

--- Page 1 ---



--- Page 2 ---

Lecture Notes in Physics
EditorialBoard
R.Beig,Wien,Austria
W.Beiglböck,Heidelberg,Germany
W.Domcke,Garching,Germany
B.-G.Englert,Singapore
U.Frisch,Nice,France
P.Hänggi,Augsburg,Germany
G.Hasinger,Garching,Germany
K.Hepp,Zürich,Switzerland
W.Hillebrandt,Garching,Germany
D.Imboden,Zürich,Switzerland
R.L.Jaffe,Cambridge,MA,USA
R.Lipowsky,Golm,Germany
H.v.Löhneysen,Karlsruhe,Germany
I.Ojima,Kyoto,Japan
D.Sornette,Nice,France,andZürich,Switzerland
S.Theisen,Golm,Germany
W.Weise,Garching,Germany
J.Wess,München,Germany
J.Zittartz,Köln,Germany

--- Page 3 ---

TheLectureNotesinPhysics
TheseriesLectureNotesinPhysics(LNP),foundedin1969,reportsnewdevelopments
in physics research and teaching – quickly and informally, but with a high quality and
theexplicitaimtosummarizeandcommunicatecurrentknowledgeinanaccessibleway.
Bookspublishedinthisseriesareconceivedasbridgingmaterialbetweenadvancedgrad-
uatetextbooksandtheforefrontofresearchtoservethefollowingpurposes:
•tobeacompactandmodernup-to-datesourceofreferenceonawell-definedtopic;
•toserveasanaccessibleintroductiontothefieldtopostgraduatestudentsandnonspe-
cialistresearchersfromrelatedareas;
• to be a source of advanced teaching material for specialized seminars, courses and
schools.
Both monographs and multi-author volumes will be considered for publication. Edited
volumes should, however, consist of a very limited number of contributions only. Pro-
ceedingswillnotbeconsideredforLNP.
Volumes published in LNP are disseminated both in print and in electronic formats,
the electronic archive is available at springerlink.com. The series content is indexed,
abstracted and referenced by many abstracting and information services, bibliographic
networks,subscriptionagencies,librarynetworks,andconsortia.
ProposalsshouldbesenttoamemberoftheEditorialBoard,ordirectlytothemanaging
editoratSpringer:
Dr.ChristianCaron
SpringerHeidelberg
PhysicsEditorialDepartmentI
Tiergartenstrasse17
69121Heidelberg/Germany
christian.caron@springer.com

--- Page 4 ---

Walter Pötz Jaroslav Fabian
Ulrich Hohenester (Eds.)
Modern Aspects
of Spin Physics
ABC

--- Page 5 ---

Editors
WalterPötz JaroslavFabian
UlrichHohenester InstitutfürTheoretischePhysik
InstitutfürTheoretischePhysik UniversitätRegensburg
UniversitätGraz Universitätsstr.31
Universitätsplatz5 93040Regensburg,Germany
8010Graz,Austria E-mail:jaroslav.fabian@physik.uni-
E-mail:walter.poetz@uni-graz.at regensburg.de
ulrich.hohenester@uni-graz.at
Walter Pötz et al., Modern Aspects of Spin Physics, Lect. Notes Phys. 712 (Springer,
BerlinHeidelberg2007),DOI10.1007/b11824190
LibraryofCongressControlNumber:2006931572
ISSN0075-8450
ISBN-10 3-540-38590-8SpringerBerlinHeidelbergNewYork
ISBN-13 978-3-540-38590-5SpringerBerlinHeidelbergNewYork
Thisworkissubjecttocopyright.Allrightsarereserved,whetherthewholeorpartofthematerialis
concerned,specificallytherightsoftranslation,reprinting,reuseofillustrations,recitation,broadcasting,
reproductiononmicrofilmorinanyotherway,andstorageindatabanks.Duplicationofthispublication
orpartsthereofispermittedonlyundertheprovisionsoftheGermanCopyrightLawofSeptember9,
1965,initscurrentversion,andpermissionforusemustalwaysbeobtainedfromSpringer.Violationsare
liableforprosecutionundertheGermanCopyrightLaw.
SpringerisapartofSpringerScience+BusinessMedia
springer.com
(cid:1)c Springer-VerlagBerlinHeidelberg2007
Theuseofgeneraldescriptivenames,registerednames,trademarks,etc.inthispublicationdoesnotimply,
evenintheabsenceofaspecificstatement,thatsuchnamesareexemptfromtherelevantprotectivelaws
andregulationsandthereforefreeforgeneraluse.
Typesetting:bytheauthorsandtechbooksusingaSpringerLATEXmacropackage
Coverdesign:WMXDesignGmbH,Heidelberg
Printedonacid-freepaper SPIN:11824190 54/techbooks 543210

--- Page 6 ---

Preface
Thisvolumecontainsacollectionoflecturenotesprovidedbythekeyspeak-
ers of the Schladming Winter School in Theoretical Physics, “43. Interna-
tionale Universita¨tswochen fu¨r Theoretische Physik”, held in Schladming,
Austria.ThisschooltookplacefromFebruary26tillMarch4,2005,andwas
titled Spin Physics, Spintronics, and Spin-Offs.
Until 2003 the Schladming Winter School, which is organized by the Di-
vision for Theoretical Physics of the University of Graz, Austria, has been
devoted primarily to topics in subatomic physics. A few years ago, however,
it was decided to broaden the scope of this school and, in particular, to in-
corporate hot topics in condensed matter physics. This was done in an effort
to better represent the scientific activities of the theory group of the Physics
DepartmentattheUniversityofGraz,resultinginthe42ndWinterSchoolon
“Quantum Coherence in Matter: From Quarks to Solids,” held in 2004, and
the43rdWinterSchoolon“SpinPhysics,Spintronics,andSpin-Offs”in2005.
A compilation of lecture notes from the 2004 event have been released in the
SpringerseriesLectureNotesinPhysicsLNP689titledQuantum Coherence:
From Quarks to Solids.
Spin is a fundamental property of elementary particles with important
consequences on the macroscopic world. Beginning with the famous Stern–
Gerlach experiment, research has been conducted to provide a sound micro-
scopic understanding of this intriguing physical property. Indeed, the spin
degreeoffreedomhasphysicalimplicationsonpracticallyallareasofphysics
andbeyond:fromelementaryparticlephysics,atomic-molecularphysics,con-
densed matter physics, optics, to chemistry and biology.
Recently, the spin degree of freedom has been “rediscovered” in the con-
textofquantuminformationstorageandprocessing,colloquiallysummarized
as“quantumcomputation.”Inaddition,arelativelyyoungfieldofsolid-state
device physics termed “spintronics,” with the attempt to utilize the spin-
rather than the charge-degree of freedom, has emerged. Each of these two
topics is well worthy of its own school; however, in an attempt to provide
an even broader perspective and to also attract students from elementary
particle physics this winter school has included not only lectures and talks
from both fields, but topics from elementary particle physics as well. As in
past years, the Schladming Winter School and this compilation of lecture

--- Page 7 ---

VI Preface
notes is intended for advanced undergraduate and graduate students up to
seniorscientistswhowanttolearnaboutorevengetintothisexcitingfieldof
physics. Research in this area is interdisciplinary and has both fundamental
and applied aspects.
Listed below, in alphabetical order, are the speakers and titles of their
lectures:
Enrico Arrigoni, Technical University of Graz, “Spin Pairing and High-
Temperature Superconductors”
TomaszDietl,PolishAcademyofSciences,Warsaw,“SemiconductorSpin-
tronics”
Stefano Forte, University of Milano, “Spin in Quantum Field Theories”
Elliot Leader, Imperial College, London, “Nucleon Spin”
Yuli V. Nazarov, Delft University, “Spin Currents and Spin Counting”
IgorZˇuti´c,NRL,WashingtonDC,“Spin-PolarizedTransportinSemicon-
ductor Junctions: From Superconductors to Magnetic Bipolar Transistors”
Next to these lectures, there were a number of invited and contributed
talks. For details, we refer to our Schladming Winter School web page
http://physik.uni-graz.at/itp/iutp/index-iutp.html.Thisvolumecontainsthe
lecture notes presented by T. Dietl, E. Arrigoni, S. Forte, and E. Leader.
Whathasbeensaidbeforeabouttheflavorofthelecturesalsoappliestothe
lecture notes presented in this volume.
In “Semiconductor Spintronics,” Tomasz Dietl gives an overview of the
modern field of spintronics, containing a brief history, motivation behind the
field, past achievements, and future challenges. It should be mentioned that
Prof.Dietl’sAwardoftheAgilentTechnologiesEurophysicsPrize2005(with
David D. Awschalom and Hideo Ohno) was announced during the Winter
School.
In“LecturesonSpinPairing MechanisminHigh-Temperature Supercon-
ductors,”EnricoArrigonifirstreviewstheessentialsofconventionalphonon-
based superconductivity and then discusses alternative pairing mechanisms
based on the Hubbard model, which may play a role in high-temperature
superconducting materials with an antiferromagnetic phase.
In “Spin in Quantum Field Theories,” Stefano Forte gives a pedagogi-
cal introduction to spin in quantum field theory, largely avoiding the usual
framework of relativistic quantum field theory. This paper is intended as a
bridgebetweenelementaryparticle(relativisticquantumfieldtheory)physics
and condensed matter physics (nonrelativistic quantum field theory).
In“NucleonSpin,”ElliotLeaderdiscussesproton(nucleon)spinandpit-
falls encountered in the interpretation of its origin from the nucleon’s con-
stituents.
We are grateful to the lecturers for presenting their lectures in a very
pedagogical way at the school and for taking the time for preparing the

--- Page 8 ---

Preface VII
manuscriptsforpublicationinthisbook.Wefeelthatthisvolumerepresents
a good overview of current research on spin-related physics.
We acknowledge financial support from the main sponsors of the school:
the Austrian Federal Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture, as well as
the Government of Styria. We have received financial, material, and techni-
cal support from the University of Graz, the town of Schladming, RICOH
Austria, and Hornig Graz. We also thank our colleagues, staff, and students
at the Physics Department for their valuable technical assistance, as well as
all participants and speakers for making the 43rd Schladming Winter School
a great success.
Graz, Walter Po¨tz
July 2006 Jaroslav Fabian
Ulrich Hohenester

--- Page 9 ---

Contents
Semiconductor Spintronics
T. Dietl........................................................ 1
1 Why Spintronics? ........................................... 1
2 Non-magnetic Semiconductors ................................ 4
2.1 Overview .............................................. 4
2.2 Spin Relaxation and Dephasing........................... 5
2.3 An Example of Spin Filter ............................... 6
3 Hybrid Structures ........................................... 7
3.1 Overview .............................................. 7
3.2 Spin Injection .......................................... 8
3.3 Search for Solid-state Stern-Gerlach Effect ................. 9
4 Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors ............................. 11
4.1 Overview .............................................. 11
4.2 Magnetic Impurities in Semiconductors .................... 12
4.3 Exchange Interaction Between Band and Localized Spins .... 14
4.4 Electronic Properties.................................... 15
4.5 Magnetic Polarons ...................................... 17
4.6 Exchange Interactions between Localized Spins ............. 17
4.7 Magnetic Collective Phenomena .......................... 18
5 Properties of Ferromagnetic Semiconductors .................... 19
5.1 Overview .............................................. 19
5.2 p-d Zener Model........................................ 20
5.3 Curie Temperature – Chemical Trends..................... 22
5.4 Micromagnetic Properties................................ 23
5.5 Optical Properties ...................................... 26
5.6 Charge Transport Phenomena ............................ 28
5.7 Spin Transport Phenomena .............................. 36
5.8 Methods of Magnetization Manipulation ................... 37
6 Summary and Outlook....................................... 37
References ..................................................... 40

--- Page 10 ---

X Contents
LecturesontheSpinPairingMechanisminHigh-Temperature
Superconductors
E. Arrigoni .................................................... 47
1 Introduction ................................................ 47
2 Superconductivity ........................................... 48
3 Phonon-Mediated Effective Attraction between Electrons ........ 50
4 BCS Theory ............................................... 53
5 High-Temperature Superconductors............................ 55
6 Pairing Mediated by Spin Fluctuations:
Linear Response to Magnetic Excitations....................... 59
References ..................................................... 65
Spin in Quantum Field Theory
S. Forte ....................................................... 67
1 From Quantum Mechanics to Field Theory ..................... 67
2 Spin and Statistics .......................................... 68
2.1 The Galilei Group and the Lorentz Group ................. 68
2.2 Statistics and Topology.................................. 70
2.3 Bosons, Fermions and Anyons ............................ 74
3 A Path Integral for Spin ..................................... 79
3.1 The Spin Action........................................ 79
3.2 Classical Dynamics ..................................... 81
3.3 Geometric Quantization ................................. 82
4 Relativistic Spinning Particles ................................ 86
4.1 Path Integral for Spinless Particles........................ 86
4.2 The Classical Spinning Particle........................... 88
4.3 Quantum Spinning Particles and Fermions ................. 90
5 Conclusion ................................................. 93
References ..................................................... 94
Nucleon Spin
E. Leader ...................................................... 95
1 Introduction ................................................ 95
2 Polarized Lepton-Nucleon Deep Inelastic Scattering.............. 97
3 The Spin Crisis in the Parton Model........................... 101
4 Resolution of the Spin Crisis: The Axial Anomaly ............... 105
5 Matrix Elements of Angular Momentum Operators: The Problem . 108
6 Relativistic Spin States ...................................... 111
7 Matrix Elements of Angular Momentum Operators: The Results .. 113
7.1 Canonical Spin State Matrix Elements..................... 114
7.2 Helicity State Matrix Elements ........................... 116
8 Angular Momentum Sum Rules ............................... 118
8.1 General Structure of Sum Rules:
Parton Transverse Momentum............................ 118

--- Page 11 ---

Contents XI
8.2 The Longitudinal Sum Rule.............................. 122
8.3 The Transverse Case: The New Sum Rulexs................ 123
8.4 Comparison with Results in the Literature ................. 125
9 Interpretation of the Sum Rules ............................... 126
References ..................................................... 127

--- Page 12 ---

List of Contributors
Enrico Arrigoni Institute of Theoretical Physics
Institute for Theoretical Physics Warsaw University
and Computational Physics Poland
Graz University of Technology dietl@ifpan.edu.pl
Petersgasse 16
A-8010 Graz
Stefano Forte
Austria
Dipartimento di Fisica
arrigoni@itp.tu-graz.ac.at
Universita di Milano
and
Tomasz Dietl
INFN Sezione di Milano
Institute of Physics
via Celoria 16
Polish Academy of Sciences
I-10129 Milano
and
Italy
ERATO Semiconductor Spintronics
forte@mi.infn.it
Project
Japan Science and Technology
Agency Elliot Leader
al. Lotnikow 32/46 Prince Consort Road
PL-02668 Warszawa London SW7 2BW
Poland England
and e.leader@imperial.ac.uk

--- Page 13 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics
T. Dietl
Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences and ERATO Semiconductor
Spintronics Project, Japan Science and Technology Agency, al. Lotnik´ow 32/46,
02668 Warszawa, Poland and Institute of Theoretical Physics, Warsaw University,
Poland
dietl@ifpan.edu.pl
Abstract. These informal lecture notes describe the recent progress in semicon-
ductor spintronics in a historic perspective as well as in comparison to achieve-
ments of spintronics of ferromagnetic metals. After outlining motivations behind
spintronic research, selected results of investigations on three groups of materi-
als are presented. These include non-magnetic semiconductors, hybrid structures
involving semiconductors and ferromagnetic metals, and diluted magnetic semi-
conductors either in paramagnetic or ferromagnetic phase. Particular attention is
paid to the hole-controlled ferromagnetic systems whose thermodynamic, micro-
magnetic, transport, and optical properties are described in detail together with
relevant theoretical models.
1 Why Spintronics?
The well-known questions fuelling a broad interest in nanoscience are: will
it still be possible to achieve further progress in information and commu-
nication technologies simply by continuing to miniaturize the transistors in
microprocessors and the memory cells in magnetic and optical discs? How
to reduce power consumption of components in order to save energy and to
increase battery operation time? How to integrate nowadays devices with
biological molecules and functionalities?
Since 70s, the miniaturization by obeying Moore’s law has persistently
lead to an exponential increase in the quantity of information that can be
processed, stored, and transmitted per unit area of microprocessor, memory,
and fiberglass, respectively. A modern integrated circuit contains now one
billiontransistors,eachsmallerthan100nminsize,i.e.,afivehundredtimes
smaller than the diameter of a human hair. The crossing of this symbolic
100 nm threshold at the outset of the 21st century ushered in the era of
nanotechnology. As the size of transistors decreases, their speed increases,
and their price falls. Today it is much less expensive to manufacture one
transistor than to print a single letter. Despite the series of successes that
industriallaboratorieshavescoredoverthepast40yearsinsurmountingone
technical and physical barrier after another, there is a prevalent sense that
in the near future a qualitative change is now in store for us in terms of the
methodsofdataprocessing,storing,encoding,andtransmission.Forthisrea-
son,governmentsinmanycountriesarefinancingambitiousinterdisciplinary
T.Dietl:SemiconductorSpintronics,Lect.NotesPhys.712,1–46(2007)
DOI10.1007/3-540-38592-41 (cid:1)c Springer-VerlagBerlinHeidelberg2007

--- Page 14 ---

2 T. Dietl
programsaimedatinsuringactiveparticipationinthefuturedevelopmentof
nanotechnology.
Among the many proposals for where to take such research, the field of
spintronics,i.e.,electronicsaimedatunderstandingelectronspinphenomena
and at proposing, designing, and developing devices to harness these phe-
nomena,isplayingamajorrole.Thehopesplacedinspintronicsarefounded
on the well-known fact that since magnetic monopoles do not exist, random
magneticfieldsaresignificantlyweakerthanrandomelectricfields.Forthese
reasons, magnetic memories are non-volatile, while memories based on an
accumulated electric charge (dynamic random access memory, or DRAM)
require frequent refreshing.
One of the ambitious goals in the spintronics field is to create magnetic
random access memory (MRAM), a type of device that would combine the
advantages of both magnetic memory and dynamic random access memory.
This requires novel methods of magnetizing memory cells and reading back
thedirectionofsuchmagnetization,whichwouldnotinvolveanymechanical
systems.Anotherimportantstepalongthispathwouldbetheabilitytocon-
trol magnetization isothermally, by means of light or electric field. Modern
devices expend relatively large amounts of energy on controlling magnetiza-
tion(i.e.,storingdata),astheyemployOerstedmagneticfieldsgeneratedby
electric currents.
The development of more “intelligent” magnetization control methods
would also make it possible to build spin transistors, devices composed of
two layers of ferromagnetic conductors separated by non-magnetic mater-
ial. It stands to reason that if carriers injected into the non-magnetic layer
preserve their spin direction, then the electric conductivity depends on the
relative direction of the magnetization vectors in the ferromagnetic layers.
This could offer a means of producing an energy-conserving and fast switch-
ing device, as it would allow current to be controlled without changing the
carrier concentration. An obvious prerequisite for such a transistor to oper-
ate is the efficient injection of spin-polarized carriers made of ferromagnetic
material into the non-magnetic area. Also, there should be no processes that
could disrupt the spin polarization. Simultaneously, researchers are seeking
ways of generating, amplifying, and detecting spin currents: here, the under-
lying conviction is that the movement of electrons with opposite spins does
not entail any losses, yet can carry information. This would lay the founda-
tionsforthedevelopmentoflow-powerdevices,characterizedbysignificantly
reduced heat dissipation. Another important issue is to develop methods for
injecting spin-polarized carriers into semiconductors. Apart from the possi-
bility of designing the magnetization sensors and spin transistors, polarized
carrierinjectioncouldprovetobeusefulasamethodforthefastmodulation
of semiconductor lasers and would allow surface-emission lasers to work in a
single mode fashion.

--- Page 15 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 3
Perhapsthemostimportantintellectualchallengetobefacedinspintron-
icsistocreateahardwareforquantuminformationscience.Researchersover
the world have joined efforts to lay the theoretical foundations for this new
discipline [1], one notable example being the Horodecki family from Gdan´sk
[2]. Experiments conducted by David Awschalom’s group in Santa Barbara
showthatspindegreesoffreedomareofparticularimportanceastheymain-
taintheirphasecoherencesignificantlylongerthanorbitaldegreesoffreedom
do[3].Electronspinisthereforemuchmoresuitablethanelectronchargefor
putting into practice modern ideas for performing numerical computations
usingthesuperpositionandentanglementofquantumstates.Spinnanostruc-
tures might consequently alter the basic principles not only in the design of
electronicelements,butalsointheverycomputerarchitecturethathasbeen
inuseforhalfacentury.Itisnoteworthy thatquantumencodersarealready
now being sold and installed: such devices use the polarization of light to
encode the transmitted information, and the unauthorized interception and
reading of this information appears to be impossible.
Today’sresearchonspinelectronicsinvolvesvirtuallyallmaterialfamilies.
The most advanced are studies on magnetic multilayers. As demonstrated in
80s by groups of Albert Fert [4] in Orsay and Peter Gru¨nberg [5] in Ju¨lich,
these systems exhibit giant magnetoresistance (GMR). According to theory
triggered by these discoveries and developed by Jo´zef Barna´s from Poznan´
and co-workers [6], GMR results from spin-dependent scattering at adjacent
interfaces between non-magnetic and magnetic metals, which changes when
the magnetic field aligns magnetization of particular layers. Since 90s, the
GMRdeviceshavebeensuccessfullyappliedinreadingheadsofhigh-density
hard-discs. Recent works focuss also on spin-dependent tunnelling via an ox-
ide film. Remarkably, for the case of crystalline MgO sandwiched between
contacts of amorphous Fe-Co-B layers, the difference between tunnelling re-
sistanceforanti-parallelandparallelorientationsofmagnetization,theTMR,
reaches a factor of three at 300 K [7, 8, 9]. Moreover, the magnetization di-
rectioncanbeswitchedbyanelectriccurrentbelow106 Acm−2[10],opening
the doors for a direct magnetization writing by current pulses. Last but not
least such structures can be used for injecting highly polarized spin currents
to semiconductors, such as GaAs [11].
These informal lecture notes on semiconductor spintronics exploit and
update author’s earlier reviews [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18], where more sys-
tematicreferencestooriginalpaperscanbefound.Particularattentionispaid
here to those results of research on spin properties of semiconductors, which
appear relevant in the context of disruptive classical and quantum informa-
tion and communication technologies. First part of the paper shows briefly
how spin effects specific to non-magnetic semiconductors can be exploited
in spintronic devices. This is followed by a presentation of chosen prop-
erties of hybrid semiconductor/ferromagnetic metal structures. The main
body of the paper is devoted to diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMS),

--- Page 16 ---

4 T. Dietl
especially to materials exhibiting the ferromagnetic order, as they combine
complementaryresourcesofsemiconductormaterialsandferromagneticmet-
als.Here,thefundamentalresearchproblemistoidentifytheextenttowhich
the methods that have been so successfully applied to controlling the den-
sity and degree of spin polarization of carriers in semiconductor structures
might be employed to control the magnetization magnitude and direction.
Apart from the possibility of designing the aforementioned magnetoresistive
sensors and spin aligners, ferromagnetic semiconductors are the materials of
choice for spin current amplification and detection. Furthermore, their out-
standingmagnetoopticalpropertiescanbeexploitedforfastlightmodulation
as well as optical isolators, perhaps replacing hybrid structures consisting of
paramagnetic DMS, such as (Cd,Mn)Te, and a permanent magnet.
In the course of the years semiconductor spintronics has evolved into a
rather broad research field. These notes are by no means exhaustive and,
moreover, they are biased by author’s own expertise. Fortunately, however,
in a number of excellent reviews the issues either omitted or only touched
uponherehasbeenthoroughlyelaboratedintermsofcontentandreferences
totheoriginalpapers.Forinstance,theprogressinfabricationandstudiesof
spin quantum gates of double quantum dots has been described by van Viel
etal.[19].Acomprehensivesurveyonspin-orbiteffectsandthepresentstatus
of spin semiconductor transistors has been completed by Zˇuti´c, Fabian, and
Das Sarma [20]. Finally, Jungwirth et al. [21] have reviewed various aspects
oftheoryof(Ga,Mn)Asandrelatedmaterials.Excellentreviewsontheentire
semiconductor spintronics are also available [22, 23].
2 Non-magnetic Semiconductors
2.1 Overview
Thebeginningofspintronicresearchonnon-magneticsemiconductorscanbe
traced back to the detection of nuclear spin polarization in Si illuminated by
circularly polarized light reported in late 60s by Georges Lampel at Ecole
Polytechnique [24]. Already this pioneering experiment involved phenomena
crucialforsemiconductorspintronics:(i)thespin-orbitinteractionthatallows
for transfer of orbital (light) momentum to spin degrees of freedom and (ii)
the hyperfine interaction between electronic and nuclear spins. Subsequent
experimental and theoretical works on spin orientation in semiconductors,
carriedoutin70smostlybyresearchersaroundIonelSolomoninEcolePoly-
techniqueandlateBorisP.ZakharchenyainIoffeInstitute,weresummarized
in a by now classic volume [25].
Morerecently,notably DavidAwschalom andhisco-workersfirstatIBM
andthenatSantaBarbara,initiatedtheuseoftimeresolvedopticalmagneto-
spectroscopies that have made it possible to both temporally and spatially

--- Page 17 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 5
explore the spin degrees of freedom in a wide variety of semiconductor ma-
terials and nanostructures [26]. The starting point of this experimentally
demanding technique is the preparation of spins in a particular orientation
by optically pumping into selected electronic states. The electron spin then
precesses in an applied or molecular magnetic field produced by electronic
or nuclear spins. The precessing magnetic moment creates a time dependent
Faradayrotationofthefemtosecondopticalprobe.Theoscillationanddecay
measuretheeffectiveLand´eg-factor,thelocalmagneticfields,andcoherence
time describing the temporal dynamics of the optically injected spins.
Present spintronic activities focuss on two interrelated topics. The first is
toexploitZeemansplittingandspin-orbitinteractionsforspinmanipulation.
Tothiscategorybelongs,inparticular,researchonspinfiltersanddetectors,
on the Datta-Das transistor [20], on optical generation of spin currents [27]
and on the spin Hall effect [28]. The other topic is the quest for solid-state
spinquantumgatesthatwouldoperatemakinguseofspin-spinexchange[29]
and/or hyperfine interactions [30]. An important aspect of the field is a dual
roleoftheinteractionsinquestioninnon-magneticsemiconductors:fromone
hand they allow for spin functionalities, on the other they account for spin
decoherenceandrelaxation,usuallydetrimentalforspindeviceperformance.
This,togetherwithisotopecharacteristics,narrowsratherseverelyawindow
of material parameters at which semiconductor spin devices might operate.
2.2 Spin Relaxation and Dephasing
Owing to a large energy gap and the weakness of spin-orbit interactions,
especially long spin life times are to be expected in the nitrides and oxides.
Figure 1 depicts results of time-resolved Faraday rotation, which has been
usedtomeasureelectronspincoherenceinn-typeGaNepilayers[31].Despite
densities of charged threading dislocations of 5×108 cm−2, this coherence
yields spin lifetimes of about 20 ns at temperatures of 5 K, and persists up
to room temperature.
Figure2presentsacomparisonofexperimentalandcalculatedmagnetore-
sistance (MR) of a ZnO:Al thin film containing 1.8·1020 electrons per cm3
[32]. Here, spin effects control quantum interference corrections to the clas-
sical Drude-Boltzmann conductivity. A characteristic positive component of
MR,signalizingthepresenceofspin-orbitscattering,isdetectedbelow1mT
atlowtemperatures.ThisscatteringislinkedtothepresenceofaRashba-like
termλ c(s×k)inthekphamiltonianofthewurzitestructure,firstdetected
so
inn-CdSeinthegroupofthepresentauthor[33].AsshowninFig.2,aquite
good description of the findings is obtained with λ = 4.4·10−11 eV cm,
so
resultinginthespincoherencetime1ns,morethan104 timeslongerthanthe
momentum relaxation time. Importantly, this low decoherence rate of wide-
bandgapsemiconductorsisoftencoupledwithasmallvalueofthedielectric
constant that enhances characteristic energy scales for quantum dot charg-
ing as well as for the exchange interaction of the electrons residing on the

--- Page 18 ---

6 T. Dietl
Fig. 1: Spin scattering time τ of n-GaN at various magnetic fields (a), tem-
2
peratures (b) (n=3.5×1016 cm−3), and electron concentrations at 5 K (c)
(after Beschoten et al. [31])
neighboringdots.Thismaysuggestsomeadvantagesofthesecompoundsfor
fabrication of spin quantum gates. Another material appealing in this con-
text is obviously Si, and related quantum structures, in which the interfacial
electric field controls the magnitude of the Rashba term [34] and material
containing no nuclear spins can be obtained.
2.3 An Example of Spin Filter
Turning to the case of narrow-gap semiconductors we note that strong spin-
orbit effects specific to these systems results, among other things, in a large
Zeeman splitting of the carrier states, which can be exploited for fabrication
of efficient spin filters. As an example, we consider quantum point contacts
patternedofPbTequantumwellsembeddedbyBi-dopedPb Eu Tebar-
0.92 0.08
riers[35,36].Owing tobiaxial strain,the fourfold L-valley degeneracy of the
conduction band in PbTe is lifted, so that the relevant ground-state 2D sub-
bandisformedofasinglevalleywiththelongaxisparalleltothe[111]growth
direction. As discussed recently [36], the paraelectric character of PbTe re-
sultsinefficientscreeningofCoulombscatteringpotentials,sothatsignatures
ofballistictransportcanbeobserveddespiteofsignificantamountofcharged

--- Page 19 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 7
0 0.0004
6x10-3 λ =4.4x10-11eVcm
so
2x10-7
4x10-3
1x10-7
2x10-3
0 0
0 3 6
%10.0
n-ZnO
T (K):
0.05
0.4
1
1.5
2
5
Magnetic field (mT)
)Ω(
segnahc
ecnatsiser
teehS
)2e/h(
B/B
tr
Fig. 2: Resistance changes in the magnetic field for n-ZnO (symbols) com-
paredtocalculations(solid lines)withintheweaklocalizationtheoryforthe
2D case. Curves are vertically shifted for clarity (after Andrearczyk et al.
[32])
defects in the vicinity of the channel. At the same time, the electron density
can be tuned over a wide range by biasing a p-n junction that is formed be-
tweenthep+ interfaciallayerandthen-typequantumwell[36].Furthermore,
aratherlargemagnitudeofelectronspinsplittingforthemagneticfieldalong
thegrowth direction, correspondingtothe Land´e factor |g∗|≈66,can serve
to produce a highly spin-selective barrier. According to results displayed in
Fig. 3, spin-degeneracy of the quantized conductance steps starts to be re-
moved well below 1 T, so that it has become possible to generate entirely
polarized spin current carried by a number of 1D subbands [35].
3 Hybrid Structures
3.1 Overview
The hybrid nanostructures, in which both electric and magnetic field are
spatially modulated, are usually fabricated by patterning of a ferromagnetic
metal on the top of a semiconductor or by inserting ferromagnetic nanopar-
ticles or layers into a semiconductor matrix. In such devices, the stray fields

--- Page 20 ---

8 T. Dietl
120
140
160
180
200
220
0 1 2 3 4
MAGNETIC FIELD [T]
]Vm[
EGATLOV
ETAG
Fig. 3: Transconductance dG/dV (gray scale) showing dependence of 1D
g
subbands on the magnetic field and gate voltage for PbTe nanoconstriction
of a wide (Pb, Eu)Te/PbTe/(Pb, Eu)Te quantum well (after Grabecki et al.
[35])
can control charge and spin dynamics in the semiconductor. At the same
time, spin-polarized electrons in the metal can be injected into or across the
semiconductor [37, 38].Furthermore,the ferromagnetic neighbors may affect
semiconductor electronic states by the ferromagnetic proximity effect even
under thermal equilibrium conditions. Particularly perspective materials in
the context of hybrid structures appear to be those elemental or compound
ferromagnets which can be grown in the same reactor as the semiconductor
counterpart.
3.2 Spin Injection
It is now well established that efficient spin injection from a ferromagnetic
metal to a semiconductor is possible provided that semiconductor Sharvin
resistanceiscomparableorsmallerthanthedifferenceininterfaceresistances
for two spin orientations. Often, to enhance the latter, a heavily doped or
oxide layer is inserted between the metal and as-grown semiconductor. In
this way, spin current reaching polarization tens percents has been injected
formFeintoGaAs[11,39].Atthesametime,itisstillhardtoachieveTMR
above 10% in Fe/GaAs/Fe trilayer structures without interfacial layer [40],
which may suggest that the relevant Schottky barriers are only weakly spin
selective.

--- Page 21 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 9
The mastering of spin injection is a necessary condition for the demon-
stration of the Datta-Das transistor [41], often regarded as a flag spintronic
device. In this spin FET, the orientation of the spins flowing between fer-
romagnetic contacts, and thus the device resistance, is controlled by the
Rashba field generated in the semiconductor by an electrostatic gate. Re-
cently,acurrentmodulationupto30%bythegatevoltagewasachievedina
Fe/(In,Ga)As/FeFETatroomtemperature[42].Thisimportantfindingwas
obtained for a 1 µm channel of narrow gap In Ga As, in which TMR
0.81 0.19
achieved 200%, indicating that the destructive role of the Schottky barriers
got reduced. Furthermore, an engineered interplay between the Rashba and
Dresselhaus effects [43, 44] resulted in a spin relaxation time long comparing
to spin precession period and the dwell time.
3.3 Search for Solid-state Stern-Gerlach Effect
Theferromagneticcomponentofhybridstructurescanalsoserveforthegen-
eration of a magnetic field. This field, if uniform, produces a spin selective
barrier that can serve as a local spin filter and detector. A non-homogenous
field, in turn, might induce spatial spin separation via the Stern-Gerlach (S-
G) mechanism. Figure 4(a) presents a micrograph of a Stern-Gerlach device,
whose design results from an elaborated optimization process [45]. A local
magnetic field was produced by NiFe (permalloy, Py) and cobalt (Co) films.
Themicromagnetsresidedindeepgrovesonthetwosidesofthewire,sothat
the 2D electron gas in the modulation-doped GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure
was approximately at the center of the field, and the influence of the com-
peting Lorentz force was largely reduced. Hall magnetometry was applied in
order to visualize directly the magnetizing process of the two micromagnets
in question.
AsshowninFig.5,acurrentincreaseincounterswasdetectedwhenafield
gradientwasproducedbyanappropriatecycleoftheexternalmagneticfield
at100mK.Therangeofmagneticfieldswheretheenhancementwasobserved
corresponded to the the presence of the field gradient according to the Hall
magnetometry, which also showed that Py magnetization diminished almost
twofoldpriortoachangeinthedirectionoftheexternalmagneticfield.This
effect, associated with the formation of closure domains in soft magnets,
explained why the current changes appeared before the field reversal. The
relative change ∆I of counter current depended on V , ∆I/I increased from
G
0.5% at zero gate voltage to 50% close to the threshold. Furthermore, for V
G
about−0.8V∆I wasnegative.ItwascheckedthatresultspresentedinFig.5
wereunalteredbyincreasingthetemperatureupto200mKandindependent
of the magnetic field sweep rate.
Theoretical studies [45] of the results shown in Fig. 5 demonstrated that
semiconductor nanostructures of the kind shown in Fig. 4 can indeed serve
to generate and detect spin polarized currents in the absence of an external
magnetic field. Moreover, the degree and direction of spin polarization at

--- Page 22 ---

10 T. Dietl
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.3T
0.2 By(T)
0
0 2 1 0.1
−0.2 3 0 4 x (µm)
y (µm) 0.2
7
15
10
5
0
−0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0
V (V) G
)An(
I , I 2 1
VVVGGG
III111
1 AAA
Py
Py
VVV000
E VVVGGG
Co Co III222
BBB 77µ mµµµm 2 AAA
(b)
VVVGGG (a)
I
0.2 1
T = 100 mK I
1
0.1
I 2
0.2
0 T
0 −0.1 By(T) 0
−0.2
2
1 −0.2
−0.2 4 3 (c) (d)
0
yyy (µm) 5 xxx(µm)
0.2 6
7
Fig. 4: (a) Scanning electron micrograph of the spin-filter device. Fixed AC
voltage V is applied between emitter (E) and “counters” (1), (2); V is the
0 G
DC gate voltage. The external in-plane magnetizing field (B(cid:2)) is oriented as
shown. (b) The in-plane magnetic field B (wider part of the channel is in
y
front) calculated for half-plane, 0.1 µm thick magnetic films separated by a
position dependent gap W(x) and magnetized in the same directions (satu-
ration magnetization as for Co). (c) B calculated for antiparallel directions
y
of micromagnet magnetizations. (d) Counter currents I and I as a func-
1 2
tion of the gate voltage at V
0
= 100 µV and B(cid:2) = 0; upper curve (shown in
gray)wascollectedduringadifferentthermalcycleandafterlongerinfra-red
illumination (after Wro´bel et al. [45])
low electron densities can easily be manipulated by gate voltage or a weak
external magnetic field. While the results of the performed computations
suggest that the spin separation and thus Stern-Gerlach effect occurs un-
der experimental conditions in question, its direct experimental observation
would require incorporation of spatially resolved spin detection.

--- Page 23 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 11
3.6
3.4
−0.1 −0.05 0 0.05 0.1
B (T) ||
)An(
I
1
7.2
7
−0.1 −0.05 0 0.05 0.1
B (T) ||
)An(
I
1
2.2
2
−0.1 −0.05 0 0.05 0.1
B (T)
||
)An(
I
1
V = − 0.2 V V = − 0.6 V
G G
field down
field up
0.6
V G = − 0.8 V V G = − 0.88 V
0.4
−0.1 −0.05 0 0.05 0.1
B (T)
||
Fig. 5: The counter current I of as a function of the in-plane magnetic field
1
for various gate voltages for the device shown in Fig. 4. After Wrobel et al.
[45]
4 Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
4.1 Overview
This family of materials encompasses standard semiconductors, in which a
sizableportionofatomsissubstitutedbysuchelements,whichproducelocal-
ized magnetic moments in the semiconductor matrix. Usually, magnetic mo-
ments originate from 3d or 4f open shells of transition metals or rare earths
(lanthanides),respectively,sothattypicalexamplesofdilutedmagneticsemi-
conductors (DMS) are Cd 1−x Co x Se, Ga 1−x Mn x As, Pb 1−x Eu x Te and, in a
sense, Si:Er. A strong spin-dependent coupling between the band and local-
ized states accounts for outstanding properties of DMS. This coupling gives
rise to spin-disorder scattering, giant spin-splittings of the electronic states,
formation of magnetic polarons, and strong indirect exchange interactions
between the magnetic moments, the latter leading to collective spin-glass,
antiferromagnetic or ferromagnetic spin ordering. Owing to the possibility
of controlling and probing magnetic properties by the electronic subsystem
or vice versa, DMS have successfully been employed to address a number of
important questions concerning the nature of various spin effects in various
environments and at various length and time scales. At the same time, DMS
exhibit a strong sensitivity to the magnetic field and temperature as well as
constitute important media for generation of spin currents and for manip-
ulation of localized or itinerant spins by, e.g., strain, light, electrostatic or
ferromagnetic gates. These properties, complementary to both non-magnetic

--- Page 24 ---

12 T. Dietl
semiconductors and magnetic metals, open doors for application of DMS as
functional materials in spintronic devices.
Extensive studies of DMS started in 70s, particularly in the group of
Robert R. Gal(cid:3)a¸zka in Warsaw, when appropriately purified Mn was em-
ployed to grow bulk II-VI Mn-based alloys by various modifications of the
Bridgman method [46]. Comparing to magnetic semiconductors, such as Eu
chalcogenides(e.g.,EuS)andCrspinels(e.g.,CdCr Se )investigatedearlier
2 4
[47],DMSexhibitedsmallerdefectconcentrationsandwereeasiertodopeby
shallow impurities. Accordingly, it was possible to examine their properties
bypowerfulmagnetoopticalandmagnetotransporttechniques[12,46,48,49].
Since, in contrast to magnetic semiconductors, neither narrow magnetic
bandsnorlong-rangemagneticorderingaffectedlow-energyexcitations,DMS
were named semimagnetic semiconductors. More recently, research on DMS
have been extended toward materials containing magnetic elements other
than Mn as well as to III-VI, IV-VI [50] and III-V [51] compounds as well as
groupIVelementalsemiconductorsandvariousoxides[52].Inconsequence,a
variety of novel phenomena has been discovered, including effects associated
with narrow-bands and magnetic phase transformations, making the border-
linebetweenpropertiesofDMSandmagneticsemiconductorsmoreandmore
elusive.
A rapid progress of DMS research in 90s stemmed, to a large extend,
fromthedevelopmentofmethodsofcrystalgrowthfarfromthermalequilib-
rium,primarilybymolecularbeamepitaxy(MBE),butalsobylaserablation.
These methods have made it possible to obtain DMS with the content of the
magnetic constituent beyond thermalequilibrium solubility limits [53].Simi-
larly,thedopingduringMBEprocessallowsonetoincreasesubstantiallythe
electricalactivityofshallowimpurities[54,55].InthecaseofIII-VDMS[51],
inwhichdivalentmagneticatomssupplybothspinsandholes,theuseofthe
low-temperature MBE (LT MBE) provides thin films of, e.g., Ga 1−x Mn x As
withxupto0.07andtheholeconcentrationinexcessof1020 cm−3,inwhich
ferromagnetic ordering is observed above 170 K [56]. Remarkably, MBE and
processesofnanostructurefabrication,makeitpossibletoaddmagnetismto
thephysicsofsemiconductorquantumstructures.Particularlyimportantare
DMS, in which ferromagnetic ordering was discovered, as discussed in some
details later on.
4.2 Magnetic Impurities in Semiconductors
A good starting point for the description of DMS is the Vonsovskii model,
according to which the electron states can be divided into two categories:
(i) localized magnetic d or f shells and (ii) extended band states built up of
s, p, and sometimes d atomic orbitals. The former give rise to the presence
of local magnetic moments and intra-center optical transitions. The latter
form bands, much alike as in the case of non-magnetic semiconductor alloys.
Indeed, the lattice constant of DMS obeys the Vegard low, and the energy

--- Page 25 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 13
gap E between the valence and the conduction band depends on x in a
g
mannerqualitativelysimilartonon-magneticcounterparts.Accordingtothe
Anderson model, the character of magnetic impurities in solids results from
a competition between (i) hybridization of local and extended states, which
tends to delocalized magnetic electrons and (ii) the on-site Coulomb inter-
actions among the localized electrons, which stabilizes the magnetic moment
in agreement with Hund’s rule.
Figure 6 shows positions of local states derived from 3d shells of transi-
tion metal (TM) impurities in respect to the band energies of the host II-VI
and III-V compounds. In figure the levels labelled “donors” denote the ion-
ization energy of the magnetic electrons (TM2+ → TM3+ or dn → dn−1),
whereasthe“acceptors”correspondtotheiraffinityenergy(TM2+ →TM1+
or dn → dn+1). The difference between the two is the on-d-shell Coulomb
(Hubbard) repulsion energy U in the semiconductor matrix. In addition, the
potential introduced by either neutral or charged TM can bind a band car-
rier in a Zhang-Rice-type singlet or hydrogenic-like state, respectively. Such
bound states are often experimentally important, particularly in III-V com-
pounds,astheycorrespondtolowerenergiesthanthecompetingd-likestates,
such as presented in Fig. 6.
In the case of Mn, in which the d shell is half-filled, the d-like donor
stateliesdeepinthevalenceband,whereastheacceptorlevelresideshighin
the conduction band, so that U ≈ 7 eV according to photoemission and in-
versephotoemissionstudies.Thus,Mn-basedDMScanbeclassifiedascharge
transfer insulators, E < U. The Mn ion remains in the 2+ charge state,
g
which means that it does not supply any carriers in II-VI materials. How-
ever, it acts as a hydrogenic-like acceptor in the case of III-V antimonides
and arsenides, while the corresponding Mn-related state is deep, presumably
due to a stronger p-d hybridization, in the case of phosphides and nitrides.
AccordingtoHund’srulethetotalspinS =5/2andthetotalorbitalmomen-
tum L=0 for the d5 shell in the ground state. The lowest excited state d∗5
correspondstoS =3/2anditsopticalexcitationenergyisabout2eV.Thus,
if there is no interaction between the spins, their magnetization is described
by the paramagnetic Brillouin function. In the case of other transition met-
als,theimpurity-inducedlevelsmayappearinthegap,andthencompensate
shallow impurities, or even act as resonant dopant, e.g., Sc in CdSe, Fe in
HgSe or Cu in HgTe. Transport studies of such systems have demonstrated
that inter-site Coulomb interactions between charged ions lead to the Efros-
Shklovskii gap in the density of the impurity states, which makes resonant
scatteringtobeinefficientinsemiconductors[59].Furthermore,spin-orbitin-
teraction and Jahn-Teller effect control positions and splittings of the levels
in the case of ions with L(cid:4)=0. If the resulting ground state is a magnetically
inactive singlet there is no permanent magnetic moment associated with the
ion, the case of Fe2+, whose magnetization is of the Van Vleck-type at low
temperatures.

--- Page 26 ---

14 T. Dietl
4
A(0/-)
2
D(0/+)
0
-2
OnZ
vnZ eSnZ eTnZ
SdC eSdC
eTdC
Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu
d1 d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d7 d8 d9
4
d1 d2 d3 d4 d5 d6
NnI
2
A(0/-)
0
D(0/+)
-2
PnI
sAnI
bSnI
NlA
PlA sAlA
bSlA
Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co
)Ve(
ygrenE
)Ve(
ygrenE
NaG
PaG
sAaG bSaG
Fig. 6: Approximate positions of transition metals levels relative to the con-
duction and valence band edges of II-VI (left panel) and III-V (right panel)
compounds. By triangles the dN/dN−1 donor and by squares the dN/dN+1
acceptorstatesaredenoted(adaptedfromLangeretal.[57]andZunger[58])
4.3 Exchange Interaction Between Band and Localized Spins
TheimportantaspectofDMSisastrongspin-dependentcouplingoftheeffec-
tive mass carriers to the localized d electrons, first discovered in (Cd,Mn)Te
[60, 61] and (Hg,Mn)Te [62, 63]. Neglecting non-scalar corrections that can
appear for ions with L(cid:4)=0, this interaction assumes the Kondo form,
H =−I(r−R(i))sS(i) , (1)
K

--- Page 27 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 15
where I(r − R(i)) is a short-range exchange energy operator between the
carrier spin s and the TM spin localized at R(i). When incorporated to the
kp scheme, the effect of H is described by matrix elements (cid:5)u |I|u (cid:6), where
K i i
u aretheKohn-Luttingeramplitudesofthecorrespondingbandextreme.In
i
the case of carriers at the Γ point of the Brillouin zone in zinc-blende DMS,
the two relevant matrix elements α = (cid:5)u |I|u (cid:6) and β = (cid:5)u |I|u (cid:6) involve
c c v v
s-type and p-types wave functions, respectively. There are two mechanisms
contributing to the Kondo coupling [48, 64, 65]: (i) the exchange part of the
Coulomb interaction between the effective mass and localized electrons; (ii)
the spin-dependent hybridization between the band and local states. Since
there is no hybridization between Γ and d-derived (e and t ) states in
6 g 2g
zinc-blende structure, the s-d coupling is determined by the direct exchange.
The experimentally determined values are of the order of αN ≈ 0.25 eV,
o
where N is the cation concentration, somewhat reduced comparing to the
o
value deduced from the energy difference between S ±1 states of the free
singlyionizedMnatom3d54s1,αN =0.39eV.Incontrast,thereisastrong
o
hybridizationbetweenΓ andt states,whichaffectstheirrelativeposition,
8 2g
andleadstoalargemagnitudeof|βN |≈1eV.Iftherelevanteffectivemass
o
state is above the t level (the case of, e.g., Mn-based DMS), β < 0 but
2g
otherwise β can be positive (the case of, e.g., Zn 1−x Cr x Se [66]).
4.4 Electronic Properties
Effects of Giant Spin Splitting
In the virtual-crystal and molecular-field approximations, the effect of the
Kondo coupling is described by H =IM(r)s/gµ , where M(r) is magne-
K B
tization (averaged over amicroscopic region aroundr)ofthe localized spins,
andgistheirLand´efactor.Neglectingthermodynamicfluctuationsofmagne-
tization(themean-fieldapproximation)M(r)canbereplacedbyM (T,H),
o
thetemperatureandmagneticfielddependentmacroscopicmagnetization of
the localized spins available experimentally. The resulting spin-splitting of
s-type electron states is given by
(cid:1)ω =g ∗ µ B+αM (T,H)/gµ , (2)
s B o B
where g∗ is the band Land´e factor. The exchange contribution is known
as the giant Zeeman splitting, as in moderately high magnetic fields and
low temperatures it attains values comparable to the Fermi energy or to
the binding energy of excitons and shallow impurities. For effective mass
states, whose periodic part of the Bloch function contains spin components
mixed up by aspin-orbit interaction, the exchange splitting does not depend
only on the product of M and the relevant exchange integral, say β, but
o
usually also on the magnitude and direction ofM ,confinement, and strain.
o
Furthermore, because of confinement or non-zero k the Bloch wave function

--- Page 28 ---

16 T. Dietl
containscontributionsfrombothconductionandvalenceband,whichaffects
the magnitude and even the sign of the spin splitting [49, 62, 63, 67]. The
giantZeemansplittingisclearlyvisibleinmagnetoopticalphenomenaaswell
as in the Shubnikov-de Haas effect, making an accurate determination of
the exchange integrals possible, particularly in wide-gap materials, in which
competing Landau and ordinary spin splittings are small.
The possibility of tailoring the magnitude of spin splitting in DMS struc-
turesoffersapowerfultooltoexaminevariousphenomena.Forinstance,spin
engineering was explored to control by the magnetic field the confinement of
carriersandphotons[68],tomapatomdistributionsatinterfaces[69]aswell
as to identify the nature of optical transitions and excitonic states. Further-
more, a subtle influence of spin splitting on quantum scattering amplitude
of interacting electrons with opposite spins was put into evidence in DMS
in the weakly localized regime in 3D [33], 2D [70, 71], and 1D systems [72].
The redistribution of carriers between spin levels induced by spin splitting
was found to drive an insulator-to-metal transition [73] as well as to gener-
ateuniversalconductancefluctuationsinDMSquantumwires[72].Sincethe
spin splitting is greater than the cyclotron energy, there are no overlapping
Landaulevelsinmodulation-dopedheterostructuresofDMSinthequantum
Hall regime in moderately strong magnetic fields. This made it possible to
test a scaling behavior of wave functions at the center of Landau levels [74].
At higher fields, a crossing of Landau levels occurs, so that quantum Hall
ferromagnet could be evidenced and studied [75]. At the same time, it has
been confirmed that in the presence of a strong spin-orbit coupling (e.g., in
the case of p-type wave functions) the spin polarization can generate a large
extraordinary(anomalous)Hallvoltage[76].Lastbutnotleast,optically[77]
and electrically controlled spin-injection [78] and filtering [79] were observed
in all-semiconductor structures containing DMS.
Spin-disorder Scattering
Spatial fluctuations of magnetization, disregarded in the mean-field ap-
proximation, lead to spin disorder scattering. According to the fluctuation-
dissipation theorem, the corresponding scattering rate in the paramagnetic
phase is proportional to Tχ(T), where χ(T) is the magnetic susceptibility
of the localized spins [12, 80]. Except to the vicinity of ferromagnetic phase
transitions,adirectcontributionofspin-disorderscatteringtomomentumre-
laxationturnsouttobesmall.Incontrast,thisscatteringmechanismcontrols
thespinlifetimeofeffectivemasscarriersinDMS,asevidencedbystudiesof
universal conductance fluctuations [81], line-width of spin-flip Raman scat-
tering[80],andopticalpumpingefficiency[82].Furthermore,thermodynamic
fluctuations contribute to the temperature dependence of the band gap and
band off-set. In the case when the total potential introduced by a magnetic
ionisgraterthanthewidthofthecarrierband,thevirtualcrystalandmole-
cular field approximations break down, a case of the holes in Cd 1−x Mn x S.

--- Page 29 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 17
A non-perturbative scheme was developed [83, 84] to describe nonlinear de-
pendencies of the band gap on x and of the spin splitting on magnetization
observed in such situations.
4.5 Magnetic Polarons
Bound magnetic polaron (BMP), that is a bubble of spins ordered ferro-
magnetically by the exchange interaction with an effective mass carrier in
a localized state, modifies optical, transport, and thermodynamic proper-
ties of DMS. BMP is formed inside the localization radius of an occupied
impurity orquantumdotstatebutalsoaroundatrappedexciton,asthepo-
laron formation time is typically shorter than the exciton lifetime [85]. The
BMP binding energy and spontaneous carrier spin-splitting are proportional
to the magnitude of local magnetization, which is built up by two effects:
the molecular field of the localized carrier and thermodynamic fluctuations
of magnetization [86, 87, 88, 12]. The fluctuating magnetization leads to de-
phasingandenlargeswidthofopticallines.Typically,in2Dand3Dsystems,
the spins alone cannot localized itinerant carriers but in the 1D case the
polaron is stable even without any pre-localizing potential [83]. In contrast,
a free magnetic polaron – a delocalized carrier accompanied by a travelling
cloud of polarized spins – is expected to exist only in magnetically ordered
phases.Thisisbecausecoherenttunnelling of quasi-particles dressedbyspin
polarization is hampered, in disordered magnetic systems, by a smallness of
quantum overlap between magnetizations in neighboring space regions. In-
terestingly,theoryofBMPcanreadilybeappliedforexaminingeffectsofthe
hyperfine coupling between nuclear spins and carriers in localized states.
4.6 Exchange Interactions between Localized Spins
As in most magnetic materials, classical dipole-dipole interactions between
magnetic moments are weaker than exchange couplings in DMS. Direct d-d
or f-f exchange interactions, known from properties of magnetic dimmers,
are thought to be less important than indirect exchange channels. The lat-
ter involve a transfer of magnetic information via spin polarization of bands,
which is produced by the exchange interaction or spin-dependent hybridiza-
tion of magnetic impurity and band states. If magnetic orbitals are involved
inthepolarizationprocess,themechanismisknownassuperexchange,which
is merely antiferromagnetic and dominates, except for p-type DMS. If fully
occupied band states are polarized by the sp-d exchange interaction, the
resulting indirect d-d coupling is known as the Bloembergen-Rowland mech-
anism.InthecaseofRudermann-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida(RKKY)interaction,
the d-d coupling proceeds via spin polarization of partly filled bands, that is
by free carriers. Since in DMS the sp-d is usually smaller than the width of
therelevantband(weakcouplinglimit)aswellasthecarrierconcentrationis

--- Page 30 ---

18 T. Dietl
usually smaller than those of localized spins, the energetics of the latter can
be treated in the continuous medium approximation, an approach referred
here to as the Zener model. Within this model the RKKY interaction is fer-
romagnetic, and particularly strong in p-type materials, because of a large
magnitudes of the hole mass and exchange integral β. It worth emphasiz-
ing that the Zener model is valid for any ratio of the sp-d exchange energy
to the Fermi energy. Finally, in the case of systems in which magnetic ions
in different charge states coexist, hopping of an electron between magnetic
orbitals of neighboring ions in differing charge states tends to order them
ferromagnetically. This mechanism, doubted the double exchange, operates
in manganites but its relevance in DMS has not yet been found.
In general, the bilinear part of the interaction Hamiltonian for a pair of
spins i and j is described by a tensor Jˆ,
H =−2S(i)Jˆ(ij)S(j) , (3)
ij
whichinthecaseofthecouplingbetweennearestneighborcationsitesinthe
unperturbedzinc-blendelatticecontainsfourindependentcomponents.Thus,
in addition to the scalar Heisenberg-type coupling, H = −2J(ij)S(i)S(j),
ij
there are non-scalar terms (e.g., Dzialoshinskii-Moriya or pseudo-dipole).
These terms are induced by the spin-orbit interaction within the magnetic
ions or within non-magnetic atoms mediating the spin-spin exchange. The
non-scalar terms, while smaller than the scalar ones, control spin-coherence
time and magnetic anisotropy. Typically, J(ij) ≈ −1 meV for nearest-
neighbor pairs coupled by the superexchange, and the interaction strength
decaysfastwiththepairdistance.Thus,withloweringtemperaturemoreand
more distant pairs become magnetically neutral, S = 0. Accordingly, the
tot
temperaturedependenceofmagneticsusceptibilityassumesamodifiedCurie
form,χ(T)=C/T γ,whereγ <1andbothC andγ dependonthecontentof
the magnetic constituent x. Similarly, the field dependence of magnetization
is conveniently parameterized by a modified Brillouin function B [89],
S
M (T,H)=Sgµ N x B [Sgµ H/k (T +T )], (4)
o B o eff S B B AF
inwhichtwox-andT-dependentempiricalparameters,x <xandT >
eff AF
0, describe the presence of antiferromagnetic interactions.
4.7 Magnetic Collective Phenomena
In addition to magnetic and neutron techniques [90], a variety of optical
and transport methods, including 1/f noise study of nanostructures [81],
havesuccessfullybeenemployedtocharacterizecollectivespinphenomenain
DMS. Undoped DMS belong to a rare class of systems, in which spin-glass
freezing is driven by purely antiferromagnetic interactions, an effect of spin
frustration inherent to the randomly occupied fcc sublattice. Typically, in
II-VI DMS, the spin-glass freezing temperature T increases from 0.1 K for
g

--- Page 31 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 19
x = 0.05 to 20 K at x = 0.5 according to T ∼ xδ, where δ ≈ 2, which
g
reflects a short-range character of the superexchange. For x approaching 1,
antiferromagnetic type III ordering develops, according to neutron studies.
Here, strain imposed by the substrate material–the strain engineering–can
serve to select domain orientations as well as to produce spiral structures
with a tailored period [91]. Particularly important is, however, the carrier-
densitycontrolledferromagnetismofbulkandmodulation-dopedp-typeDMS
described next.
5 Properties of Ferromagnetic Semiconductors
5.1 Overview
Since for decades III-V semiconductor compounds have been applied as
photonic and microwave devices, the discovery of ferromagnetism first in
In 1−x Mn x As [92] and then in Ga 1−x Mn x As by Hideo Ohno and collabora-
tors in Sendai [93] came as a landmark achievement. In these materials, sub-
stitutional divalent Mn ions provide localized spins and function as acceptor
centersthatprovideholeswhichmediatetheferromagneticcouplingbetween
the parent Mn spins [94, 95, 96]. In another technologically important group
of semiconductors, in II-VI compounds, the densities of spins and carriers
can be controlled independently, similarly to the case of IV-VI materials, in
which hole-mediated ferromagnetism was discovered by Tomasz Story et al.
in Warsaw already in the 80s [97]. Stimulated by the theoretical predictions
of the present author [94], laboratories in Grenoble and Warsaw, led by late
Yves Merle d’Aubign´e and the present author, joined efforts to undertake
comprehensive research dealing with carrier-induced ferromagnetism in II-
IV materials containing Mn. Experimental studies conducted with the use of
magnetoopticalandmagneticmethodsledtothediscoveryofferromagnetism
in 2D and [54] 3D II-VI materials [55] doped by nitrogen acceptors.
Guidedbythegrowingamountofexperimentalresults,thepresentauthor
andco-workersproposedatheoreticalmodelofthehole-controlledferromag-
netism in III-V, II-VI, and group IV semiconductors containing Mn [98, 99].
In these materials conceptual difficulties of charge transfer insulators and
strongly correlated disordered metals are combined with intricate properties
of heavily doped semiconductors, such as Anderson-Mott localization and
defectgenerationbyself-compensationmechanisms.Nevertheless,thetheory
built on Zener’s model of ferromagnetism and the Kohn-Luttinger kp theory
of the valence band in tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors has quan-
titatively described thermodynamic, micromagnetic, transport, and optical
propertiesofDMSwithdelocalizedorweaklylocalizedholes[21,98,99,100],
challenging competing theories. It is often argued that owing to these stud-
ies Ga 1−x Mn x As has become one of the best-understood ferromagnets.
Accordingly, this material is now employed as a testing ground for various

--- Page 32 ---

20 T. Dietl
ab initio computation approaches to strongly correlated and disordered sys-
tems. Moreover, the understanding of the carrier-controlled ferromagnetic
DMS has provided a basis for the development of novel methods enabling
magnetization manipulation and switching.
5.2 p-d Zener Model
ItisconvenienttoapplytheZenermodelofcarrier-controlledferromagnetism
by introducing the functional of free energy density, F[M(r)]. The choice of
the local magnetization M(r) as an order parameter means that the spins
aretreatedasclassicalvectors,andthatspatialdisorderinherenttomagnetic
alloys isneglected.Inthecaseofmagnetic semiconductors F[M(r)]consists
of two terms, F[M(r)]=F [M(r)]+F [M(r)], which describe, for a given
S c
magnetization profile M(r), the free energy densities of the Mn spins in the
absence of any carriers and of the carriers in the presence of the Mn spins,
respectively. A visible asymmetry in the treatment of the carries and of the
spins corresponds to an adiabatic approximation: the dynamics of the spins
in the absence of the carriers is assumed to be much slower than that of
the carriers. Furthermore, in the spirit of the virtual-crystal and molecular-
field approximations, the classical continuous field M(r) controls the effect
of the spins upon the carriers. Now, the thermodynamics of the system is
describedbythepartitionfunctionZ,whic(cid:1)hcanbeobtainedbyafunctional
integration of the Boltzmann factor exp(− drF[M(r)]/k T) over all mag-
B
netization profiles M(r) [87, 88]. In the mean-field approximation (MFA), a
term corresponding to the minimum of F[M(r)] is assumed to determine Z
with a sufficient accuracy.
IfenergeticsisdominatedbyspatiallyuniformmagnetizationM,thespin
part of the free energy density in the magnetic field H can be written in the
form [101]
(cid:2)
M
F [M]= dM h(M )−MH . (5)
S o o
0
Here, h(M ) denotes the inverse function to M (h), where M is the avail-
o o o
able experimentally macroscopic magnetization of the spins in the absence
of carriers in the field h and temperature T. In DMS, it is usually pos-
sible to parameterize M (h) by the Brillouin function that, according to
o
Eq.(4),takesthepresenceofintrinsicshort-rangeantiferromagneticinterac-
tions into account. Near T and for H = 0, M is sufficiently small to take
C
M (T,h) = χ(T)h, where χ(T) is the magnetic susceptibility of localized
o
spins in the absence of carriers. Under these conditions,
F [M]=M2/2χ(T), (6)
S
which shows that the increase of F with M slows down with lowering tem-
S
perature, where χ(T) grows. Turning to F [M] we note that owing to the
c

--- Page 33 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 21
giant Zeeman splitting of the bands proportional to M, the energy of the
carriers, and thus F [M], decreases with |M|, F [M]−F [0] ∼ −M2. Ac-
c c c
cordingly, a minimum of F[M] at non-zero M may develop in H = 0 at
sufficiently low temperatures signalizing the appearance of a ferromagnetic
order.
The present authors and co-workers [98] found that the minimal hamil-
tonian necessary to describe properly effects of the complex structure of the
valencebandintetrahedrallycoordinatedsemiconductorsuponF [M]isthe
c
Luttinger 6×6 kp model supplemented by the p-d exchange contribution
taken in the virtual crystal and molecular field approximations,
H =βsM/gµ . (7)
pd B
Thistermleadstospinsplittingsofthevalencesubbands,whosemagnitudes
– owing to the spin-orbit coupling – depend on the hole wave vectors k in a
complex way even for spatially uniform magnetization M. It would be tech-
nically difficult to incorporate such effects to the RKKY model, as the spin-
orbitcouplingleadstonon-scalartermsinthespin-spinHamiltonian.Atthe
same time, the indirect exchange associated with the virtual spin excitations
between the valence subbands, the Bloembergen-Rowland mechanism, is au-
tomatically included. The model allows for biaxial strain, confinement, and
was developed for both zinc blende and wurzite materials [99]. Furthermore,
the direct influence of the magnetic field on the hole spectrum was taken
into account. Carrier-carrier spin correlation was described by introducing a
Fermi-liquid-like parameter A [54, 94, 96], which enlarges the Pauli suscep-
F
tibility of the hole liquid. No disorder effects were taken into account on the
ground that their influence on thermodynamic properties is relatively weak
exceptforstronglylocalizedregime.Havingtheholeenergies,thefreeenergy
density F [M] was evaluated according to the procedure suitable for Fermi
c
liquidsofarbitrarydegeneracy.ByminimizingF[M]=F [M]+F [M]with
S c
respecttoM atgivenT,H,andholeconcentrationp,Mnspinmagnetization
M(T,H) was obtained as a solution of the mean-field equation,
M(T,H)=x N gµ SB [gµ (−∂F [M]/∂M+H)/k (T+T )], (8)
eff o B S B c B AF
wherepeculiaritiesofthevalencebandstructure,suchasthepresenceofvar-
iousholesubbands,anisotropy,andspin-orbitcoupling,arehiddeninF [M].
c
Near the Curie temperature T and at H =0, where M is small, we expect
C
F [M]−F [0] ∼ −M2. It is convenient to parameterize this dependence by
c c
a generalized carrier spin susceptibility χ˜ , which is related to the magnetic
c
susceptibilityofthecarrierliquidaccordingtoχ˜ =A (g∗µ )2χ .Interms
c F B c
of χ˜ ,
c
F [M]=F [0]−A χ˜β2M2/2(gµ )2 . (9)
c c F c B
By expanding B (M) for small M one arrives to the mean-field formula for
S
T =T −T , where T is given by
C F AF F

--- Page 34 ---

22 T. Dietl
T =x N S(S+1)A χ˜ (T )β2/3k . (10)
F eff o F c C B
For a strongly degenerate carrier liquid |(cid:12) |/k T (cid:8) 1, as well as ne-
F B
glecting the spin-orbit interaction χ˜ = ρ/4, where ρ is the total density-
c
of-states for intra-band charge excitations, which in the 3D case is given by
ρ=m∗ k /π2(cid:1)2.InthiscaseandforA =1,T assumesthewell-known
DOS F F F
form, derived already in 40s in the context of carrier-mediated nuclear ferro-
magnetism [102]. In general, however, χ˜ has to be determined numerically
c
bycomputingF [M]foragivenbandstructureanddegeneracyofthecarrier
c
liquid.Themodelcanreadilybegeneralizedtovariousdimensionsaswellas
to the case, when M is not spatially uniform in the ground state.
The same formalism, in addition to T and Mn magnetization M(T,H),
C
as discussed above, provides also quantitative information on spin polariza-
tion and magnetization of the hole liquid [99]. Furthermore, it can be ex-
ploited to describe chemical trends as well as micromagnetic, transport, and
optical properties of ferromagnetic DMS, the topics discussed in the subse-
quent sections.
5.3 Curie Temperature – Chemical Trends
Large magnitudes of both density of states and exchange integral specific
to the valence band make T to be much higher in p-type than in n-type
F
materials with a comparable carrier concentration. Accordingly, in agree-
ment with theoretical evaluations [94], no ferromagnetic order was detected
above1Kinn-(Zn,Mn)O:Al,evenwhentheelectronconcentrationexceeded
1020 cm−3 [103]. At the same time, theoretical calculations carried out with
no adjustable parameters explained satisfactorily the magnitude of T in
C
both (Ga,Mn)As [98, 104] and p-type (Zn,Mn)Te [55]. Furthermore, theo-
retical expectations within the p-d Zener model are consistent with chemi-
cal trends in T values observed experimentally in (Ga,Mn)Sb, (Ga,Mn)P,
C
(In,Mn)As, (In,Mn)Sb, (Ge,Mn), and p-(Zn,Be)Te though effects of hole lo-
calization [99, 55] preclude the appearance of a uniform ferromagnetic or-
der with a univocally defined T value in a number of cases. In addition
C
to localization, a competition between long-range ferromagnetic interactions
and intrinsic short-range antiferromagnetic interactions [100], as described
by T >0 and x <x, may affect the character of magnetic order [105].
AF eff
It appears that the effect is more relevant in II-VI DMS than in III-V DMS
where Mn centers are ionized, so that the enhanced hole density at closely
lying Mn pairs may compensate antiferromagnetic interactions [98]. In both
groupsofmaterialsthedensityofcompensatingdonordefectsappeartogrow
with the Mn concentration [95, 55]. In the case of (Ga,Mn)As the defect in-
volved is the Mn interstitial [106], which can be driven and passivated at the
surface be low temperature annealing [107].
Accordingtoevaluationscarriedoutbythepresentauthorandco-workers
[98] room temperature ferromagnetism could be observed in a weakly com-

--- Page 35 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 23
pensated (Ga,Mn)As containing at least 10% of Mn. At the same time,
because of stronger p-d hybridization in wide band-gap materials, such as
(Ga,Mn)N and (Zn,Mn)O, T >300 K is expected already for x=5%, pro-
C
vided that the hole concentration would be sufficiently high. However, it was
clearfromthebeginning[98]thattheenhancementoftheholebindingenergy
by p-d hybridization as well as a limited solubility of magnetic constituent
together with the effect of self-compensation may render the fabrication of
hightemperatureferromagneticDMSchallenging.Nevertheless,anumberof
group has started the growth of relevant systems, the effort stimulated even
further by a number of positive results as well as by numerous theoretical
papers suggesting, based on ab initio computations, that high temperature
ferromagnetism is possible in a large variety of DMS even without band
holes. Today, however, a view appears to prevail that the high temperature
ferromagnetism, as evidenced by either magnetic, magnetotransport or mag-
netooptical phenomena, results actually from the presence of precipitates of
known or so-far unknown ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic nanocrystals con-
taining a high density of magnetic ions. At the same time, it becomes more
and more clear that the ab initio computations in question suffered from im-
proper treatment of correlation and disorder, which led to an overestimation
oftendencytowardsaferromagneticorder.Itseemsattheendthat,asargued
initially [94, 98], the delocalized or weakly localized holes are necessary to
stabilize a long-range ferromagnetic order in tetrahedrally coordinated DMS
with a small concentration of randomly distributed magnetic ions.
5.4 Micromagnetic Properties
Magnetic Anisotropy
As the energy of dipole-dipole magnetic interactions depends on the dipole
distribution,thereexiststheso-calledshapeanisotropy.Inparticular,forthin
films,thedifferenceinenergydensitycorrespondingtotheperpendicularand
in-plane orientation of magnetization M is given by
E =µ M2/2, (11)
o
which leads to the anisotropy field µ H = µ M of about 60 mT for
o A o
Ga Mn As.
0.95 0.05
Already early studies of the ferromagnetic phase in (In,Mn)As [108] and
(Ga,Mn)As [109] demonstrated the existence of magnetic anisotropy, whose
character and magnitude implied a sizable contribution of a microscopic ori-
gin.Magneto-crystallineanisotropyisusuallyassociatedwiththeinteraction
between spin and orbital degrees of freedom of the magnetic ion d-electrons.
Accordingtothemodeladvocatedhere,theseelectronsareinthed5 configu-
ration.ForsuchacasetheorbitalmomentumL=0,sothateffectsstemming
fromthespin-orbitcouplingareexpectedtoberatherweak.Itwas,however,

--- Page 36 ---

24 T. Dietl
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.1 1 10
T
/
T
C
R
x = 5.3% [001]
εεεε =-0.27%
xx
<110>
[001]
<100>
<110>
Hole concentration [ 1020cm-3 ]
Fig. 7: Experimental (full points) and computed values (thick lines) of the
ratioofthereorientationtoCurietemperatureforthetransitionfromperpen-
diculartoin-planemagneticanisotropy.Dashedlinesmarkexpectedtemper-
aturesforthereorientationoftheeasyaxisbetween(cid:5)100(cid:6)and(cid:5)110(cid:6)in-plane
directions (after Sawicki et al. [111])
been noted that the interaction between the localized spins is mediated by
the holes that have a non-zero orbital momentum l = 1 [98]. An important
aspectofthep-dZenermodelisthatitdoestakeintoaccounttheanisotropy
of the carrier-mediated exchange interaction associated with the spin-orbit
coupling in the host material [98, 99, 110].
A detail theoretical analysis of anisotropy energies and anisotropy fields
in films of (Ga,Mn)As was carried out for a number of experimentally im-
portant cases within the p-d Zener model [99, 110]. In particular, the cu-
bic anisotropy as well as uniaxial anisotropy under biaxial epitaxial strain
were examined as a function of the hole concentration p. Both shape and
magneto-crystalline anisotropies were taken into account. The perpendicular
and in-plane orientation of the easy axis is expected for the compressive and
tensilestrain,respectively,providedthattheholeconcentrationissufficiently
small.However,accordingtotheory,areorientationoftheeasyaxisdirection
is expected at higher hole concentrations. Furthermore, in a certain concen-
tration range the character of magnetic anisotropy is computed to depend
on the magnitude of spontaneous magnetization, that is on the temperature.
The computed phase diagram for the reorientation transition compared to
the experimental results for a film is shown in Fig. 7. In view that theory
is developed with no adjustable parameters the agreement between experi-
mental and computed concentrations and temperature corresponding to the
reorientationtransitionisverygood.Furthermore,thecomputedmagnitudes
of the anisotropy field H [99] are consistent with the available findings for
u
both compressive and tensile strain.

--- Page 37 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 25
According to the discussion above, the easy axis assumes the in-plane
orientation for typical carrier concentrations in the most thoroughly studied
system (Ga,Mn)As/GaAs. In this case the easy axis is expected to switch
between(cid:5)100(cid:6)and(cid:5)110(cid:6)in-planecubicdirectionsasafunctionofp[99,110].
Surprisingly, however, only the (cid:5)100(cid:6) biaxial magnetic symmetry has so-far
been observed in films of (Ga,Mn)As/GaAs at low temperatures. Neverthe-
less, the corresponding in-plane anisotropy field assumes the expected mag-
nitude,oftheorderof0.1T,whichistypicallymuchsmallerthanthatcorre-
sponding to the strain-induced energy of magnetic anisotropy. It is possible
that anisotropy of the hole magnetic moment, neglected in the theoretical
calculations [99, 110], stabilizes the (cid:5)100(cid:6) orientation of the easy axis.
In addition to the cubic in-plane anisotropy, the accumulated data for
both(Ga,Mn)As/GaAsand(In,Mn)As/(In,Al)Aspointtoanon-equivalence
of [110] and [−110] directions, which leads to the in-plane uniaxial magnetic
anisotropy. Such a uniaxial anisotropy is not expected for D symmetry of
2d
a T crystal under epitaxial strain [112, 113]. Furthermore, the magnitude
d
of the corresponding anisotropy field appears to be independent of the film
thickness [114], which points to a puzzling symmetry breaking in the film
body.
Magnetic Stiffness and Domain Structure
Another important characteristics of any ferromagnetic system is magnetic
stiffnessA,whichdescribestheenergypenaltyassociatedwiththelocaltwist-
ing of the direction of magnetization. Remarkably, A determines the mag-
nitude and character of thermodynamic fluctuations of magnetization, the
spectrumofspinexcitationsaswellasthewidthandenergyofdomainwalls.
An important resultis that the magnetic stiffness computed within the 6×6
Luttinger model is almost by a factor of 10 greater than that expected for a
simple spin degenerate band with the heave-hole band-edge mass [115]. This
enhancement, which stabilizes strongly the spatially uniform spin ordering,
stems presumably from p-like symmetry of the valence band wave functions,
asforsuchacasethecarriersusceptibility(theLindhardfunction)decreases
strongly with q [116].
Thestructureofmagneticdomainsin(Ga,Mn)Asundertensilestrainhas
beendeterminedbymicro-Hallprobeimaging[117].Theregionswithmagne-
tization oriented along the [001] and [00-1] easy axis form alternating stripes
extendinginthe[110]direction.AsshowninFig.8,theexperimentallydeter-
minedstripewidthisW =1.5µmat5Kfor0.2µmfilmofGa Mn As
0.957 0.043
onGa In As,forwhichtensilestrainof(cid:12) =0.9%isexpected.Accord-
0.84 0.16 xx
ingtomicromagnetictheory,W isdeterminedbytheratioofthedomainwall
energytothestrayfieldenergy.AsshowninFig.8,thecomputedvaluewith
no adjustable parameters W = 1.1 µm [118] compares favorably with the
experimental finding, W =1.5 µm at low temperatures. However, the model

--- Page 38 ---

26 T. Dietl
10
Ga Mn As
8 0.957 0.043
6
4
2
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
]mµ[
htdiw
niamoD
Relative temperature T/T
C
Fig. 8: Temperature dependence of the width of domain stripes as measured
by Shono et al. [117] for the Ga Mn As film with the easy axis along
0.957 0.043
thegrowthdirection(full squares).Computeddomainwidthisshownbythe
solid line (after Dietl et al. [118])
predicts much weaker temperature dependence of W than that observed ex-
perimentally, which was linked [118] to critical fluctuations, disregarded in
the mean-field approach.
5.5 Optical Properties
Magnetic Circular Dichroism
Within the Zener model, the strength of the ferromagnetic spin-spin interac-
tioniscontrolledbythek·pparametersofthehostsemiconductorandbythe
magnitudeofthespin-dependentcouplingbetweentheeffectivemasscarriers
andlocalizedspins.InthecaseofII-VIDMS,detailedinformationontheex-
change-inducedspin-splittingofthebands,andthusonthecouplingbetween
the effective mass electrons and the localized spins has been obtained from
magnetooptical studies [12]. A similar work on (Ga,Mn)As [119, 120, 121]
led to a number of surprises. The most striking was the opposite order of
the absorption edges corresponding to the two circular photon polarizations
in (Ga,Mn)As comparing to II-VI materials. This behavior of circular mag-
netic dichroism (MCD) suggested the opposite order of the exchange-split
spin subbands, and thus a different origin of the sp-d interaction in these
two families of DMS. A new light on the issue was shed by studies of pho-
toluminescence (PL) and its excitation spectra (PLE) in p-type (Cd,Mn)Te
quantumwells[54].AsshownschematicallyinFig.9,thereversaloftheorder
ofPLEedgescorrespondingtothetwocircularpolarizationsresultsfromthe

--- Page 39 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 27
Fig. 9: Photoluminescence excitation spectra (PLE), that is the photolumi-
nescence (PL) intensity as a function of the excitation photon energy in-
tensity, for σ+ (solid lines) and σ− (dotted lines) circular polarizations at
selected values of the magnetic field in a modulation-doped p-type quantum
well of Cd Mn Te at 2 K. The photoluminescence was collected in σ+
0.976 0.024
polarization at energies marked by the narrowest features. The sharp max-
imum (vertical arrow) and step-like form (horizontal arrow) correspond to
quasi-free exciton and transitions starting at the Fermi level, respectively.
Note reverse ordering of transition energies at σ+ and σ− for PL and PLE
(the latter is equivalent to optical absorption). The band arrangement at
150 Oe is sketched in the inset (after Haury et al. [54])
Moss-Bursteineffect,thatisfromtheshiftsoftheabsorptionedgesassociated
with the empty portion of the valence subbands in the p-type material.
The above model was subsequently applied to interpret the magnetoab-
sorption data for metallic (Ga,Mn)As [99, 120]. More recently, the theory
was extended by taking into account the effect of scattering-induced mixing
of k states [122]. As shown in Fig. 10, this approach explains the slop of the
absorption edge as well as its field-induced splitting assuming the value of
the p-d exchange energy βN =−1 eV.
0
Recently, the formalisms suitable for description of either interband [99]
orintraband[123]opticalabsorptionwerecombined[124]inordertoexamine
theoreticallyoptical(dynamic)conductivityinthewholespectralrangeupto

--- Page 40 ---

28 T. Dietl
Fig. 10: Transmission of Ga Mn As film for two circular light polar-
0.968 0.032
izations in the Faraday configuration in the absence of the magnetic field
(data shifted up for clarity) and in 5 T at 2 K (points) [120]. Solid lines
arecalculatedfortheholeconcentrationp=7×1019 cm−3,exchangeenergy
N β =−1eV,andallowingforscattering-inducedbreakingofthek selection
0
rules [122]
2 eV. Furthermore a possible presence of optical absorption involving defect
stateswastakenintoaccount.Inthisway,themostgeneralquantitativethe-
oryofopticalandmagnetopticaleffectsinmagneticsemiconductorsavailable
todatewasworkedout.Agoodquantitativedescriptionofexperimentaldata
[125, 126] was obtained verifying the model. However, some discrepancies in
the low photon energy range were detected, which confirmed the presence of
quantum localization effects. At the same time, a disagreement in the high
energy region pointed to the onset of intra-d band transitions. The Faraday
and Kerr rotations were also computed showing a large magnitude and a
complex spectral dependence in the virtually whole studied photon energy
range up to 2 eV, which suggests a suitability of this material family for
magnetooptical applications.
5.6 Charge Transport Phenomena
Hall Effect in Ferromagnetic Semiconductors – Theory
The assessment of magnetic characteristics by means of magnetotransport
studiesisofparticularimportanceinthecaseofthinfilmsofdilutedmagnets,
in which the magnitude of the total magnetic moment is typically small. For
this reason, recent years have witnessed a renewed interest in the nature
of the anomalous Hall effect (AHE), which–if understood theoretically–can

--- Page 41 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 29
serve to determine the magnitude of magnetization. Also magnetoresistance,
to be discussed later on, provides information on the magnetism and on the
interplay between electronic and magnetic degrees of freedom.
The Hall resistance R ≡ ρ /d of a film of the thickness d is empiri-
Hall yx
cally known to be a sum of ordinary and anomalous Hall terms in magnetic
materials [127],
R =R µ H/d+R µ M/d. (12)
Hall 0 o S o
Here, R and R are the ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficients, respec-
0 S
tively (R > 0 for the holes), and M(T,H) is the component of the mag-
0
netization vector perpendicular to the sample surface. While the ordinary
Hall effect serves to determine the carrier density, the anomalous Hall effect
(known also as the extraordinary Hall effect) provides valuable information
on magnetic properties of thin films. The coefficient R is usually assumed
S
to be proportional to Rα , where R (T,H) is the sheet resistance and
sheet sheet
the exponent α depends on the mechanisms accounting for the AHE.
If the effect of stray magnetic fields produced by localized magnetic mo-
ments were been dominating, R would scale with magnetization M but
S
wouldberatherproportionaltoR thantoR .Thereisnodemagnetiza-
0 sheet
tion effect in the magnetic field perpendicular to the surface of a uniformly
magnetized film, B = µ H. However, this is no longer the case in the pres-
o
ence of magnetic precipitates, whose stray fields and AHE may produce an
apparent magnetization-dependent contribution the host Hall resistance.
When effects of stray fields can be disregarded, spin-orbit interactions
control totally R . In such a situation α is either 1 or 2 depending on the
S
origin of the effect: the skew-scattering (extrinsic) mechanism, for which the
Hall conductivity is proportional to momentum relaxation time τ, results in
α ≈ 1 [127]. From the theory point of view particularly interesting is the
intrinsic mechanism for the Hall conductivity σ =R M/(R d)2] does
AH S sheet
not depend explicitly on scattering efficiency but only on the band structure
parameters [21, 128, 129].
Forbothextrinsicandintrinsicmechanisms,theoverallmagnitudeofthe
anomalous Hall resistance depends on the strength of the spin-orbit interac-
tion and spin polarization of the carriers at the Fermi surface. Accordingly,
at given magnetization M, the effect is expected to be much stronger for
the holes than for the electrons in tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors.
For the carrier-mediated ferromagnetism, the latter is proportional to the
exchange coupling of the carriers to the spins, and varies – not necessarily
linearly – with the magnitude of spin magnetization M. Additionally, the
skew-scattering contribution depends on the asymmetry of scattering rates
for particular spin subbands, an effect which can depend on M in a highly
nontrivial way. Importantly, the sign of either of the two contributions can
be positive or negative depending on a subtle interplay between the orienta-
tions of orbital and spin momenta as well as on the character (repulsive vs.
attractive) of scattering potentials.

--- Page 42 ---

30 T. Dietl
Recently, Jungwirth et al. [129] developed a theory of the intrinsic AHE
in p-type zinc-blende magnetic semiconductors, and presented numerical re-
sults for the case of (Ga,Mn)As, (In,Mn)As, and (Al,Mn)As. The derived
formula for σ corresponds to that given earlier [128, 130, 131] in the weak
AH
scattering limit. The intrinsic AHE can also be regarded as a zero-frequency
limit of σ (ω), where σ(ω) is the dynamic (optical) conductivity tensor,
xy
related directly the Kerr effect, widely studied in experimentally and theo-
reticallyinferromagneticmetals[132].Fortheholeconcentrationpsuchthat
the Fermi energy is much smaller than the spin-orbit splitting ∆ but larger
o
than the exchange splitting h between the majority j =−3/2 and minority
z
j = +3/2 bands at k = 0, ∆ (cid:8) |(cid:12) | (cid:8)h, Jungwirth et al. [129] predict
z o F
within the 4×4 spherical Luttinger model
σin =e2hm /[4π2(cid:1)3(3πp)1/3]. (13)
AH hh
Here the heavy hole mass m is assumed to be much larger than the light
hh
hole mass m , whereas σin becomes by the factor of 24/3 greater in the
lh AH
oppositelimitm =m .Intherangeh(cid:10)|(cid:12) |(cid:10)∆ thedeterminedvalue
hh lh F o
of σin is positive, that is the coefficients of the normal and anomalous Hall
AH
effects are expected to have the same sign. However, if the Fermi level were
approached the split-off Γ band, a change of sign would occur.
7
A formula for σin was also derived [133] from 4 of Jungwirth et al.
AH
[129]), employing the known form of the heavy hole Bloch wave functions
u [116]. Neglecting a small effect of the spin splitting on the heavy hole
k,jz
wave functions, σin was found to be given by the right hand side of 14
AH
multiplied by the factor (16/9)ln2−1/6≈1.066 [133].
Inordertoevaluatetheratioofintrinsicandskew-scatteringmechanisms,
the general theory of the AHE effect in semiconductors [128, 129, 130, 131]
was applied [15]. Assuming that scattering by ionized impurities dominates,
this ratio is then given by [131, 134, 135],
σin
AH =±f(ξ)(N +N )/(pr k (cid:17)). (14)
σss A D s F
AH
Here, f(ξ) ≈ 10 is a function that depends weakly on the screening di-
mensionless parameter ξ; (N +N )/p is the ratio of the ionized impurity
A D
and carrier concentrations; r is the average distance between the carriers in
s
the units of the effective Bohr radius, and (cid:17) is the mean free path. Similarly,
forspin-independentscatteringbyshortrangepotentials,V(r)=Vδ(r−r )
i
[130] was applied [133]. Assuming that scattering by ionized impurities is
negligible,
σin
AH =−3/[πVρ(ε )k (cid:17)], (15)
σss F F
AH
where ρ(ε ) is the density of states at the Fermi level. Of course, the overall
F
sign depends on the sign of the scattering potential V.

--- Page 43 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 31
InordertofindoutwhichofthetwoAHEmechanismsoperatespredomi-
nantlyinp-typetetrahedrallycoordinatedferromagneticsemiconductors,we
notethatscatteringbyionizedimpuritiesappearstodominateintheseheav-
ily doped and compensated materials. This scattering mechanism, together
with alloy and spin disorder scattering, limits presumably the hole mobility
and leads ultimately to the metal-to-insulator transition (MIT). Since at the
MIT r ≈ 2 and k (cid:17) ≈ 1 one expects from 15 that as long as the holes re-
s F
mainclosetothelocalizationboundarytheintrinsicmechanismaccountsfor
the AHE. It would be interesting to know how quantum localization correc-
tions affect the anomalous Hall conductivity as well as how to extend theory
towards the insulator side of the MIT. A work in this direction was reported
[136].
Obviously,thepresenceoftheAHEmakesameaningfuldeterminationof
the carrier type and density difficult in ferromagnetic semiconductors. Usu-
ally,theordinaryHalleffectdominatesonlyinratherhighmagneticfieldsor
at temperatures several times larger than T . It appears, therefore, that a
C
careful experimental and theoretical examination of the resistivity tensor in
wide field and temperature ranges is necessary to separate characteristics of
the spin and carrier subsystems.
Comparison Between Theoretical and Experimental Results
Asmentionedabove,becauseofthedominanceoftheanomalousHalltermin
wide temperatureand fieldranges,itisnotstraightforward todetermine the
carrier type and concentration in ferromagnetic semiconductors. Only at low
temperatures and under very high fields, the anomalous Hall term saturates,
so that the ordinary Hall coefficient can be determined from the remaining
linearchange of theHallresistanceinthemagnetic field.Note thatalthough
magnetization saturates in relatively low magnetic fields, the negative MR
usually persists, and generates the field dependence of the anomalous Hall
coefficient.
Magnetotransport data collected for (Ga,Mn)As in a wide temperature
and field ranges [95, 137] were exploited to test the theory of the AHE [129].
The results of such a comparison are shown in Fig. 11. There is a good
agreement between the theoretical and experimental magnitude of the Hall
conductivity. Importantly, no significant contribution from skew scattering
is expected for the (Ga,Mn)As sample in question [137], for which (N +
A
N )/p≈5, r ≈1.1, and k (cid:17)≈0.8, so that σin /σss ≈57.
D s F AH AH
Another material for which various contributions to Hall resistance were
analyzed is Zn Mn Te:N containing 1.2×1020 holes per cm3 [133]. In
0.981 0.019
Fig. 12, ρ /ρ −µB, i.e., the spin dependent Hall angle, is compared to
yx xx
the magnetization measured in a vibrating sample magnetometer [138] for
this film. The normal Hall angle µB = µµ H was subtracted assuming a
o
constant hole mobility µ i.e., assigning the conductivity changes entirely to
variations in the hole concentration. This assumption is not crucial for the

--- Page 44 ---

32 T. Dietl
Fig. 11: Full numerical simulations of the anomalous Hall conductivity σ
AH
for GaAs host with hole densities p = 1020, (dotted lines), 2×1020 (dashed
lines), and 3.5×1020 cm−3 (solid lines). Filled circle represents measured
Hall conductivity (Fig. 2). The saturation mean-field value of the splitting
h between Γ heavy hole subbands was estimated from nominal sample pa-
8
rameters. Horizontal error bar corresponds to the experimental uncertainty
of the p−d exchange integral. Experimental hole density in the (Ga,Mn)As
sample is 3.5×1020 cm−3 (after Jungwirth et al. [129])
present highly doped sample, but it proves to be less satisfactory for the
less doped samples. As shown in Fig. 12, a reasonable agreement is found by
taking,
ρ /ρ =µB+ΘM/M , (16)
yx xx S
where M is the saturation value of magnetization and Θ = 0.04 is the
S
adjustable parameter. For the sample in question, the maximum value of
hole polarization, (pup−pdown)/(pup+pdown), has been estimated to be of
the order of 10% [138].
Here, similarly to the case of (Ga,Mn)As, the sign and magnitude of the
anomalousHallcoefficientindicatedthattheintrinsicmechanismisinvolved.
The value of Θ was evaluated theoretically from 13 by adopting parameters
suitable for the sample in question, m = 0.6m , ρ = 5 × 10−3 Ωcm
hh o xx
and the saturation value of the splitting h = 41 meV. This leads to σin =
AH
13.1 (Ωcm)−1 and Θin = 0.065 [133], in a reasonable agreement with the
experimental value Θ = 0.04. Since a contribution from the light hole band
will enhance the theoretical value, it was concluded [133] that the present
theory describes the anomalous hole effect within the factor of about two.
It is important to note that there exist several reasons causing that the
Hall effect and direct magnetometry can provide different information on
magnetization. Indeed, contrary to the standard magnetometry, the AHE
does not provide information about the magnetization of the whole samples

--- Page 45 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 33
Fig.12:ComparisonofthenormalizedanomalousHalleffect(lines)withthe
normalizedmagnetizationM/M (crosses);fromtop tobottom:1.7,2.8,4.2,
S
7, 10, 30, and 50 K; the data are shifted for clarity (after [138])
but only about its value in regions visited by the carriers. Near the metal-
insulatorboundary,especiallywhenthecompensationisappreciable,thecar-
rier distribution is highly non-uniform. In the regions visited by the carriers
theferromagneticinteractionsarestrong,whereastheremainingregionsmay
remain paramagnetic. Under such conditions, magnetotransport and direct
magnetic measurements will provide different magnetization values [98]. In
particular, M at T → 0, as seen by a direct magnetometry, can be much
S
lowerthanthatexpectedforagivenvalueofthemagneticionconcentration.
High magnetic fields are then necessary to magnetize all localized spins. The
correspondingfieldmagnitudeisexpectedtogrowwiththetemperatureand
strength of antiferromagnetic interactions that dominate in the absence of
the holes.
Anisotropic Magnetoresistance and Planar Hall Effect
Incubicmaterialstheconductivitytensorisdiagonalintheabsenceofanex-
ternal magnetic field. However, non-zero values of strain make the resistance
to depend on the orientation of current in respect to crystallographic axes.
Furthermore, the spin-orbit interaction accounts for anisotropic magnetore-

--- Page 46 ---

34 T. Dietl
sistance(AMR),thatisthedependenceofresistanceontheanglebetweenthe
current and magnetization, an effect particularly useful for position sensing
in engines. Under these conditions, even if magnetization remains in-plane
the resistivity tensor may assume a non-diagonal form. This leads to the ap-
pearance of a Hall voltage, a phenomenon known as the planar Hall effect
(PHE) [139]. The information on the orientation of in-plane magnetization,
which can be obtained from AMR and PHE is, thus, complementary to that
provided by AHE which is sensitive only to the perpendicular component
of magnetization. In particular, AMR and PHE can trace the character of
in-plane magnetization reorientation at the coercive field and serve to deter-
mine the corresponding anisotropy fields. Last but not least, AMR and PHE
are sensitive probe of spin anisotropy at the Fermi surface associated with
the strain and spin-orbit interaction for non-zero magnetization. The corre-
sponding theory of AMR was developed by Jungwirth et al. [140] within the
Drude-Boltzmann formulation of charge transport in solids.
Totestthetheoreticalpredictionsconcerningeffectsofbiaxialstrainupon
AMR,(Ga,Mn)Assamplesundercompressiveandtensilestrainwerestudied
for longitudinal and two perpendicular orientations of the magnetic field in
respect to electric current [141]. As show in Fig. 13, above 0.5 T, negative
magnetoresistance is observed, whose magnitude is virtually independent of
experimental configuration. However, the absolute value of resistance ρ in
this range depends on the field direction, which is the signature of AMR.
These data provide information on processes of the field-induced rotation of
magnetization for various orientations of the field in respect to crystal and
easyaxes.Inparticular,thevaluesofthefieldcorrespondingtotheresistance
maxima are expected to be of the order of the anisotropy field.
If only spin-orbit effects were controlled AMR, its magnitude would de-
pend only on the angle between the current and field directions. Accord-
ing to Fig. 13, this is not the case since AMR depends also on the di-
rections of the field and current in respect to crystal axes. It is conve-
nient to introduce AMR = [ρ (H (cid:11) x)−ρ (H (cid:11) y)]/ρ (H (cid:11) y) and
op xx xx xx
AMR = [ρ (H (cid:11) x)−ρ (H (cid:11) z)]/ρ (H (cid:11) z), where the current and
op xx xx xx
growth directions are denoted by x and z, respectively, and ρ is the lon-
xx
gitudinal resistivity. Importantly, the sign and order of magnitude of AMR
is consistent with theoretical expectations [140, 142]. In particular, the pre-
dicted difference in sign of AMR −AMR in the case of compressive and
op ip
tensilestrainiscorroboratedbythedata.Ontheotherhand,thedependence
ofAMR andAMR atgivenstrainonthecurrentdirectionappearsaschal-
op ip
lenging. It may result from the lowering of the symmetry of the (Ga,Mn)As
films from the expected D to C , as discussed in Sect. 3.
2d 2v
Particularly intriguing are hysteretic resistance jumps observed for sam-
ples under compressive strain and for the field pointing along the growth
direction.Weassignthiseffecttoalargeratiooftheanisotropyandcoercive
fields,whichmakesthatevenarathersmallmisalignment,andthusaminute

--- Page 47 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 35
102 Ga 0.95 Mn 0.05 As (200 nm), compressive strain
2 K H ⊥ plane
100 I // [110]
in-plane H ⊥ I
98
H // I
96
100
98
96
102
100
98
96
94
-0.8 -0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8
Fig. 13: Left panel: Field-induced changes in resistance of
Ga Mn As/GaAs (compressive strain) lower panel: current along
0.95 0.05
[110]; middle panel: current along [100]) and of Ga Mn As/(In,Ga)As
0.957 0.043
undertensilestrain(lowerpanel,currentalong(cid:5)110(cid:6))forthreeorientationsof
themagneticfieldinrespecttocurrentdirectionat2K.Rightpanel:fieldand
temperature dependencies of resistance in Ga Mn As/GaAs (compres-
0.95 0.05
sive strain, upper panel) and in tensile strained Ga Mn As/(In,Ga)As
0.957 0.043
(lower panel) for magnetic field perpendicular to the film plane. Starting
from up, subsequent curves at H = 0 correspond to temperatures in K: 70,
60, 80, 50, 90, 40, 100, 30, 125, 20, 2, 5, 10, 150, 200, 300 (upper panel)
and to 50, 60, 40, 70, 30, 80, 90, 20, 100, 2, 10, 5, 125, 150, 200, 300 (lower
panel). The thick solid lines superimposed on 2 K data in positive magnetic
field side show Kawabata’s theory predictions (after Matsukura et al. [141])
in-plane field, can result in magnetization switching between in-plane easy
directions. These results provide, therefore, information on resistance values
in a demagnetized state for the studied current directions.
Low and High Field Magnetoresistance
Apart from AMR, there is a number of other effects that can produce a siz-
able magnetoresistance in magnetic semiconductors, especially in the vicin-
ity of the localization boundary [12], where quantum corrections to Drude-
Boltzmannconductivitybecomeimportant.Inparticular,carrierdiffusionin
Ga Mn As (200 nm), compressive strain
0.95 0.05
2 K H ⊥ plane I // [100]
in-plane H ⊥ I
H // I
)%(
RM
Ga Mn As (200 nm), tensile strain
0.957 0.043
2 K in-plane H ⊥ I
I // <110> H ⊥ plane
H // I
Ga Mn As (200 nm), compressive strain 0.95 0.05
1.0 I // [100]
H ⊥ plane
0.8
0.6
2.0 T = 2, 5, 10, 20,
30, 40, 50, 60,
70, 80, 90, 100,
125, 150, 200,
1.6 300 K
1.2
0.8
-9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9
µH (T)
0
)Ωk(
R
teehs
Ga Mn As (200 nm), tensile strain 0.957 0.043
I // <110>
H ⊥ plane
µH (T)
0

--- Page 48 ---

36 T. Dietl
the molecular field of randomly oriented spin clusters that form above T
C
shifts the metal-to-insulator transition towards higher carrier concentrations
[71]. The resulting temperature dependent localization may lead to a resis-
tance maximum at T , which will be destroyed by the magnetic field. This
C
accounts presumably for the field and temperature dependence of resistivity
near T visible clearly in Fig. 13.
C
However, the negative magnetoresistance hardly saturates even in rather
strong magnetic fields, and occurs also at low temperatures, where the spins
are fully ordered ferromagnetically according to the Hall effect data. This
surprising observation was explained by the present author and co-workers
[133, 141] in terms of weak localization orbital magnetoresistance. Indeed, in
theregimeinquestionthegiantsplittingofthevalencebandmakesbothspin-
disorderandspin-orbitscatteringrelativelyinefficient.Undersuchconditions,
weaklocalizationmagnetoresistancecanshowupatlowtemperatures,where
phase breaking scattering ceases to operate. According to Kawabata [143],
(cid:12)ρ/ρ≈−(cid:12)σ/σ =−n e2C (e/(cid:1)B)1/2/(2π2(cid:1)), (17)
v o
where C = 0.605, σ is the conductivity, and 1/2 ≤ n ≤ 2 depending on
o v
whetheroneorallfourholesubbandscontributetothechargetransport.For
the samples under compressive and tensile strain, the above formula gives
(cid:12)ρ/ρ = −0.13n and −0.25n , respectively at B = 9 T. These values are
v v
to be compared to experimental data of Fig. 13, (cid:12)ρ/ρ = −0.09 and -0.14
at 2 K. The fitting to Eq. (17) reproduces the data at 2 K quite well (thin
solid lines in Fig. 13 and gives n = 1.46 and 0.82 for the compressive and
v
tensile samples, respectively, as could be expected for ferromagnetic films of
(Ga,Mn)As. Since negative magnetoresistance takes over above B ≈ 1 T,
i
we can evaluate a lower limit for the spin-disorder scattering time, τ =
s
m∗/(eB k l)=8 ps for the hole effective mass m∗=0.7m and k l=0.5,
i F o F
where k the Fermi momentum and l the mean free path.
F
5.7 Spin Transport Phenomena
To this category belongs a number of effects observed in heterostructures of
(Ga,Mn)As, and important for perspective spintronic devices, such as spin
injection of holes [144, 145] and electrons in the Zener diode [146, 147], giant
magnetoresistance (GMR) [148], tunnelling magnetoresistance (TMR) [149,
150, 151], tunnelling anisotropic magnetoresistance (TAMR) [152, 153], and
domain wall resistance [154, 155].
Since in most semiconductor spin transport devices the relevant length
scale is shorter that the phase coherence length, a formulation of theory in
termsoftheBoltzmann distribution functionf isnotvalid.Recently,theory
thatcombinesanempiricaltight-bindingapproachwithaLandauer-Bu¨ttiker
formalism was developed [156, 157]. In contrast to the standard kp method,

--- Page 49 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 37
this theory describes properly the interfaces and inversion symmetry break-
ing as well as the band dispersion in the entire Brillouin zone, so that the
essential for the spin-dependent tunnelling Rashba and Dresselhaus terms as
well as the tunnelling via k points away from the zone center are taken into
account. This approach [156,157], developed with noadjustable parameters,
explainedexperimentallyobservedlargemagnitudesofbothelectroncurrent
spinpolarizationupto70%inthe(Ga,Mn)As/n-GaAsZenerdiode[158]and
TMRoftheorderof300%ina(Ga,Mn)As/GaAs/(Ga,Mn)Astrilayerstruc-
ture [151]. Furthermore, theory reproduced a fast decrease of these figures
with the device bias as well as it indicated that the magnitude of TAMR
should not exceed 10% under usual strain conditions.
5.8 Methods of Magnetization Manipulation
Since magnetic properties are controlled by band holes, an appealing possi-
bility is to influence the magnetic ordering isothermally, by light or by the
electric field, which affect the carrier concentration in semiconductor struc-
tures. Such tuning capabilities of the materials systems in question were
put into the evidence in (In,Mn)As/(Al,Ga)Sb [159, 160] and modulation
dopedp-(Cd,Mn)Te/(Cd,Mg,Zn)Te[54,161]heterostructures,asdepictedin
Figs.14and15.Actually,thesefindingscanbequantitatively interpretedby
considering the effect of the electric field or illumination on the hole density
under stationary conditions and, therefore, on the Curie temperature in the
relevant magnetic layers. Interestingly, according to experimental findings
andtheoreticalmodelling,photocarriersgeneratedinII-VIsystemsbyabove
barrier illumination destroy ferromagnetic order in the magnetic quantum
well residing in an undoped (intrinsic) region of a p-i-p structure [54, 161]
buttheyenhancethemagnitudeofspontaneousmagnetizationinthecaseof
a p-i-n diode [161], as shown in Fig. 15.
Another method of magnetization manipulation, suitable for low-power
switchingofbitsinmagneticmemories,wasinvokedbyLucBerger[162]and
John Slonczewski [163], who considered since dozen of years magnetization
reversal by a transfer of spin momentum from the current of spin polarized
carriers to localized magnetic moments in ferromagnetic metals. In the case
of semiconductors, the current-induced magnetization reversal was demon-
stratedinsubmicronpillarsof(Ga,Mn)As/GaAs/(Ga,Mn)As [164].Further-
more,spin-polarizedcurrentwasshowntodisplacemagneticdomainwallsin
(Ga,Mn)As with the easy axis perpendicular to the film plane [165, 166].
6 Summary and Outlook
Asanoutcomeofthegreatprogressmadeinthefieldofsemiconductorspin-
tronics in the past few years as reviewed above, spin transistors were for the

--- Page 50 ---

38 T. Dietl
50
22.5 K
25
0
0 V
-25 +125 V
-125 V
0 V
-50
-1.0 -0.5 0 0.5 1.0
Fig. 14: Magnetization hysteresis loops determined by measurements of
anomalousHalleffectatconstanttemperatureof22.5Kforvariousgatevolt-
agesinfield-effecttransistorwith(In,Mn)Aschannel(afterOhnoetal.[160])
first time described in The International Technology Roadmap for Semicon-
ductors:Update2004EmergingResearchDevices.Hereitwasalsosuggested
that spin transistors might replace unipolar silicon transistors, which have
been so successfully employed since the 1960s. It is, however, also obvious
from this review that a number of challenges are ahead, so that semiconduc-
tor spintronics will attract a lot of attentions of the research community in
the years to come.
From the device physics perspective, further works on magnetooptical
isolators and modulators as well as on electrically controlled spin current
generation, injection, detection, filtering, and amplification, particularly in
spin bipolar devices [20] are expected. At the same time, further advance-
ment in low-power magnetization switching will allow the development of
new generation magnetic random access memories (MRAM) and, perhaps,
extend the use of magnetism towards logics. Last but not least a progress in
manipulationofsingleelectronornuclearspinsinscalablesolid-statedevices
can be envisaged, though a time scale in question is hard to predict.
Similarly to other branches of condensed matter physics, breakthrough
achievements will be triggered by developments of new materials. Further
progress in p-type doping and magnetic ion incorporation to standard semi-
conductors will make it possible to synthesize functional high temperature
)Ω(
R
llaH
50
25
0
-25
-50
-8 -4 0 4 8
B (mT)
)Ω(
R
llaH
B (mT)

--- Page 51 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 39
0V
4.2 K
3.03
2.80
2.19
2.05
1.87
1.65
1.49 K
1700 1710
Fig. 15: Effect of temperature (a), bias voltage (b), and illumination (c) on
photoluminescenceofstructureconsistingofmodulationdopedp-(Cd,Mn)Te
quantumwellandn-typebarrier.Zero-fieldlinesplitting(markedbyarrows)
witnessestheappearanceofaferromagneticordering(a)whichdoesnotshow
up if the quantum well is depleted from the holes by reverse bias of p-i-n
diode (b). Low-temperature splitting is enhanced by additional illumination
by white light (c), which increases hole concentration in quantum well (after
Boukari et al. [161])
ferromagnetic DMS. At the same time, a control over ferromagnetic precip-
itates in various semiconductors will result in composite materials that will
beusefulasmagnetoopticalmediaandforhighdensitymemories.Particular
attention will be paid to insulating ferrimagnetic oxides and nitrides, which
could serve as spin selective barriers up to well above room temperature.
Moreover, efforts will be undertaken to convert them into functional mag-
netic semiconductors by elaboration of purification methods and mastering
doping protocols that will producehigh mobility electrons and holes in these
systems. Another line of research will be devoted to search for nonmagnetic
barrier materials in which transmission coefficients could be electrically ad-
justed to optimize either reading or writing process in MRAM cells. Par-
ticularly prospective appear multiferroic systems,asin thesemultifunctional
materialsthecouplingbetweenmagneticandelectricpolarizationsoffersnew
device paradigms.
The important aspect of extensive studies on ferromagnetism in semi-
conductors discussed in this review is the demonstration of suitability of
).u.a(
ytisnetnI
LP
a
2.97
2.82
2.19
2.05
1.88
1.65
1.49 K
1700 1710
b -1V c 0V
4.2 K
1.5 K
1700 1710
Photon energy

--- Page 52 ---

40 T. Dietl
empirically-constrained theoretical methods in quantitative description of a
largebodyofthermodynamic,micromagnetic,transport,andopticalproper-
tiesofferromagneticsemiconductors.Inparticular,asuccessfuldescriptionof
spintroniceffectsinbothnonmagneticandmagneticsemiconductorsispossi-
bleprovidedthatallpeculiaritiesofthehostbandstructure,especiallythose
associated with the spin-orbit interaction, are carefully taken into account.
Indeed, as a result of such an effort (Ga,Mn)As has reached the status of the
best understood ferromagnet. At the same time, research on DMS has dis-
closed shortcomings of today’s computational materials science in predicting
and elucidating magnetic properties of solids. It appears that this failure of
abinitiomethods(predictionofferromagnetisminsystemswhereitisabsent
andinabilitytoexplainitsnatureinmaterialswhereitdoesexist)originates
from the co-existence of strong correlation with electronic and magnetic dis-
orderinDMS.Thiscallsfornovelcomputationprotocolsthatwillbeableto
handlerandomnessandcorrelationonequalfooting,alsoatnon-zerotemper-
atures,andwillallowfortheexistenceofelectronicand/orchemicalnanoscale
phase separations. Such computational tools, together with advanced meth-
odsofspatiallyresolvedmaterialcharacterization,willinparticularanswera
persistently raised question on whether a high temperature ferromagnetism
is possible in materials containing no magnetic ions.
With no doubt, in course of the years semiconductor spintronics has
evolved into an important branch of today’s materials science, condensed
matter physics, and device engineering.
Acknowledgements
TheauthorwouldliketothankhisnumerousWarsaw’sco-workersandHideo
Ohno and his co-workers, as indicated in the reference list, for many years of
stimulating discussions and fruitful collaboration.
References
1. C. Benett, D. DiVincenzo: Nature 404, 247 (2000)
2. M. Horodecki, K. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, R. Horodecki, J. Oppenheim,
A. Sen(De), U. Sen: Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 100402 (2003)
3. J.M. Kikkawa, D.D. Awschalom, I.P. Smorchkova, N. Samarth:
4. M.N.Baibich,J.M.Broto,A.Fert,F.NguyenVanDau,F.Petroff,P.Eitenne,
G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, J. Chazelas: Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2472 (1988)
5. G. Binasch, P. Gru¨nberg, F. Saurenbach, W. Zinn: Phys. Rev. B 39, 4828
(1989)
6. R.E. Camley, J. Barna´s: Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 664 (1989)
7. S.Parkin,C.Kaiser,A.Panchula,P.Rice,B.H.M.Samant,S.H.Yang:Nature
Mat. 3, 862 (2004)

--- Page 53 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 41
8. S. Yuasa, T. Nagahama, A. Fukushima, Y. Suzuki, K. Ando: Nature Mat. 3,
868 (2004)
9. S. Ikeda, J. Hayakawa, Y.M. Lee, R. Sasaki, T. Meguro, F. Matsukura,
H. Ohno: Japan. J. Appl. Phys. 44, L1442
10. J.Hayakawa,S.Ikeda,Y.M.Lee,R.Sasaki,T.Meguro,F.Matsukura,H.T.H.
Ohno: Japan. J. Appl. Phys. 44, L1267
11. X. Jiang, R. Wang, R.M. Shelby, R.M. Macfarlane, S.R. Bank, J.S. Harris,
S.S.P. Parkin: Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 056601
12. T.Dietl:“Dilutedmagneticsemiconductors”,inHandbookofSemiconductors,
ed. by S. Mahajan, Vol. 3B (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1994), p. 1251
13. T. Dietl: Acta Phys. Polon. A 100, 139 (2001)
14. T. Dietl: Semicond. Sci. Technol. 17, 377 (2002)
15. T. Dietl: “III-V and II-VI Mn-based ferromagnetic semiconductors”, in Ad-
vances in Solid State Physics, ed. by B. Kramer (Springer, Berlin, 2003), p.
413
16. T. Dietl: J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 16, 5471 (2004)
17. T. Dietl: J. Mag. Mag Mat. 290-291, 14 (2005)
18. T. Dietl: Proceedings 27th International Conference on Physics of Semicon-
ductors, Flagstaff, USA, 2004 (AIP, Melville) p. 56 (2005)
19. W.G.vanderWiel,S.DeFranceschi,J.M.Elzerman,T.Fujisawa,S.Tarucha,
L.P. Kouwenhoven: Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 1 (2003)
20. I. Zˇuti´c, J. Fabian, S. Das Sarma: Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323 (2004)
21. T.Jungwirth,J.Sinova,J.Maˇsek,J.Kuˇcera,A.MacDonald:Rev.Mod.Phys
96, in press (2006)
22. S.A. Wolf, D.D. Awschalom, R.A. Buhrman, J.M. Daughton, S. von Moln´ar,
M.L. Roukes, A.Y. Chtchelkanova, D.M. Treger: Science 294, 1488 (2001)
23. H. Ohno, F. Matsukura, Y. Ohno: JSAP International 5, 4 (2002)
24. G. Lampel: Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 491 (1968)
25. In Optical Orientation, ed. by F. Meyer, B. Zacharchenya (North Holland,
Amsterdam,1986),Vol.8ofModernProblemsinCondensedMatterSciences
26. D. Awschalom, N. Samarth: “Optical manipulation, transport and storage of
spin coherence in semiconductors”, in Semiconductor Spintronics and Quan-
tum Computation, ed. by D. Awschalom, D. Loss, N. Samarth (Springer,
Berlin, 2002), pp. 147–194
27. S. Ganichev, W. Prettl: J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 15, R935 (2003)
28. V. Sih, Y. Kato, D. Awschalom: Phys. World 18, 33 (November 2005)
29. D. Loss, D.P. DiVincenzo: Phys. Rev. A 57, 120 (1998)
30. B. Kane: Nature 393, 133 (1998)
31. B. Beschoten, E. Johnston-Halperin, D.K. Young, M. Poggio, J.E. Grimaldi,
S.Keller,S.P.DenBaars,U.K.Mishra,E.L.Hu,D.D.Awschalom:Phys.Rev.
B 63, 121202 (2001)
32. T. Andrearczyk, J. Jaroszyn´ski, G. Grabecki, T. Dietl, T. Fukumura,
M. Kawasaki: Phys. Rev. B. 72, 121309(R) (2005)
33. M.Sawicki,T.Dietl,J.Kossut,J.Igalson,T.Wojtowicz,W.Plesiewicz:Phys.
Rev. Lett. 56, 508 (1986)
34. Z. Wilamowski, W. Jantsch, N. Sandersfeld, M. Mu¨hlberger, F. Sch¨affler,
S. Lyon: Physica E 16, 111 (2003)
35. G. Grabecki, J. Wr´obel, T. Dietl, E. Papis, E. Kami´ska, A. Piotrowska,
G. Springholz, G. Bauer: Physica E 13, 649 (2002)

--- Page 54 ---

42 T. Dietl
36. G. Grabecki, J. Wr´obel, T. Dietl, E. Janik, M. Aleszkiewicz, E. Papis,
E. Kamin´ska, A. Piotrowska, G. Springholz, G. Bauer: Phys. Rev. B 72,
125332 (2005)
37. M. Johnson: Semicond. Sci. Technol. 17, 298 (2002)
38. G. Prinz: Science 282, 1660 (1998)
39. A.Hanbicki,O.vantErve,R.Magno,G.Kioseoglou,C.Li,B.Jonker,G.It-
skos, R. Mallory, M. Yasar, A. Petrou: Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 4092 (2003)
40. M. Zenger, J. Moser, W. Wegscheider, D. Weiss, T. Dietl: J. Appl. Phys. 96,
2400 (2004)
41. S. Datta, B. Das: Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 665 (1990)
42. K. Yoh, M. Ferhat, S. Kashiwada, T. Tsuchiyam, A. Riposan, J. Mirecki-
Millunchick: “Electrical characterization of an Fe/InGaAs spin FET”, in Ab-
stracts – SpinTech III Conference, Awaji Island, Japan 2005 (unpublished,
2005)
43. A. L(cid:3)usakowski, J. Wr´obel, T. Dietl: Phys. Rev. B 68, 081201(R) (2003)
44. R. Winkler: Phys. Rev. B 69, 045317 (2004)
45. J.Wr´obel,T.Dietl,A.L(cid:3)usakowski,G.Grabecki,K.Fronc,R.Hey,K.Ploog,
H. Shtrikman: Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 246601 (2004)
46. R. Ga(cid:3)la¸zka: “Semimagnetic semiconductors”, in Proceedings 14th Interna-
tional Conference on Physics of Semiconductors, Edinburgh 1978, ed. by
B. Wilson (IoP, Bristol, 1978), p. 133
47. R. Nagaev: Physics of Magnetic Semiconductors (Mir, Moscow, 1983)
48. T. Dietl: “Semimagnetic semiconductors in high magnetic fields”, in Physics
in High Magnetic Fields, ed. by S. Chikazumi, N. Miura (Springer, Berlin)
49. J.Furdyna,J.Kossut:Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors,Vol.25ofSemicon-
ductor and Semimetals (Academic Press, New York, 1988)
50. G. Bauer, W. Pascher, W. Zawadzki: Semicond. Sci. Technol. 7, 703 (1992)
51. F. Matsukura, H. Ohno, T. Dietl: Handbook of Magnetic Materials 14, 1–87
(2002)
52. W. Prellier, A. Fouchet, B. Mercey: J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 15, R1583
(2003)
53. H. Ohno: Science 281, 951 (1998)
54. A.Haury,A.Wasiela,A.Arnoult,J.Cibert,S.Tatarenko,T.Dietl,Y.Merle
d’Aubign´e: Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 511 (1997)
55. D.Ferrand,J.Cibert,A.Wasiela,C.Bourgognon,S.Tatarenko,G.Fishman,
T. Andrearczyk, J. Jaroszynski, S. Kolesnik, T. Dietl, B. Barbara, D. Dufeu:
Phys. Rev. B 63, 085201 (2001)
56. K. Wang, K. Edmonds, R. Campion, B. Gallagher, T. Foxon, M. Sawicki,
T. Dietl, P. Boguslawski, T. Jungwirth: Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, July 2004,
ed. J. Mendez, AIP Melville, 2005 p. 333 (2005)
57. J.Langer,C.Delerue,M.Lannoo,H.Heinrich:Phys.Rev.B 38,7723(1988)
58. A. Zunger: “Electronic structure of 3d transition-atom impurities in semi-
conductors”, in Solid State Physics, ed. by F. Seitz, D. Turnbull, Vol. 39
(Academic Press, New York, 1986), pp. 275–464
59. Z.Wilamowski,K.S´wia¸tek,T.Dietl,J.Kossut:SolidStateCommun.74,833
(1990)
60. A. Komarov, S. Ryabchenko, O. Terletskii, I. Zheru, R. Ivanchuk: Sov. Phys.
JETP 46, 318 (1977)
61. J.A. Gaj, R.R. Ga(cid:3)la¸zka, M. Nawrocki: Solid State Commun. 25, 193 (1978)

--- Page 55 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 43
62. G.Bastard,C.Rigaux,Y.Guldner,J.Mycielski,A.Mycielski:J.dePhysique
(Paris) 39, 87 (1978)
63. M. Jaczyn´ski, J. Kossut, R.R. Ga(cid:3)la¸zka: Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 88, 73 (1978)
64. A.K. Bhattacharjee, G. Fishman, B. Coqblin: Physica B+C 117-118, 449
(1983)
65. P. Kacman: Semicond. Sci. Technol. 16, R25 R39 (2001)
66. W. Mac, Nguyen The Khoi, A. Twardowski, J.A. Gaj, M. Demianiuk: Phys.
Rev. Lett. 71, 2327 (1993)
67. I.A. Merkulov, D.R. Yakovlev, A. Keller, J.G. W. Ossau, A. Waag,
G. Landwehr, G. Karczewski, T. Wojtowicz, J. Kossut: Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
1431 (1999)
68. J.Sadowski,H.Mariette,A.Wasiela,R.Andr´e,Y.Merled’Aubign´e,T.Dietl:
Phys. Rev. B 56, 1664(R) (1997)
69. J.A.Gaj,W.Grieshaber,C.Bodin-Deshayes,J.Cibert,G.Feuillet,Y.Merle
d’Aubign´e, A. Wasiela: Phys. Rev. B 50, 5512 (1994)
70. I.Smorchkova,N.Samarth,J.Kikkawa,D.Awschalom:Phys.Rev.Lett. 78,
3571 (1997)
71. J. Jaroszyn´ski, T. Andrearczyk, G. Karczewski, J. Wr´obel, T. Wojtowicz,
D. Popoviæ, T. Dietl: cond-mat/0509189
72. J. Jaroszyn´ski, J. Wr´obel, M. Sawicki, E. Kamin´ska, T.Sko´skiewicz, G. Kar-
czewski, T. Wojtowicz, A. Piotrowska, J.Kossut, T. Dietl: Phys. Rev. Lett.
75, 3170 (1995)
73. T.Wojtowicz,T.Dietl,M.Sawicki,W.Plesiewicz,J.Jaroszyn´ski:Phys.Rev.
Lett. 56, 2419 (1986)
74. J.Jaroszyn´ski,G.Karczewski,J.Wr´obel,T.Andrearczyk,T.W.A.Strychar-
czuk, G. Grabecki, E. Papis, E. Kamin´ska, A. Piotrowska, T. Dietl: Physica
E 6, 790 (2000)
75. J. Jaroszyn´ski, T. Andrearczyk, G. Karczewski, J. Wr´obel, T. Wojtowicz,
E.Papis,E.Kamin´ska,A.Piotrowska,D.Popovic,T.Dietl:Phys.Rev.Lett.
89, 266802 (2002)
76. N. Brandt, V. Moshchalkov: Adv. Phys. 33, 193 (1984)
77. M. Oestreich, J. Hu¨bner, D. H¨agele, P.J. Klar, W. Heimbrodt, W.W. Ru¨hle,
D.E. Ashenford, B. Lunn: Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 1251 (1999)
78. R.Fiederling,M.Keim,G.Reuscher,W.Ossau,G.Schmidt,A.Waag,L.W.
Molenkamp: Nature 402, 787 (1999)
79. A. Slobodskyy, C. Gould, T. Slobodskyy, C.R. Becker, G. Schmidt, L.W.
Molenkamp: Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 246601 (2003)
80. T. Dietl, M. Sawicki, E. Isaacs, M. Dahl, D. Heiman, M. Graf, S. Gubarev,
D.L. Alov: Phys. Rev. B 43, 3154 (1991)
81. J.Jaroszyn´ski,J.Wr´obel,G.Karczewski,T.Wojtowicz,T.Dietl:Phys.Rev.
Lett. 80, 5635 (1998)
82. H. Krenn, K. Kaltenegger, T. Dietl, J. Spa(cid:3)lek, G. Bauer: Phys. Rev. B 39,
10918 (1989)
83. C. Benoit `a la Guillaume: Phys. Stat. Solidi (b) 175, 369 (1993)
84. T. Dietl: Acta Phys. Polon. A 94, 111 (1998)
85. T. Dietl, P. Peyla, W. Grieshaber, Y. Merle d’Aubign´e: Phys. Rev. Lett. 74,
474 (1995)
86. T. Dietl, J. Spa(cid:3)lek: Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 355 (1982)
87. T. Dietl, J. Spa(cid:3)lek: Phys. Rev. B 28, 1548 (1983)

--- Page 56 ---

44 T. Dietl
88. T. Dietl: J. Mag. Mag. Mat. 38, 34 (1983)
89. J.A. Gaj, R. Planel, G. Fishman: Solid State Commun. 29, 435 (1979)
90. R. Ga(cid:3)la¸zka: J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 140-144, 13 (1995)
91. T.M. Giebu(cid:3)ltowicz, N. Samarth, H. Luo, J.K. Furdyna, P. K(cid:3)losowski, J.J.
Rhyne: Phys. Rev. B 46, 12076(R) (1992)
92. H. Ohno, H. Munekata, T. Penney, S. von Moln´ar, L.L. Chang: Phys. Rev.
Lett. 68, 2664 (1992)
93. H. Ohno, A. Shen, F. Matsukura, A. Oiwa, A. Endo, S. Katsumoto, Y. Iye:
Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 363 (1996)
94. T. Dietl, A. Haury, Y. Merle d’Aubign´e: Phys. Rev. B 55, 3347(R) (1997)
95. F. Matsukura, H. Ohno, A. Shen, Y. Sugawara: Phys. Rev. B 57, R2037
(1998)
96. T. Jungwirth, W. Atkinson, B. Lee, A. MacDonald: Phys. Rev. B 59, 9818
(1999)
97. T. Story, R.R. Ga(cid:3)la¸zka, R.B. Frankel, P.A. Wolff: Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 777
(1986)
98. T. Dietl, H. Ohno, F. Matsukura, J. Cibert, D. Ferrand: Science 287, 1019
(2000)
99. T. Dietl, H. Ohno, F. Matsukura: Phys. Rev. B 63, 195205 (2001)
100. H. K¸epa, Le Van Khoi, C. Brown, M. Sawicki, J. Furdyna, T. Giebu(cid:3)ltowicz,
T. Dietl: Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 087205 (2003)
101. L. S´wierkowski, T. Dietl: Acta Phys. Polon. A 73, 431 (1988)
102. F. Fr¨ohlich, F. Nabarro: Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 175, 382 (1940)
103. T.Andrearczyk,J.Jaroszyn´ski,M.Sawicki,LeVanKhoi,T.Dietl,D.Ferrand,
C. Bourgognon, J. Cibert, S. Tatarenko, T. Fukumura, Z. Jin, H. Koinuma,
M. Kawasaki: in Proceedings 25th International Conference on Physics of
Semiconductors, Osaka, Japan, 2000, ed. by N. Miura, T. Ando (Spriger,
Berlin)
104. T.Jungwirth,K.Wang,J.Maˇsek,K.Edmonds,J.K¨onig,J.Sinova,M.Polini,
N. Goncharuk, A. MacDonald, M. Sawicki, R. Campion, L. Zhao, C. Foxon,
B. Gallagher: Phys. Rev. B 72, 165204
105. D. Kechrakos, N. Papanikolaou, K. Trohidou, T. Dietl: Phys. Rev. Lett 94,
127201
106. K.M. Yu, W. Walukiewicz, T. Wojtowicz, I. Kuryliszyn, X. Liu, Y. Sasaki,
J.K. Furdyna: Phys. Rev. B 65, 201303(R) (2002)
107. K.Edmonds,P.Boguslawski,K.Wang,R.Campion,N.Farley,B.Gallagher,
C.Foxon,M.Sawicki,T.Dietl,M.Nardelli,J.Bernholc:Phys.Rev.Lett.92,
037201 (2004)
108. H. Munekata, A. Zaslavsky, P. Fumagalli, R.J. Gambino: Appl. Phys. Lett.
63, 2929 (1993)
109. A. Shen, H. Ohno, F. Matsukura, Y. Sugawara, N. Akiba, T. Kuroiwa,
A. Oiwa, A. Endo, S. Katsumoto, Y. Iye: J. Cryst. Growth 175/176, 1069
(1997)
110. M.Abolfath,T.Jungwirth,J.Brum,A.MacDonald:Phys.Rev.B63,054418
(2001)
111. M.Sawicki,K.Y.Wang,K.W.Edmonds,R.Campion,C.Staddon,N.Farley,
C.Foxon,E.Papis,E.Kamin´ska,A.Piotrowska,T.Dietl,B.Gallagher:Phys.
Rev. B 71, 121302 (2005)

--- Page 57 ---

Semiconductor Spintronics 45
112. M.Sawicki,K.Y.Wang,K.W.Edmonds,R.P.Campion,N.R.S.F.C.R.Stad-
don, C.T. Foxon, E. Papis, E. Kamin´ska, A. Piotrowska, T. Dietl, B.L. Gal-
lagher: Phys. Rev. B 71, 121302(R)
113. K.Y.Wang,M.Sawicki,K.Edmonds,R.Campion,S.Maat,C.Foxon,B.Gal-
lagher, T. Dietl: Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005)
114. U. Welp, V.K. Vlasko-Vlasov, A. Menzel, H.D. You, X. Liu, J.K. Furdyna,
T. Wojtowicz: Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 260 (2004)
115. J. K¨onig, T. Jungwirth, A. MacDonald: Phys. Rev. B 64, 184423 (2001)
116. W. Szyman´ska, T. Dietl: J. Phys. Chem. Solids 39, 1025 (1978)
117. T. Shono, T. Hasegawa, T. Fukumura, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno: Appl. Phys.
Lett. 77, 1363 (2000)
118. T. Dietl, J. K¨onig, A.H. MacDonald: Phys. Rev. B 64, 241201 (2001)
119. K. Ando, T. Hayashi, M. Tanaka, A. Twardowski: J. Appl. Phys. 83, 6548
(1998)
120. J. Szczytko, W. Mac, A. Twardowski, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno: Phys. Rev. B
59, 12935 (1999)
121. B.Beschoten,P.Crowell,I.Malajovich,D.Awschalom,F.Fumihiro,A.Shen,
H. Ohno: Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3073 (1999)
122. J. Szczytko, W. Bardyszewski, A. Twardowski: Phys. Rev. B 64, 075306
(2001)
123. J. Sinova, T. Jungwirth, S.R.E. Yang, J. Kuˇcera, A. MacDonald: Phys. Rev.
B 66, 041202 (2002)
124. E.M. Hankiewicz, T. Jungwirth, T. Dietl, C. Timm, J. Sinova: Phys. Rev. B
70, 245211 (2004)
125. Y. Nagai, T. Junimoto, K. Ngasaka, H. Nojiri, M. Motokawa, F. Matsujura,
T. Dietl, H. Ohno: Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 40, 6231 (2001)
126. E.J. Singley, K.S. Burch, R. Kawakami, J. Stephens, D.D. Awschalom, D.N.
Basov: Phys. Rev. B 68, 165204 (2003)
127. L. Chien, C. Westgate: The Hall Effect and Its Applications (Plenum, New
York, 1980)
128. J.M. Luttinger: Phys. Rev. 112, 739 (1958)
129. T. Jungwirth, Q. Niu, A. MacDonald: Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 207208 (2002)
130. P. Nozieres, C. Lewiner: Le Journal de Physique 34, 901 (1973)
131. J.N. Chazalviel: Phys. Rev. B 11, 3918 (1975)
132. P. Oppener: “Ferromagnetic semiconductors”, in Handbook of Magnetic Ma-
terials, ed. by K. Buschow, Vol. 13 (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2001), p. 229
133. T. Dietl, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno, J. Cibert, D. Ferrand: “Hall effect and
magnetoresistanceinp-typeferromagneticsemiconductors”,inRecentTrends
in Theory of Physical Phenomena in High Magnetic Fields, ed. by I. Vagner
(Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2003), p. 197
134. P. Leroux-Hugon, A. Ghazali: J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 5, 1072 (1972)
135. J.N. Chazalviel: Phys. Rev. B 10, 3018 (1974)
136. V.K. Dugaev, A. Cr´epieux, P. Bruno: Phys. Rev. B 64, 104411 (2001)
137. T.Omiya,F.Matsukura,T.Dietl,Y.Ohno,T.Sakon,M.Motokawa,H.Ohno:
Physica E 7, 976 (2000)
138. D.Ferrand,J.Cibert,A.Wasiela,C.Bourgognon,S.Tatarenko,G.Fishman,
S. Kole´snik, J. Jaroszyn´ski, T. Dietl, B. Barbara, D. Dufeu: J. Appl. Phys.
87, 6451 (2000)
139. H. Tang, R. Kawakami, D. Awschalom, M. Roukes: Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
107201 (2003)

--- Page 58 ---

46 T. Dietl
140. T.Jungwirth,M.Abolfath,J.Sinova,J.Kuˇcera,A.MacDonald:Appl.Phys.
Lett. 81, 4029 (2002)
141. F. Matsukura, M. Sawicki, T. Dietl, D. Chiba, H. Ohno: Physica E 21, 1032
(2004)
142. T.Jungwirth,J.Sinova,K.Wang,K.W.Edmonds,R.Campion,B.Gallagher,
C. Foxon, Q. Niu, A. MacDonald: Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 320 (2003)
143. A. Kawabata: Solid State Commun. 34, 432 (1980)
144. Y. Ohno, D.K. Young, B. Beschoten, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno, D.D.
Awschalom: Nature 402, 790 (1999)
145. K. Young, J.A. Gupta, E. Johnston-Halperin, R. Epstein, Y. Kato, D.D.
Awschalom: Semicond. Sci. Technol. 17, 275 (2002)
146. M. Kohda, Y. Ohno, K. Takamura, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno: Jpn. J. Appl.
Phys. 40, L1274 (2001)
147. E. Johnston-Halperin, D. Lofgreen, R. Kawakami, D. Young, L. Coldren,
A. Gossard, D. Awschalom: Phys. Rev. B 65, 041306(R) (2002)
148. D.Chiba,N.Akiba,F.Matsukura,Y.Ohno,H.Ohno:Appl.Phys.Lett.77,
1873 (2000)
149. M. Tanaka, Y. Higo: Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 026602 (2001)
150. R. Mattana, J.M. George, H. Jaffr`es, F.N.V. Dau, A. Fert, B. L´epine,
A. Guivarc’h, G. J´ez´equel: Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 166601 (2003)
151. D. Chiba, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno: Physica E 21, 966 (2004)
152. C. Ruster, C. Gould, T. Jungwirth, E. Girgis, G.M. Schott, R. Giraud,
K.Brunner,G.Schmidt,L.W.Molenkamp:J.Appl.Phys.97,10C506(2005)
153. A. Giddings, M. Khalid, T. Jungwirth, J. Wunderlich, S. Yasin, R. Cam-
pion, K. Edmonds, J. Sinova, K. Ito, K.Y. Wang, D. Williams, B. Gallagher,
C. Foxon: Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 127202 (2005)
154. H. Tang, S. Masmanidis, R. Kawakami, D. Awschalom, M. Roukes: Nature
431, 52 (2004)
155. D.Chiba,M.Yamanouchi,F.Matsukura,T.Dietl,H.Ohno:Phys.Rev.Lett.
96, 096602 (2006)
156. P.VanDorpe,W.VanRoy,J.DeBoeck,G.Borghs,P.Sankowski,P.Kacman,
J.A. Majewski, T. Dietl: Phys. Rev. B 72, 205322 (2005)
157. P. Sankowski, P. Kacman, J. Majewski, T. Dietl: cond-mat/0607206, Phys.
Rev. B, submitted
158. P.VanDorpe,W.VanRoy,V.Motsnyi,M.Sawicki,G.Borghs,J.DeBoeck:
Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 3495 (2004)
159. S.Koshihara,A.Oiwa,M.Hirasawa,S.Katsumoto,Y.Iye,C.Urano,H.Tak-
agi, H. Munekata: Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4617 (1997)
160. H. Ohno, D. Chiba, F. Matsukura, T. Omiya, E. Abe, T. Dietl, Y. Ohno,
K. Ohtani: Nature 408, 944 (2000)
161. H. Boukari, P. Kossacki, M. Bertolini, D. Ferrand, J. Cibert, S. Tatarenko,
A. Wasiela, J.A. Gaj, T. Dietl: Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 207204 (2002)
162. L. Berger: J. Appl. Phys. 55, 1954 (1984)
163. J.C. Slonczewski: J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 159, L1 (1996)
164. D. Chiba, Y. Sato, T. Kita, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno: Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
216602 (2004)
165. M. Yamanouchi, D. Chiba, F. Matsukura, H. Ohno: Nature 428, 539 (2004)
166. M.Yamanouchi,D.Chiba,F.Matsukura,T.Dietl,H.Ohno:Phys.Rev.Lett.
96, 096601 (2006)

--- Page 59 ---

Lectures on the Spin Pairing Mechanism
in High-Temperature Superconductors
E. Arrigoni
Institute of Theoretical Physics and Computational Physics,
Graz University of Technology, Petersgasse 16, 8010 Graz, Austria
arrigoni@itp.tu-graz.ac.at
Abstract. Theaimoftheselecturesistopresentabriefintroduction,appropriate
for non-experts in the field, on the physics of high-temperature superconductors,
focusing in particular on their pairing mechanism. These notes are a summary of
the short lecture held at the Schladming Winter School, and are certainly not a
complete review on the topic. For a more complete and appropriate overview, the
reader is referred to the extended literature on the subject.
Afterashortintroductionabout“conventional”superconductorsandaboutthe
BCS phonon-mediated pairing mechanism, I will present one of the models which
is commonly used to describe the physics of these materials, namely, the Hubbard
model. Here, I will show how the Pauli principle naturally leads to the superex-
changemechanism,i.e.toanantiferromagneticcouplingbetweenelectronspinson
neighboringorbitals.Inundopedcompoundsthiscouplingleadstoaninsulatingan-
tiferromagneticphase.Upondoping,chargecarriers(holes)areintroducedintothe
copper-oxidelayersanddestroylong-rangeantiferromagnetismwhichisreplacedby
short-range antiferromagnetic fluctuations. In the last part of these lectures I will
show how these magnetic fluctuations can lead to an effective attraction between
charge carriers and to pairing, which is the main ingredient of superconductivity.
1 Introduction
Superconductivity was first discovered 1911 in mercury by H. Kamerling
Omnes at Leiden University. However, the theoretical explanation for this
phenomenon was given only 46 years later by Bardeen, Cooper and Schrief-
fer [1]. In order to become superconductor, Mercury was cooled down below
a critical temperature T ≈ 4K. In the years following Omnes’ discovery,
c
superconductivitywasobservedinanumberofadditionalelementsandcom-
pounds. However, until about 20 years ago, the maximum T obtained was
c
around20K (Fig.2).In1986,BednorzandMu¨llerfromIBMinZu¨richbroke
this barrier and first observed superconductivity with T ≈ 35K in a new
c
compound, LaBaCuO [2]. A few months later P. Chu from the University of
Huston, reported superconductivity at T ≈ 90K in YBaCuO. In few years,
c
alargenumberofnewsuperconductingmaterialswerediscovered,withT ’s
c
above the melting point of liquid nitrogen (Fig. 2).
It was quickly realized that these new materials were quite different from
the binary and ternary “conventional” superconductors found before 1986.
E.Arrigoni:LecturesontheSpinPairingMechanisminHigh-TemperatureSuperconductors,
Lect.NotesPhys.712,47–65(2007)
DOI10.1007/3-540-38592-42 (cid:1)c Springer-VerlagBerlinHeidelberg2007

--- Page 60 ---

48 E. Arrigoni
In particular, it was very soon clear that the superconducting mechanism
was different. Up to now, there is not yet a complete agreement about the
mechanism for these High-Temperature Superconductors (HTSC).
In these lectures, I will first present a short introduction about the “con-
ventional”superconductingmechanismandthenpresentasimpledescription
ofoneofthemostwidelyacceptedtheoriesfortheHTSCmechanism,namely
the one based on spin-mediated pairing.
2 Superconductivity
The term superconductivity is related to dissipationless current transport,
whichisreacheduponcoolingbelowthesuperconductingtransitiontempera-
ture.However,thisisnotthewholestory.Oneadditionalimportantproperty
ofsuperconductorsistheMeissnereffect,namely,thefactthatmagnetic-field
linesare(atleastpartially)expelledfromthebulkofasuperconductor.This
effect can be observed by putting a magnet on a piece of superconducting
YBaCuO: the repulsion of the magnetic lines holds the magnet floating on
top of the superconductor, see Fig. 1.
Fig. 1: Meissner effect. Magnetic-field lines are expelled from the bulk of a
superconductor. Due to this effect, a magnet levitates on top of a supercon-
ductor
What is the microscopic origin of such a dissipationless state? Figures 3
and4schematicallyshowhowthepairingbetweenchargecarriers(electrons)
taking place in a superconductor, produce a “rigid” (coherent) state con-
sisting of a coherent superposition of electron pairs (Cooper pairs). Current-

--- Page 61 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 49
Fig. 2: The discovery of superconductivity: T versus years
c
dissipative scattering processes, e.g. with impurities, cannot take place, be-
cause they first need to break a Cooper pair, which costs an energy of the
order of the Cooper-pair binding energy ∆(∝K T ).
B c
Current dissipation
Average Current
Electron
Lattice Ion
Fig. 3: Current dissipation in a non-superconducting state
The fundamental question is, how can electrons, which normally repel
each other due to the Coulomb interaction, form bound pairs? As explained
in Sect. 3, in conventional superconductors, the attractive force is provided
by so-called phonons, i.e. by the lattice which is made of positively charged

--- Page 62 ---

50 E. Arrigoni
Current without dissipation
T<Tc
coherent Current
Electron
Lattice Ion
Pairing :
coherent motion
Gap ∆ :
Energy to break a pair
Fig.4: SuperconductingstatemadeofarigidcoherentstateofCooperpairs
ions oscillating around their equilibrium position. On the other hand, the
pairing mechanism is probably different in HTSC, as discussed in Sects. 5
and 6. One of the most widespread idea, which will be discussed in Sect. 6 is
that pairing in HTSC is mediated by magnetic fluctuations.
3 Phonon-Mediated Effective Attraction
between Electrons
LetusfirstconsiderthesimplepictureofFig.5.Herethelatticeisschemati-
callyrepresentedasanelasticlayer,whileelectronsare“billiardballs”which
locallydeformthelayerwiththeir“weight”.Asecondballisattractedbythe
deformationproducedbythefirstone,sothatputtingtwoballsclosetogether
reduces the elastic deformation energy. The elastic layer, thus, mediates an
effective attraction between the balls.
A more realistic picture is shown in Fig. 6. Here, a negatively charged
electronlocallypolarizesthepositivelychargedlattice.Sinceionsareheavier
thanelectrons,thelocallatticedistortionandassociatedpositivepolarization
survives for some time after the electron has gone away (retardation effect).
A second electron then feels the attraction of the local positive polarization
and follows the path of the first electron. This picture already shows how
this relatively weak “elastic” effect can overwhelm the repulsive Coulomb
interaction thanks to the retardation effect.
We want now to describe the effective attraction between electrons as an
interaction mediated by the exchange of “elastic waves” (see Fig. 5). These
waves are the quanta of elastic lattice deformation and are referred to as
phononsbecausethey areresponsibleforthetransmission ofsoundinsolids.
Phononsplayarolesimilarto“mesons”inhigh-energyphysicsbymediating
a force between electrons.

--- Page 63 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 51
How can electron pair ?!?
1 Electron in lattice 2 electrons
pair formation
attraction via exchange
of "lattice Waves" (phonons)
Fig. 5: Simple picture of the attraction between two “particles” due to a
minimization of the elastic energy
effective attraction
+ + + +
− − − −
+ + + +
Retardation effect
Fig. 6: Illustration of the retardation effect
As a starting point for this description we shall adopt a tight-binding
†
Hamiltonian, containing creation (c ) and destruction (c ) operators for
R,σ R,σ
anelectronatlatticesiteRwithsp(cid:3)inprojectionσ.These latticeelectronsare
coupled via their density n(R)≡ c † c to a local elastic displacement
σ R,σ R,σ
(phonon) described by the field u(R) with conjugate momentum P(R). The
total Hamiltonian for this system is given by
(cid:4) (cid:4)√ (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:6)
T(R−R (cid:4) )c † R,σ c R(cid:1),σ +g Ω n(R)u(R)+ 1 2 P(R)2+Ω2u(R)2 .
R,R(cid:1) R R
(1)
Here,T(R−R(cid:4))isthehoppingmatrixelementforelectrons,g istheelectron-
phonon coupling constant, and Ω is the phonon frequency. For simplic-
ity, we have considered optical (i.e. dispersionless) phonons, and we have

--- Page 64 ---

52 E. Arrigoni
conveniently absorbed the ionic mass M into the displacement field u, its
momentum P, andg .
In the so-called antiadiabatic limit, one can neglect the P term, so that
one can complete the square in the last two terms of Eq. (1):
(cid:4) √ (cid:4) 1 (cid:4) 1 (cid:4) 1g2
g n(R) Ωu(R)+ Ω2u(R)2 = Ω2u¯(R)2− n(R)2 (2)
2 2 2 Ω
R R R R
with
gn(R)
u¯≡u+ . (3)
Ω
Thenewphononfieldu¯isnowdecoupledfromtheelectrons,which,however,
feel an effective attractive interaction
(cid:4)
1 g2
V =− n(R)2 . (4)
eff,ph 2 Ω
R
From the discussion above, it is clear that the antiadiabatic limit is un-
physical: it means that phonons move much faster than electrons, which
is precisely the opposite to what happens in reality. For this reason, we
need to introduce retardation effects. This is done via the introduction of
a Matsubara-frequency (ω ) term, which modifies Eq. (4) to
λ
(cid:4)
1 g2 Ω
V =− n(R)2 . (5)
eff,ph 2 ω2 +Ω2
R λ
In momentum space this becomes
(cid:4)
−
2
1
N
g
q
2 D(q,ω
λ
) c †
k+q,σ
c †
k(cid:1)−q,σ(cid:1)
c k(cid:1),σ(cid:1)c
k,σ
, (6)
k,k(cid:1),q,σ,σ(cid:1)
where N is the number of lattice sites, the electron operators should be now
consideredasFermi(Grassmann)fieldswithanimplicitMatsubara-frequency
dependence, and we have introduced the phonon propagator
2 Ω
D(q,ω )≡ q . (7)
λ ω2 +Ω2
λ q
Here, we have introduced a q dependence of the phonon frequency Ω and of
the coupling constant g.
The expression Eq. (6) can be also obtained via a diagrammatic expan-
sion, which is represented in Fig. 7:
As discussed above, the retardation term ω is important when taking
λ
intoaccounttheCoulombrepulsionbetweentheelectrons.Thelatterismuch
stronger than the attraction Eq. (6). However, fortunately pairing can take
advantage of the retardation of the phonon-mediated attractive term (as
already discussed in Fig. 6).

--- Page 65 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 53
k
g
g
k
Fig. 7: Diagrammatic representation of the effective phonon-mediated
electron-electron interaction. Solid lines are ingoing and outgoing electron
lines (whose propagators don’t contribute to the diagram). The wavy line is
the phononic propagator D(q,ω )
λ
4 BCS Theory
How does one exploit the attractive term Eq. (6) to get the superconducting
state? Within the theory developed by Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer [1],
whichwastermedaccordinglyBCStheory,onetakesintoaccountretardation
effects by restricting the effective attraction Eq. (6) to particles within a
typical phonon energy (cid:1)Ω around the Fermi energy. For larger energies
D
(ω (cid:8)Ω ),theinteraction term(originating fromthepropagator Eq.(7)) is
λ d
cut off. This is equivalent to say that higher electronic energies correspond
to time scales that are too fast to see the phononic-mediated attraction.
After having taken for granted that in this energy range the attractive
part of the interaction “wins” over the repulsion, as suggested above (this is
proven in more detail within Eliashberg’s theory [3]), one can consider the
purely fermionic attractive model:
(cid:4) (cid:4)
H = ξ
k
c †
k,σ
c
k,σ
−
2
1
N
V(q)c †
k+q,σ
c †
k(cid:1)−q,σ(cid:1)
c k(cid:1),σ(cid:1)c
k,σ
, (8)
k,σ k,k(cid:1),q,σ,σ(cid:1)
where −V(q) is the (attractive) electron-electron interaction, and the fermi-
onic (electron) operators are written in momentum space, in which the
“kinetic”-energytermξ =(cid:12) −µ(here,thechemicalpotentialµisincluded)
k k
is diagonal.
Thismodelissolvedbydecouplingtheinteractionpartinanunusualway,
namely,oneassumesthattheoperatorc k(cid:1),σ(cid:1) c k,σ hasafiniteexpectationvalue
φ for k(cid:4) =−k and σ(cid:4) =−σ:
k
φ k ≡(cid:5)c−k,↓ c k,↑ (cid:6). (9)
Equation (8) then yields the following form
)
ω,q(D
λ
k+q
k −q

--- Page 66 ---

54 E. Arrigoni
(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:7) (cid:8)
H = ξ c † c − 1 V(q) c † c † φ +H.C. . (10)
k k,σ k,σ N k+q,↑ −k−q,↓ k
k,σ k,q,σ
In order to avoid introducing Bogolubov transformations, we carry out a
†
particle-hole transformation for the spin-down particles c
−k,↓
= d k,↓, and
obtain the following expression (in matrix notation)
H =
(cid:4)(cid:9)
c † ,d †
(cid:10)(cid:11)
ξ(k) −∆∗ k
(cid:12)(cid:11)
c k,↑
(cid:12)
+const., (11)
k,↑ k,↓ −∆ k −ξ k d k,↓
k
where (cid:4)
1
∆ k ≡ N φ k−q V(q). (12)
q
The eigenvalues of the matrix in Eq. (11) are
(cid:13)
±E(k)≡± ξ2+∆2 . (13)
k k
The ground-state energy of Eq(cid:3). (11) is obtained by summing over negative
eigenvalues, yielding E =− E(k). Evaluating the expectation value
GS k
(cid:5)d † k,↓ c k,↑ (cid:6)=φ k =− ∂ ∂ E ∆ GS = E ∆ (k k ) (14)
k
we obtain the BCS self-consistent gap equation [1]
(cid:4)
∆ = 1 V(k−k (cid:4) ) ∆ k(cid:1) . (15)
k N
k(cid:1)
E k(cid:1)
Retardation effects included in Eq. (6) can be considered in a rough way by
setting V(k,k(cid:4)) to a constantV whenever the electron momenta k and k(cid:4) lie
within an energy shell δ of width (cid:1)Ω from the FS. From Eq. (12) one can
D D
thenapproximatelytake∆ =∆independentofk inthisregion.Inthisway,
k
one can rewrite the self-consistent equation Eq. (15) as
(cid:2)
1 1 (cid:4)δD 1 n (cid:1)ΩD 1 (cid:1)Ω
= (cid:14) ≈ 0 dξ (cid:14) ≈n log D , (16)
V N
k
ξ(k)2+∆2 2
0
ξ2+∆2 0 ∆
wheren isthedensityofstatesattheFermilevel(summedoverspins).The
0
solution for n V (cid:10)1 can be written as
0
∆≈(cid:1)Ω D e − n0 1 V . (17)
It is clear from Eq. (16) that a repulsive interaction (V < 0) only gives
a solution with a vanishing gap ∆ = 0. We will see below for the case of
High-T superconductors that this is not always true.
c

--- Page 67 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 55
An important effect contained in the solution Eq. (17) is√the fact that
the gap ∆ is proportional to the phononic frequency Ω ∝1/ M , where
D Ion
M is the ionic mass. Since the transition temperature T is in turn pro-
Ion c
portional to ∆, one obtains the well-known isotope effect. This means that
by replacing the nuclei by isotopes with different masses, T becomes pro-
c
portional to the inverse squared isotopic mass. This experimental fact was
one of the key observation suggesting that phonons could be at the origin of
thesuperconductingmechanism.InHTSCtheisotopeeffectismuchsmaller,
especiallyatthedopingwhereT ismaximum(topofthe“dome”inFig.8),
c
thus questioning a possible phononic (-only) mechanism in these materials.
5 High-Temperature Superconductors
High-temperature superconducting materials have, in contrast to conven-
tional superconductors, a quite complicated crystal structure (Fig. 9). More-
over, these materials, when undoped, are in fact insulators. A metallic (and
superconducting) state is obtained upon replacing some of the rare earth
(e. g. La with Sr in LaCuO) or adding oxygen (in YBaCuO). There is an
optimal valueofthedopingxforwhichthesuperconductingT ismaximum
c
(Fig. 8).
A High−Temperature Superconductor
e_ phase diagram
Sr2+ 60
doping
40
super−
20 conductor
0. 0.1 0.2 0.3
La 2−x Sr xCu O 4
Fig.8: CrystalstructureofLa 2−x Sr x CuO 4 ,andtheeffectofreplacing(dop-
ing) La with Sr. Phase diagram as a function of doping x and temperature
T
)K(
erutarepmet
antiferromagnetic
insulator
La3+
x = Sr doping
Cu2+
O2−

--- Page 68 ---

56 E. Arrigoni
A B
c
Ba
b
a Y
Cu
O
La,Sr,Ba
6.6A
CuO layers
2
3.2A
2.4A
1.9A
Fig. 9: Crystal structure of La CuO (A) and YBa Cu O (B)
2 4 2 3 7
Despite the complicated structure, it has soon become clear that the im-
portant electron dynamics takes place on a subset of this structure, namely
on the ubiquitous copper-oxide layers. Moreover, only three orbitals per unit
cellareimportanttodescribetheelectronicstructure,namelytheCu-d x2−y2
and the O p and p orbitals (Fig. 10).
x y
The electron dynamics in these orbitals is described by the three-band
(Emery) model [4]
(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:9) (cid:10)
H 3b =−t pd α RR(cid:1)δ p † δRσ d R(cid:1)σ +H.C.
δ=(cid:4)x,y(cid:7)RR(cid:1)(cid:8)σ (cid:9) (cid:10)
−t pp α R (cid:4) R(cid:1) p † xRσ p yR(cid:1)σ +H.C.
(cid:7)(cid:7)RR(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:8)σ
(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4)
+∆ p † p + U d nd nd
δRσ δRσ 2 Rσ R−σ
Rσ δ=x,y Rσ
† †
(Fig. 11). Here, d and p create a hole (not an electron!) in the copper
Rσ δRσ
3d x2−y2 and in the oxygen 2p δ (δ = x,y) orbital, respectively. (cid:5)...(cid:6) denotes
nextneighborsCu-Oorbitalsand(cid:5)(cid:5)...(cid:6)(cid:6)nextneighborsO-Oorbitals.(cid:12) and
d
(cid:12) aretheon-siteenergiesofthecopperandtheoxygenorbitals,respectively.
p
We have set the zero of the energy on the copper site (cid:12) =0, and introduced
d
the charge-transfer gap ∆ = (cid:12) −(cid:12) . The Coulomb repulsion between two
p d
holes is taken into account by the term U. α RR(cid:1)δ and α R (cid:4) R(cid:1) contain the sign

--- Page 69 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 57
Cu O2 Layer
t ~ 0.5 eV
Emery Model
(3−Band Hubbard Model) effective hopping
single−band 5
Hubbard
O2− model undoped
Cu2+
On−site Coulomb energy U ~ 5 eV
Cu2+
O2−
Fig. 10: The copper-oxide planes with their relevant orbitals. Modeling of
these planes via a three- (left) and a single-band (right) Hubbard model
Emery Model
(3-Band Hubbard Model)
t
pd
U
d ∆
Fig. 11: Parameters of the three-band Hubbard model describing the most
relevant orbitals in the CuO layers
2
ofthephasesoftheCu-OandO-Ohoppingduetothedandpsymmetriesof
the Cu and O orbitals, respectively, according to the convention in Fig. 11.
ThismodelcanbefurthersimplifiedbyrestrictingonlytotheCuorbitals
and considering the O orbitals as an effective “bridge” between them (this is
notcompletelycorrectinhole-dopedHTSC,however,wewon’tgointodetail
here.Foramorerigoroustreatmentsee[5]).Thisisthesingle-bandHubbard
model: (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:9) (cid:10) (cid:4)
H 1b =−t c † Rσ c R(cid:1)σ +h.c. +U n R↑n R↓ (18)
σ (cid:7)RR(cid:1)(cid:8) R
with the same conventions as in Eq. (1), and (cid:5)RR(cid:4)(cid:6) means that the lattice
sum is restricted to nearest-neighbor Cu orbitals. The single-band Hubbard
t−
dp
- -
+ + - + + +
- -
+ tpp O2−
-
Cu2+

--- Page 70 ---

58 E. Arrigoni
t
U
Fig. 12: Single-band Hubbard model
Superexchange Mechanism
Large U : 2 order (degenerate) perturbation theory in t/U
Antiparallel configuration
t
t
−
U Virtual processes
t delocalization
− t ∆x ∆ p>h
U
(Heisenb.)
2
energy reduction − 2t
U
Parallel
Pauli principle !
no delocaliztion
4 t 2
superexchange energy J = ~ 150 meV Antiferromagnetic
U
Fig.13: Superexchangemechanism:duetoPauliprinciple,theelectronspins
ontwoneighboringsiteprefertostayantiparallelinordertogaintheenergy
∝−t2/U
Hamiltonian was independently introduced by Hubbard [6] and Gutzwiller
[7] in an attempt to describe the effect of electron correlation in transition
metal compounds.
AthalffillingandforlargeU/t,animportanteffecttakesplace(Fig.13).
Two particles on neighboring sites prefer to have their spin antiparallel in
order to be able to delocalize to the neighboring site. The amplitude for this
process is ∝ t/U as obtained from second-order perturbation theory. This
gives an energy gain ∝ −J/2 ≈ −2t4/U for antiparallel configurations with
respecttoparallelones.Therefore,inasquarelattice,particlestendtoorder

--- Page 71 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 59
Antiferromagnetism at x=0 (no doping)
La CuO Y. Endoh et al.
2 4 PRB (88)
800
523 K
600
a (=1) 2 4 0 0 0 0 0
300 K
1000
λ
=2 a Neutron scattering:
x,Spin
(0,2π) (2π,2π)
0
λ
y,Spin =2 a 1600 214 K
k
y
(π, π) 800
0
(0,0) k x (2π,0) kx
Fig. 14: Detecting antiferromagnetic order via neutron scattering
antiferromagnetically. This ordered phase can be detected, for example, by
neutron scattering (Fig. 14).
Dopedholesfrustrateandeventuallydestroytheantiferromagneticstate.
However, strong antiferromagnetic fluctuations survive deep into the super-
conducting phase, as shown by neutron-scattering experiments. Many theo-
ries consider magnetic fluctuations responsible for the pairing mechanism in
HTSC.AsimpleviewonhowthiscantakeplacewillbepresentedinSect.6.
6 Pairing Mediated by Spin Fluctuations:
Linear Response to Magnetic Excitations
The magnetic-mediated pairing is similar to the one produced by phonons
discussed in Sect. 3. In the former case, however, the bosons responsible for
the interaction between the charge carriers are magnetic excitations, also
called spin waves. A spin wave can be considered as a local perturbation of
the antiferromagnetic (AF) state which can then propagate in space. In a
pure AF state, long-wave spin waves have a very long lifetime (Goldstone
modes), while in a state with short-range AF order, spin waves are strongly
damped.
We now consider a simple approximation to the Hubbard Hamiltonian
Eq. (18), which will help us understanding how spin waves propagate in a
).u.a(
ytisnetnI
elastic
π 1.2 π
(1/a)

--- Page 72 ---

60 E. Arrigoni
non-antiferromagneticstateandhowthesecaninduceaneffectiveinteraction
betweenelectrons.StartingfromEq.(18),weaddanexternalspin-dependent
potential V (R,σ) and consider the linear response to this potential. We
ext
approximate the total Hamiltonian within a space-dependent mean field-
approach, i.e. each particle is affected only by the “average” interaction with
all other particles. This mean-field Hamiltonian reads
(cid:4)
H =H + (V (R,σ)+V (R,σ)) n(R,σ) (19)
kin ext int
R,σ
where H contains the kinetic part of the Hubbard Hamiltonian Eq. (18)
kin
(including the chemical potential), while the (mean-field) interaction poten-
tial can be obtained from Eq. (18)
V (R,σ)≡Uρ(R,−σ), (20)
int
whereρ(R,σ)≡<n(R,σ)>isthemeandensity.Weconsiderthefluctuation
of ρ in the presence of a total potential
V (R,σ)≡V (R,σ)+V (R,σ)−U ρ /2 (21)
tot ext int 0
up to linear order in V . In Eq. (21), for convenience, we have subtracted
tot
the homogeneous (constant) part of the interaction potential, ρ being the
0
average particle density.
In a non magnetic homogeneous state ρ(R,σ) = ρ /2+δρ(R,σ), where
0
δ(R,σ) is induced by the non-homogeneous potential V , we can write, to
tot
lowest order in V ,
tot
(cid:4)
δρ(R,σ)≈− χ (R−R (cid:4) )V (R (cid:4) ,σ), (22)
0 tot
R(cid:1)
wherewehaveintroducedthepolarisabilityχ ,andwehaveexploitedtrans-
0
lation invariance by a lattice vector. The choice of the minus sign in the
convention forχ in Eq. (22) reflects the fact that we expecta negative δρ in
0
the presence of a positive V (at least at short distances), so that we choose
tot
the sign in Eq. (22) in order to have a positive χ . By inserting Eq. (20) into
0
Eq.(21)andEq.(22),andbygoingovertomomentumspaceq (inwhichthe
convolution becomes a product), we obtain a self-consistent equation for δρ
δρ(q,σ)=−χ (q)(V (q,σ)+Uδρ(q,−σ)) . (23)
0 ext
Equation (23) can be easily decoupled by introducing the total charge
and spin densities:
δρ(q)≡δρ(q,↑)+δρ(q,↓) S(q)≡δρ(q,↑)−δρ(q,↓), (24)
as well as the external charge potential and magnetic field

--- Page 73 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 61
V (q)=V (q,↑)+V (q,↓) h(q)=V (q,↑)−V (q,↓). (25)
ext ext ext ext ext
In this way, Eq. (23) becomes
χ (q)
δρ(q)=−χ (q)(V (q)+Uδρ(q))=− 0 V (q), (26)
0 ext 1+Uχ (q) ext
0
and
χ (q)
S(q)=−χ (q)(h(q)−US(q))=− 0 h(q). (27)
0 1−Uχ (q)
0
Equation (27) already suggests the possibility of a magnetic instability: if
Uχ (q) approaches 1 for some q, then the corresponding Fourier component
0
S(q) of the spin density will become nonzero even for vanishing external
magnetic field h. Clearly, q =0 corresponds to a ferromagnetic, q =(π,π) to
an antiferromagnetic instability1.
Close to such an instability, the static spin susceptibility
χ (q)
χ (q)≡ 0 (28)
s 1−Uχ (q)
0
will be strongly peaked at this wave vector.
Forthesakeofsimplicity,wenowassumetobeclosetosuchaninstability,
so that we can take χ U (cid:8)1 and neglect the charge susceptibility χ0(q)
s 1+Uχ0(q)
(althoughthecalculationwithinclusionofthistermisstraightforward).Our
goal is to evaluate the total potential
U
V (q,σ)=V (q,σ)+Uδρ(q,−σ)≈V (q,σ)− σS(q) (29)
tot ext ext 2
U
=V (q,σ)− σ[−χ (q)h(q)] (30)
ext 2 s
U
=V (q,σ)+ χ (q)(V (q,σ)−V (q,−σ)) (31)
ext 2 s ext ext
(cid:11) (cid:12)
U U
=V (q,σ) 1+ χ (q) −V (q,−σ) χ (q). (32)
ext 2 s ext 2 s
IfwetakeV astheHubbardinteractionoriginatingfromadensitypertur-
ext
bation n(q,σ), then
V (q,σ)=Un(q,−σ) (33)
ext
V (q,σ) is thus the total potential acting on a charge density with momen-
tot
tum q and spin σ in the presence of the density Eq. (33). One can interpret
this in terms of an effective interaction
U2
V eff,↑↑(q)=−
2
χ
s
(q) (34)
1 Fromnowon,wewillworkinunitsofthelatticeconstant(Cu-Cudistance)a=1

--- Page 74 ---

62 E. Arrigoni
and (cid:11) (cid:12)
U U2
V eff,↑↓(q)=U 1+
2
χ
s
(q) ≈
2
χ
s
(q). (35)
This means that particles with parallel spin experience an effective spin-
mediatedattractive interaction,whileparticleswithantiparallelspinarepul-
sive one.
In Eq. (35) we have neglected the contribution from transverse spin fluc-
tuations, as well as time-dependent effects. These can be obtained more ap-
propriately within a diagrammatic approach. The diagrams leading to the
effective interactions are plotted in Fig. 15. The diagrams in (A) yield a
contribution
U
U(1+(Uχ )2+(Uχ )4+···)= (36)
0 0 1−(Uχ )2
0
whichisequaltoEq.(35)closetoamagneticinstabilityforwhich1−(Uχ )(cid:10)
0
1. In addition, one obtains a contribution from transverse spin fluctuations,
plotted in (B):
U2χ
U2χ (1+(Uχ )+(Uχ )2+···)= 0 (37)
0 0 0 1−(Uχ )
0
notice, however, that due to particle exchange, the polarisability χ is eval-
0
uated not at the momentum transfer q but at k−k(cid:4)−q.
k+q k’−q
σ −σ σ −σ
σ V −σ = + χ
eff U 0
(A)
k k’
+ + ...
(B)
σ
+ −σ + ....
χ
0
Fig. 15: Diagrams contributing to the effective interaction V eff,↑↓ between
opposite spins. Diagrams in (B) contain the contribution from transverse
spin fluctuations, not taken into account in Eq. (35). Dashed lines represent
the Hubbard interaction U, solid lines are Fermion propagators. One closed
fermionic loop (bubble) corresponds to the polarisability χ
0

--- Page 75 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 63
The idea of a superconducting pairing mechanism originating from mag-
netic fluctuations was originally suggested by Emery [8] and by Berk and
Schrieffer [9]. They were interested in a mechanism for superconductivity in
nearly ferromagnetic materials in which χ (q) is strongly peaked at q =0.
s
As discussed in Sect. 4, a repulsive interaction seems to suggest that it
is impossible to get a superconducting state with antiparallel spin (singlet
state). This is not true. Here, the q dependence of the interaction plays a
crucial role. As a matter of fact, close to an AF instability, χ (q), and thus
s
V eff,↑↓(q) is peaked around (π,π). In order to illustrate the consequences of
this strong q dependence, we take a model V with this property [10, 11]:
eff
V
V eff,↑↓(q)≈
1+ξ2[(q −π)
0
2+(q −π)2]
. (38)
x y
TheFouriertransforminrealspaceofEq.(38)willdecayonatypicaldistance
(AF correlation length) ξ, will be positive at R = 0 so that particles on
the same site will repel each other, and, most importantly, Eq. (38) will
be negative at nearest-neighbor sites |R| = 1. This can be seen from the
mostimportantcontributiontotheFourierintegralat(π,π)yieldingaphase
eiπRx+iπRy,whichis−1atR =(1,0)andequivalentpoints.Thismeansthat
particles on nearest-neighbor sites will attract each other and will be able to
form Cooper pairs.
In momentum space this can be seen by invoking again the BCS gap
equation Eq. (15) with V replaced with −V eff,↑↓ (here, V eff,↑↓ >0):
(cid:4)
∆
k
=−
N
1
k(cid:1)
V eff,↑↓(k−k (cid:4) ) ∆
E k
k
(cid:1)
(cid:1) . (39)
Clearly, there is no solution for a constant (s-wave) ∆ . On the other hand,
k
if V is strongly peaked at k−k(cid:4) =Q≡(π,π) one can look for a solution
eff
in which ∆ =−∆ , so that one obtains
k+Q k
(cid:4)
∆
k
=
N
1
k(cid:1)
V eff,↑↓(k−k (cid:4)−Q)
E
∆
k(cid:1)
k
−
(cid:1)
Q
. (40)
One possible solution is obtained by assuming an angular dependence of the
gap function in the form
∆ =∆ (cosk −cosk ). (41)
k 0 x s
Thisformchangessignunderarotationbyanangleπ/2,andbelongstotheso
called d x2−y2 irreducible representation of the square lattice symmetry [12].
The presence of a d x2−y2 form of the superconducting gap in HTSC has
been supported by many experiments [12, 13, 14, 15], and is by now a well
accepted result. The present discussion suggests that a d x2−y2 pairing gap is
consistentwithamagneticmechanismforhigh-T superconductivity,whileat
c

--- Page 76 ---

64 E. Arrigoni
thesametimeprobablyexcludinga(pure)phononicmechanisminwhichthe
effective interaction is not strongly q-dependent. In addition, the magnetic
mechanism is supported by the observation of a strong magnetic resonance
in the neutron-scattering spectrum of many HTSC in the superconducting
phase [16, 17, 18].
Similar conclusions are reached within the Nearly Antiferromagnetic
Fermi Liquid theory by Pines [10], in which the spin susceptibility is taken
phenomenologically from experiments in the form Eq. (38). A related the-
ory based on AF spin fluctuations was developed by Moriya and cowork-
ers [19]. Schrieffer proposed the so-called “spin-bag” magnetic pairing mech-
anism based on the idea that local AF order is still present upon doping
and that a particle (hole) is dressed with a spatially (typically a few lattice
constants) extended spin cloud, which is due to the frustration of the local
antiferromagnetic order. Two particles tend to pair because in this way they
minimizethefrustrationoftheAForder[20],similarlytotheeffectdisplayed
inFig.5.Ontheotherhand,Schrieffercriticizesthespin-wavemediatedpair-
ing discussed in Sect. 6, suggesting that vertex corrections to the diagrams
shown in Fig. 15 are crucial and could dramatically reduce the effective in-
teractions [21]. This is due to the fact that spin waves in an antiferromagnet
areinfactGoldstonemodes,i.e.theyshouldbecomeexacteigenstatesofthe
Hamiltonian (i.e. decoupled from other excitations) in the long wavelength
limit. Indeed, a strong reduction of the electron-spin-wave vertex has been
confirmed by recent Quantum-Monte Carlo calculations [22].
Despitethefactthatmanyexperimentsandtheoriessupportamagnetic-
basedpairingmechanism,recentmeasurementssuggestthatelectron-phonon
coupling could also play an important role in HTSC after all. There are
strong indications for a superconductivity-induced phonon renormalization,
foralargeisotopecoefficientsawayfromoptimaldoping[23],andofastrong
electron-phonon coupling in the electron dispersion, as observed by angle-
phonon line
interaction line
fermionic line
Fig. 16: A vertex correction to the phonon-mediated electron-electron inter-
action. Dashed lines describe the bare electron-electron interaction U, and
wavy lines describe the phonon propagator

--- Page 77 ---

Spin Pairing Mechanism in HTSC 65
resolved photoemission spectroscopy [24]. In this respect, the combined ef-
fect of electron-phonon and electron-electron interaction may play an im-
portant role. Indeed, vertex corrections due to electron-electron interaction
(see Fig. 16) introduce a strong q dependence in the electron-phonon cou-
pling[23,25,26,27],possiblymakinganelectron-phononmechanismconsis-
tent with d x2−y2 pairing.
References
1. J. Bardeen, L.N. Cooper, J.R. Schrieffer: Phys. Rev. B 108, 1175 (1957)
2. J.G. Bednorz, K.A. Mu¨ller: Zeit. Phys. B 64, 189–193 (1986)
3. G.M. Eliashberg: Soviet Phys. JETP, 11, 696 (1960)
4. V.J. Emery: Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2794 (1987)
5. F.C. Zhang, T.M. Rice: Phys. Rev. B 37, 3759–3761 (1988)
6. J. Hubbard: Proc. R. Soc. London 276, 238 (1963)
7. M.C. Gutzwiller: Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 159 (1963)
8. V.J. Emery: Ann. Phys. (NY) 28, 1 (1964)
9. N.F. Berk, J.R. Schrieffer: Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 433 (1966)
10. D. Pines: Phys. B 163, 78 (1990)
11. A.J. Millis, H. Monien, D. Pines: Phys. Rev. B 42, 167–178 (1990)
12. D.J. Scalapino: Phys. Rep. 250, 329–365 (1995)
13. Z.X. Shen, D.S. Dessau: Phys. Rep. 253, 1 (1995)
14. C.C. Tsuei, J.R. Kirtley: Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 593 (1994)
15. J.R. Kirtley, C.C. Tsuei: Scientific American August, 50–55 (1996)
16. H.F.Fong,B.Keimer,P.W.Anderson,D.Reznik,F.Dogan,I.A.Aksay:Phys.
Rev. Lett. 75, 316–319 (1995)
17. H.F. Fong, B. Keimer, D.L. Milius, I.A. Aksay: Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 713–716
(1997)
18. H. He, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis, C. Ulrich, L.P. Regnault, S. Pailhes, N.S. Berzi-
giarova, N.N. Kolesnikov, B. Keimer: Science 295, 1045–1047 (2002)
19. T. Moriya, Y. Takahashi, K. Ueda: J. Phys. Soc. Japan 59, 2905–2915 (1990)
20. J.R. Schrieffer, X.G. Wen, S.C. Zhang: Phys. Rev. B 39, 11663–11679 (1989)
21. J.R. Schrieffer: J. Low Temp. Phys. 99, 397 (1995)
22. Z.B. Huang, W. Hanke, E. Arrigoni: Europhys. Lett. 71, 959 (2005)
23. M.L. Kulic: Phys. Rep. 388, 1–264 (2000)
24. A. Lanzara, P.V. Bogdanov, X.J. Zhou, S.A. Kellar, D.L. Feng, E.D. Lu,
T. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, A. Fujimori, K. Kishio, J.I. Shimoyama, T. Noda,
S. Uchida, Z. Hussain, Z.X. Shen: Nature (London) 412, 510–514 (2001)
25. R. Zeyher, M.L. Kulic: Phys. Rev. B 53, 2850–2862 (1996)
26. M. Grilli, C. Castellani: Phys. Rev. B 50, 16880–16898 (1994)
27. Z.B. Huang, W. Hanke, E. Arrigoni, D.J. Scalapino: Phys. Rev. B 68,
220507(R) (2003)

--- Page 78 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory
S. Forte
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Milano and INFN, Sezione di Milano
via Celoria 16, 10129 Milano, Italy
forte@mi.infn.it
Abstract. I introduce spin in field theory by emphasizing the close connection
betweenquantumfieldtheoryandquantummechanics.First,Ishowthatthespin-
statistics connection can be derived in quantum mechanics without relativity or
fieldtheory.Then,Idiscusspathintegralsforspinwithoutusingspinors.Finally,I
show how spin can be quantized in a path-integral approach, without introducing
anticommuting variables.
1 From Quantum Mechanics to Field Theory
Even though everybody learns about spin in their childhood in the context
of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, many of the more interesting dynam-
ical features of spin are only introduced in relativistc quantum field theory.
In these lectures, which were originally addressed to an audience of (mostly)
condensed-matterphysicists,Idiscusssomerelevantaspectsofspindynamics
inquantumfieldtheorybyshowingtheirorigininquantummechanics.Inthe
firstlecture,afterabriefdiscussionofthewayspinappearsinnonrelativistic
(Galilei invariant) or relativistic (Lorentz invariant) dynamics, I show how
the spin-statistics connection can be obtained with minimal assumptions in
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, without invoking relativity or field the-
ory.InthesecondlectureIshowhowspincanbequantizedinapath-integral
approach with no need for introducing quantum fields. In the third lecture I
discussthedynamicsofrelativisticspinningparticlesandshowthatitsquan-
tization can be described without using anticommuting variables. A fourth
lecture was devoted to the quantum breaking of chiral symmetry – the axial
anomaly – and its origin in the structure of the spectrum of the Dirac oper-
ator, but since this subject is already covered in many classic lectures [1] it
willnotbecoveredhere.Wewillseethateventhough thestandardmethods
of quantum field theory are much more practical for actual calculations, a
purelyquantum-mechanicalapproachhelpsinunderstandingthemeaningof
field-theoretic concepts.
S.Forte:SpininQuantumFieldTheory,Lect.NotesPhys.712,67–94(2007)
DOI10.1007/3-540-38592-43 (cid:1)c Springer-VerlagBerlinHeidelberg2007

--- Page 79 ---

68 S. Forte
2 Spin and Statistics
2.1 The Galilei Group and the Lorentz Group
In both relativistic and non-relativistic dynamics we can understand the
meaning of quantum numbers in terms of the symmetries of the Hamil-
tonian and the Lagrangian and associated action. Indeed, the invariance of
the Hamiltonian determines the spectrum of physical states: eigenstates of
theHamiltonianareclassifiedbytheeigenvaluesofoperatorswhichcommute
withit,andthisgivesthesetofobservableswhichareconservedbytimeevo-
lution. However, the invariance of the dynamics is defined by the invariance
of the action. This is bigger than that of the Hamiltonian, because it also
involves time-dependent transformations. For example, in a nonrelativistic
theory the action must be invariant under Galilei boost: the change between
two frames that move at constant velocity with respect to each other. But
the Hamitonian in general doesn’t possess this invariance: Galilei boosts ob-
viously change the values of the momenta, and the Hamiltonian in general
depends on them. The set of operators which commute with all transforma-
tionsthatleavetheactioninvariantdefinesthequantumnumberscarriedby
elementary excitations of the system (elementary particles).
A nonrelativistic theory must have an action which is invaraint upon the
Galileigroup.TheGalileitransformations,alongwiththeassociatequantum-
mechanical operators are [2]:
– space translations: x →x(cid:4) =x +a ; P =−i∂
i i i i i i
– time translation: t→t(cid:4) =t+a; H =id
dt
– Galilei boosts: x →x(cid:4) =x +v t; p →p +mv ; K =−it∂ −mx
i i i i i i i i i i
– rotations: x →x(cid:4) =R x ; J =(cid:12) xj∂ +σ
i i ij j i ijk k i
Thegeneratorofrotationsisthesumoforbitalangularmomentumandspin.
The generators of the Galilei group form the Galilei algebra:
[J ,J ]=(cid:12) J ; [P ,P ]=0; [K ,K ]=0; [J ,H]=[K ,H]=0;
i j ijk k i j i j i i
[k ,H]=iP ; [J ,P ]=(cid:12) P ; [J ,K ]=(cid:12) K ; [K ,P ]=iMδ .
i i i j ijk k i j ijk k i j ij
(1)
In order to close the algebra it is necessary to introduce a (trivial) mass op-
erator M which commutes with everything else:
[M,P ]=[M,K ]=[M,J ]=[M,H]=0. (2)
i i i
The Casimir operators, which commute with all generators, are
C =M; C =2MP −P P ; C =(MJ −(cid:12) P K )(MJ −(cid:12) P K ).
1 2 0 i i 3 i ijk j k i ilm l m
(3)
In terms of quantum-mechanical operators the Casimirs correspond to

--- Page 80 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 69
– C =m (mass);
1
– 1 C =−id − p2 (internal energy);
2m 2 dt 2m
– C =σ σ (spin).
3 i i
We see that spin is one of the three numbers which classify nonrelativistic
elementary excitations, along with mass and internal energy.
In the relativistic case, the action is invariant under the Poincar´e group.
The transformations and associate operators are now:
– translations: x →x(cid:4) =x +a ; P =−i∂
µ µ µ µ µ µ
– Lorentz transf.:
xµ →x(cid:4)µ =Λµ xν; pµ →p(cid:4)µ =Λµ pν;
ν ν
Jµν =xµPν −xνPµ+Σµν
rotations: J = 1(cid:12) Jk =(cid:12) x P +σi
i 2 ijk ijk j k
boosts: K =Ji0.
i
The Poincar´e generators form the algebra
[Jµν,Jρσ]=i(gµρJνσ−gνρJµσ+gµσJνρ+gνσJµρ);
[Pµ,Jρσ]=−i (gµρPσ−gµσPρ); [Kµ,Pν]=0 (4)
Explicitly, the algebra of boosts and rotations is
[J ,J ]=(cid:12) J ; [J ,K ]=(cid:12) K ; [K ,K ]=−i(cid:12) K
i j ijk k i j ijk k i j ijk k
[J ,P ]=(cid:12) P ; [K ,H]=iP ; [K ,P ]=iHδ . (5)
i j ijk k i i i j ij
The Casimir operators are now just two:
C =P Pµ; C =W Wµ, (6)
1 µ 2 µ
in terms of the momentum generator and the Pauli-Lubanski operator
Wµ =(cid:12)µνρσP J . (7)
ν ρσ
The corresponding quantum-mechanical operators are
– C =P2; eigenvalue M2 (mass);
1
– C =W2 =mσ2; eigenvalue M2s(s+1) (mass×spin),
2
where the latter identification is clear if one chooses the rest frame, as we
shall discuss in greater detail in Sect. 4.3.
GalileitransformationscanbeobtainedfromPoincar´etransformationsin
the limit v (cid:10)1 by assuming the scaling laws M ∼1, J ∼1, P ∼v, H ∼v2
K ∼1/v.
Summarizing, both in nonrelativistic and relativistic theories spin is one
of the quantum numbers that classify elementary excitations. In quantum
mechanics, the state vectors of physical systems are expanded on a basis

--- Page 81 ---

70 S. Forte
of irreducible representations of the rotation group (in the nonrelativistic
case) or the Lorentz group (in the relativistic case). In quantum field theory,
one-particle states are, respectively, Galilei or Poincar´e irreducible represen-
tations. In the relativistic case, rotations are implicitly defined by the Pauli-
Lubanski vector Eq. (7) as the subgroup of the Lorentz group which leaves
the four-momentum invariant.
In more than two spatial dimensions the rotation group O(d) is doubly
connected (i.e., π [O(d )] = ZZ ); its universal cover is the group Spin(d),
1 2
which, in the usual d = 3 case, is isomorphic to SU(2). When d = 2 (planar
systems)therotationgroupisO(2),which,beingisomorphictothecircleS1
isinfinitelyconnected(π [O(2)]= ZZ);itsuniversalcoveristherealline RR.
1
Itfollowsthatinmorethantwodimensionthewavefunctioncancarryeither
asimple-valued(Bosons)oradoublevalued(Fermions)representationofthe
rotationgroup,andintwodimensionsitmaycarryanarbitrarilymultivalued
one (anyons [4]).
The multivaluedness of the representation of rotations is classified by the
value of the phase which the wave function acquires upon rotation by 2π
about an arbitrary axis (the z axis, say):
R2πψ(q ,...,q )=e2πiJzψ(q ,...,q )=e2πiσψ(q ,...,q ), (8)
z 1 n 1 n 1 n
where J = L + σ, and in the last step we have used the fact that the
z z
spectrum of orbital angular momentum is given by the integers, so upon 2π
rotation it is only spin that contributes to the phase.
2.2 Statistics and Topology
The wave function for a system of n identical particles must be invariant
in modulus, and thus acquire a phase, upon interchange of the full set of
quantum numbers q of the i-th and j-th particle:
i
ψ(q ,...,q ,...,q ,...,q )=e2πiσψ(q ,...,q ,...,q ,...,q ). (9)
1 i j n 1 j i n
The parameter σ, which is only defined modulo integers, is the statistics of
particlesi,j.Wenowprovethespin-statisticstheorem,whichstatesthatthe
statistics is a universal property of particles i, j, and it is equal to their spin
(also in d=2, where the spin as we have seen can be generic).
Theproofisbasedonananalysisofthequantisationofsystemsdefinedon
topologicallynontrivialconfigurationspaces.Indeed,ifC istheconfiguration
d
spaceforasingleparticleinddimensions,theconfigurationspaceforasystem
of n particles in d dimensions is
C¯n =C n−D , (10)
d d
where D is the set of points where the full set of quantum numbers of two or
more particles coincide. These points must be excised from space, otherwise
Eq. (9) with x =x implies that necessarily σ =0 .
i j

--- Page 82 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 71
Iftheparticlesareidentical,pointswhichdifferbytheirinterchangemust
be identified. The configuration space then becomes the coset space
C¯n
C n = d , (11)
d S
n
whereS isthegroupofpermutationsofnobjects.Thetopologicalstructure
n
of the configuration space changes when going from two to more than two
dimensions,justlikethetopologicalstructureoftherotationgroupdiscussed
in Sect. 2.2. Indeed, if d=2 the space Eq. (10), i.e. before dividing out per-
mutations,ismultiplyconnected:aclosedpathtraversedbythei-thparticle
inwhichparticlej isinsidetheloopformedbyparticleicannotbedeformed
into a path in which particle j is outside the loop. The configuration space
Cn is then also multiply connected, and its fundamental group is the braid
2
group π (Cn)=B , as we shall discuss explicitly below.
1 2 n
Inmorethantwodimensions,thespaceC¯n issimplyconnected:allclosed
d
path traversed by a particle can be continuously deformed into each other,
because in more than two dimensions one cannot distinguish the inside of a
one-dimensional curve from its outside. However, the configuration space Cn
d
ismultiplyconnected.Thisimpliesthatatopologicallynontrivialclosedpath
in Cn must correspond to an open path in C¯n, because all closed paths in C¯n
d d d
can be deformed into each other. Furthermore, points in Cn that correspond
d
to same point in C¯n are in one-to-one correspondence with elements of S ,
d n
because S acts effectively, i.e. only the identity of S maps all points of
n n
C¯n onto thenselves. It follows that equivalence classes of paths in C¯n are in
d d
one-to-one correspondence with elements of the permutation group:
π (Cn)=S . (12)
1 d n
Hence, the multiply connected nature of the configuration space is directly
linkedwiththepresenceofidenticalparticle,andspecificallytotheresponse
of the system upon permutations, i.e. to statistics.
Therefore,letusconsiderquantizationonamultiplyconnectedspace.The
waynontrivialstatisticsisobtainedcanbeunderstoodbystudyingthisprob-
lem in a path-integral approach [3], where transition amplitudes are written
in terms of the propagator K(q(cid:4),q)
(cid:2)
S ≡(cid:5)ψ |ψ (cid:6)=(cid:5)ψ |q (cid:4) t (cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:5)q (cid:4) t (cid:4)|qt(cid:6)(cid:5)qt|ψ (cid:6)= dqdq (cid:4) ψ ∗ (q (cid:4) )K(q (cid:4) ,q)ψ (q),
fi f i f i f i
(13)
which in turn can be written as a sum over paths
(cid:2)
(cid:1) (cid:1)
K(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t)= Dq(t 0 )ei t t dt0L[q(t0)] . (14)
q(t)=q;q(t(cid:1))=q(cid:1)
Closed paths on a multiply connected space fall into homotopy classes.
Moreover, open paths can also be classified in homotopy classes by a choice

--- Page 83 ---

72 S. Forte
Fig. 1: Paths P are assigned to homotopy classes by connecting them to a
i
base point through a mesh. Changing the base point from x to y can change
the absolute class assigment of a path, but not the relative assignment of a
pair of paths
of mesh (Fig. 1). Namely, one chooses an arbitrary reference point x (base
point) and then one assign to each point in space a path connecting it to the
base point. The homotopy class of an open path can then be defined as the
homotopy class of the closed path formed by the given open path and the
mesh that connects it to the base point. Once all paths (closed and open)
are grouped into equivalence classes, the path integral is in general defined
as follows (cid:4)
K(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t)= χ(α)Kα(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t), (15)
α
where Kα(q(cid:4),t(cid:4);q,t) is computed including in the sum over paths only paths
in the α-th homotopy class, and χ(α) are weights which depend only on the
equivalence class (homotopy class) of a given path.
The weighted sum (15) must satisfy the following physical requirements:
– (a) physical result must be independent of the choice of mesh;
– (b) amplitudes must satisfy the superposition principle, which in turn
implies the convolutive property
(cid:2) (cid:2)
K(q
(cid:4)(cid:4)
,t
(cid:4)(cid:4)
;q,t)= dq
(cid:4)(cid:5)q (cid:4)(cid:4)
t
(cid:4)(cid:4)|q (cid:4)
t
(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:5)q (cid:4)
t
(cid:4)|qt(cid:6)=
dq
(cid:4)
K(q
(cid:4)(cid:4)
,t
(cid:4)(cid:4)
q
(cid:4)
t
(cid:4)
;)K(q
(cid:4)
t
(cid:4)
;q,t).
(16)
The necessary and sufficient condition for these requirements to be satisfied
is that the weights χ(α) satisfy
|χ(α)|=1 (17)
χ(α◦β)=χ(α)χ(β), (18)

--- Page 84 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 73
Fig. 2: Graphical representation of Eq. (20)
where in Eq. (18) α and β are the homotopy classes of paths with a common
endpoint, and α◦β is the homotopy class of the path obtained by joining
them.
The proof that Eq. (18) implies property (b) is immediate:
(cid:2)
(cid:4) (cid:4)
χ(γ)Kγ(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t)= χ(α)χ(β) dq (cid:4) Kα(q (cid:4)(cid:4) ,t (cid:4)(cid:4) q (cid:4) t (cid:4) ;)Kβ(q (cid:4) t (cid:4) ;q,t).
γ α,β
(19)
The proof that Eq. (17) implies property (a) is also easy: let P be the closed
path obtained composing the open path p which connectes points a and b
with a mesh C (Fig. 2)). Upon changing the mesh toC¯, the path P becomes
the path P¯, which in turn can be obtained by composing P with the closed
paths λ≡C¯(a)C−1(a) and µ=C(b)C¯−1(b):
P¯(ab)=C¯(a)p(ab)C¯−1(b)
=C¯(a)C −1(a)C(a)p(ab)C −1(b)C(b)C¯−1(b) (20)
=λP(ab)µ.
Because µ and λ do not depend on the original path, but only on the two
meshes, the factor χ(λµ) which relates the two class assignments
χ¯(α)=χ(λµ)χ(α) (21)
is universal. It follows that
(cid:4) (cid:4)
χ¯(γ)Kα(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t)=χ(λµ) χ(γ)Kα(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t), (22)
γ γ
so if χ are phases the transition probability is unchanged.
This proves that conditions (17–18) are sufficient for requirements (a-
b) to be satisfied, the proof that they are also necessary is somewhat more
technical and we shall omit it. Conditions Eqs. (17–18), taken jointly, mean
that phases χ provide one-dimensional unitary representation of π (Cn), i.e.
1 d
the permutation group S (in more than two dimensions) or the braid group
n
(in two dimensions).

--- Page 85 ---

74 S. Forte
2.3 Bosons, Fermions and Anyons
The relation between spin and statistics now follows from the structure of
the path integral. First, we observe that there are only two unitary one-
dimensional irreducible representations of the permutation group S : the
n
trivial one (where χ = 1 for all permutations), and the alternating one,
where χ = 1 if the permutation is even and χ = −1 if it is odd (i.e., if they
may be performed by an even or odd number of interchanges, respectively).
Now, note that the wave function at time t is given by the path integral in
terms of some boundary condition at time t :
0
(cid:2)
(cid:5)q,t|ψ(cid:6)= dq K(q,t;q ,t )ψ (q ,t ). (23)
0 0 0 0 0 0
Two evolutions that lead to final states which only differ by the interchange
of the coordinates q , q in configuration space differ by the factor χ: hence,
i j
χ=−1correspondtoσ = 1 (σ =0).However,aninterchangeofcoordinates
2
q , q can also be realized by a rotation by π of the system about any axis
i j
through the center of mass of the two particles (or a rotation about any axis
followed by a translation), which in turn is generated by the corresponding
angular momentum operator
|q j q i (cid:6)=eiπJ z ij|q i q j (cid:6), (24)
where Jij is the component along the (arbitrarily defined) z axis of the an-
z
gular momentum of particles i, j. The constraint that σ can only be either
integer or half-integer is understood as a consequence of the trivial fact that
two interchanges, or a rotation by 2π, must bring back to the starting con-
figuration.
Itfollowsthatifχ=−1,soσ = 1,andthespectrumofJij isgivenbythe
2 z
odd integers. We can then view the contribution of χ to the path integral as
theresultofhavingaddedanextrainternaleffectiveinteraction,whichshifts
the angular momentum of the pair of particles i, j by an integer, i.e. the an-
gularmomentumofeachparticlebyahalf-integer.Thisestablishesthespin-
statistics theorem in a nonrelativistic theory. The results is a consequence of
thefactthatfermionicstatistics,whichisusuallygivenasapropertyofwave
functions, has been lifted through the path-integral formalism to a property
of particle paths, and attributed to a weight given to paths. The fact that
either trivial or alternating representations of permutations are possible is
then directly related to the existence of either single-valued or double-valued
representations of rotations.
In order to understand this better, let us now consider the case of planar
systems [4], both because we can then generalize this spin-statistics connec-
tion to arbitrary spin and statistics (anyons), and also because we can then
work out an explicit representation for the effective interaction associated
to the χ weigths, which will lead us to the spin action which we shall then
discuss in the next section.

--- Page 86 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 75
In d = 2, χα provide an abelian irreducible representation of the braid
group.Indeed,eachparticletrajectoryonamultiply-connectedspacedefines
an inequivalent braid (Fig. 3). Each braid, in turn, is uniquely defined as
a sequence of interchanges of pairs of neighbouring particles. This can be
represented algebraically by introducing the operator σ which exchanges
i
particles i and i + 1 (Fig. 4). Two braids are equivalent if they can be
deformed into each other. For instance (Fig. 5)
σ σ σ =σ σ σ (25)
i i+1 i i+1 i i+1
σ σ σ (cid:4)=σ σ σ −1 . (26)
i i+1 i i i+1 i
In fact, all independent relations between braids are Eq. (25) and
σ σ =σ σ if|i−j|>1. (27)
i j j i
In terms of χ Eq. (27) implies
χ(σ σ )=χ(σ )χ(σ ) if|i−j|>1, (28)
i j i j
while Eq. (25) implies
Fig. 3: Braids defined by particles’ trajectories
Fig. 4: The exchange operator σ and its inverse
i

--- Page 87 ---

76 S. Forte
a b
Fig. 5: Graphical representation of Eq. (25) (a) and Eq. (26) (b)
Fig. 6: Graphical representation of Eq. (27)
χ(σ )=χ(σ ) for alli,j . (29)
i j
Equations(28,29)inturnimplythattheweightforagenericpath(braid)
is (cid:15) (cid:16)
(cid:4)n
χ(σ ...σ )=χ(σ )...χ(σ )=exp 2iσ (cid:12) , (30)
i1 in i1 in k
k=1
where (cid:12) = +1 for a direct exchange and (cid:12) = −1 for its inverse σ −1, and
i
σ coincides with the statistics parameter Eq. (9). The cases of bosons and
fermions are recovered when σ = 0 or σ = 1, respectively, but now σ can
2
take any real value (anyons). Indeed, in two dimensions two subsequent in-
terchanges donotnecessarily take back to the starting point, becauseapath
where particle i traverses a loop encircling particle j cannot be shrunk to a
point(identity).Hence,twointerchangesdonotnecessarilybringbacktothe
starting configuration, and the constraint that 2σ =1 no longer applies. Ac-
cordingly, as already mentioned, in two dimension the rotation group admits
arbitrarily multivalued representations.
The χ weights can be represented e(cid:9)xpli(cid:10)citly in in terms of the variation
of relative polar angle Θ(x) ≡ tan−1 x2 of particles i and j along the
x1
particles’ paths:
   
(cid:2)
(cid:4) (cid:4)
χ=exp −2iσ ∆Θ  =exp −iσ dt d Θ(x (t)−x (t))  .
ij dt i j
i<j i(cid:9)=j
(31)
Using this representation, the weighted path integral Eq. (15) becomes
(cid:2)
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:9) (cid:3) (cid:10)
K(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t)= Dq(t 0 )e i t t dt0 L[q(t0)]−σ i(cid:2)=j d d t0 Θ[xi(t0)−xj(t0)] (32)
q(t)=q;q(t(cid:1))=q(cid:1)

--- Page 88 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 77
(cid:4)∞ (cid:3) (cid:3)
= e −iσ( i(cid:2)=j Θˆ(xi(t(cid:1))−xj(t(cid:1)))+2πnij ) K(n)(q (cid:4) ,t (cid:4) ;q,t)eiσ i(cid:2)=j Θˆ(xi(t)−xj(t)) .
0
nij,(i(cid:2)=j)=−∞
Hence, the weights χ can be viewed as the consequence of having added to
the Lagrangian L the effective interaction term
(cid:4)
d
L [q(t)]=−σ Θ[x (t)−x (t)]. (33)
eff dt i j
i(cid:9)=j
If the starting Lagrangian L described bosonic exitations, the interaction
Eq. (33) endows these excitations with statistics σ.
Equation (32) shows that the effect of the statistics-changing interaction
can be absorbed in a redefinition of the wave function by a phase:
(cid:3)
ψ 0 (q,t)=eiσ i(cid:2)=j Θij(t)ψ(q,t) : (34)
the wave function ψ is propagated by the path-integral defined in terms of
0
the bosonic Lagrangian L. However, it is defined on a space of paths rather
than a space of coordinates, and it satisfies “twisted” boundary conditions:
upon rotation by 2π it acquires a phase
R2πψ (q,t)=ei2πσn(n−1)ψ (q,t), (35)
0 0
and correspondingly the spectrum of eigenvalue of the angular momentum
operator (which generates rotations) is
j =j +σn(n−1), (36)
0
where j is the spectrum of angular momentum for the original Lagrangian.
0
We see explicitly that for a system of of particles the angular momentum of
the pair is shifted by 2σ i.e. each particle has acquired spin σ.
The effective statistics-changing Lagrangian L Eq. (33) looks intrinsi-
eff
cally nonrelativistic, in that it depends on the polar angle as a function of
time. However, it also admits a covariant formulation, which will turn out to
be closely related to the formulation of a path integral for spin. To see this,
define a covariant particle current
(cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:2)
(cid:4)n
dx
(cid:4)n
dxµ
jµ = 1, i δ(2)(x−x )= dsδ(3)(x−x ) , (37)
dt i i ds
i=1 i=1
where s is any covariant parametrization along th(cid:1)e particle path (e.g. the
path-length). Furthermore, add to the action I = dtL(t) a covariant cou-
0
pling of the current to a gauge potential A :
µ
I =I +I +I (38)
(cid:2)0 c f
I = d3xjµ(x)A (x) (39)
c µ
(cid:2)
1
I =− d3x(cid:12)µνρA (x)∂ A (x). (40)
f 2σ µ ν ρ

--- Page 89 ---

78 S. Forte
TheactionI forthegaugepotentialA isquadraticandcanbeintegrated
c µ
out:
(cid:2) (cid:2)
I
eff
[j]≡−iln DAµei(Ic+If) =πσ d3xd3yjµ(x)K
µν
(x,y)jν(y), (41)
in terms of the Green function K (x,y) for the operator (cid:12) ∂ :
µν µρν ν
1 (x−y)ρ
K (x,y)=− (cid:12) (42)
µν 2π µρν |x−y|3
(cid:12) ∂ Kρσ(x,y)=δ σδ(3)(x−y). (43)
µνρ ν µ
The effective current-current interaction
(cid:2)
(cid:4) 1 (x −x )ρ
I =σ I , I =− dxµdxν(cid:12) i j (44)
eff ij ij 2 i j µρν |x −x |3
i j
i,j
isformallyidenticaltotheinteractionofthecurrentjµwithaDiracmagnetic
monopole potential A˜ :
µ
xµ
=(cid:12)µαβ∂ A˜ (x). (45)
|x|3 α β
It is now easy to recover the form Eq. (33) of the spin-statistics changing
interaction. To this purpose, we choose an explicit “Coulomb gauge” repre-
sentation for the potential A˜ (x):
β
(cid:11) (cid:12)
(cid:12) xb
A˜ (t,x)= 0,− ab , r2 =|x|2 =t2−x2−x2 , (46)
µ r(t−r) 1 2
and we parametrize paths with time, s=t.
We get
1 (cid:2) T (cid:2) T dxµ(t) (cid:9) (cid:10) dxν(t(cid:4))
I =− dt dt (cid:4) i ∂ A˜ (x −x )−∂ A˜ (x −x ) j
ij 2 dt µ ν i j ν µ i j dt(cid:4)
(cid:2) 0 (cid:11)0 (cid:12)
T dxa dxa (x (t)−x (t))b
= dt(cid:12)ab i − j i j +I , (47)
dt dt |x (t)−x (t)|2 g
0 i j
where I is a rotationally invariant surface term which has no effect on spin
g
and statistics. Now, terms with i = j in Eq. (47) vanish by antisymmetry,
while terms with i(cid:4)=j can be rewritten using the identity
xb
∂ Θ(x)=−(cid:12)ab , (48)
a |x|2
which immediately implies that
(cid:2)
d
I =− dt Θ(x −x )+I , (49)
ij dt i j g

--- Page 90 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 79
i.e.,uptotheirrelevantI ,thesameastheactionobtainedfromtheeffective
g
Lagrangian Eq. (33).
Summarizing, we have found that nontrivial statistics is enforced by
weighing topologically inequivalent paths in the path integral, that inequiv-
alent paths are those which correspond to interchanging the coordinates of
two or more particles, and that these weights can be obtained as the result
of adding to the Lagrangian an effective interaction term, which shifts the
spectrum of the total angular momentum by a half-integer contribution per
particle. Furthermore, in two dimensions we have obtained an explicit local
representation of this effective interaction term, which is formally equivalent
to the interaction of the particle current with a Dirac magnetic monopole
localized on each other particle.
3 A Path Integral for Spin
Spin is usually quantized by introducing degrees of freedom which live in
an internal space. In particular, the quantization of Fermions is usually per-
formed by introducing anticommuting variables. However, in the previous
section we have seen that it is possible to represent the effect of fermionic
statistics in terms of an interaction defined in configuration space, and then
path-integrating over this space. In this section we shall see that it is also
possible to obtain the path-integral quantization of a spin degree of free-
dom by constructing the configuration space for a classical spin, and then
path-integrating over evolutions in this configuration spaces with a suitable
weight.
3.1 The Spin Action
Itiswell-knownthattheclassicalactionforafree(relativistic)particlecoin-
cides with the arc-length L of the path xµ(s) traversed by it, and in fact its
quantization [10] can be obtained by by summing over paths with a weight
given by an action which coincides with the arc-length L:
(cid:21)
(cid:2) (cid:11) (cid:12)
dxµ 2
I =m ds =mL. (50)
ds
Hence, the quantization of the spinning particle is obtained by first defining
the space of paths, and then introducing as a weight over it the simplest
geometric invariant of the paths.
The path-integral quantization of spin can be obtained in a similar way.
The configuration space for spin is the set of points spanned by a vector
s=σe (51)

--- Page 91 ---

80 S. Forte
with fixed modulus |s| = σ, namely the two-sphere S2. This can be viewed
astheresultoftheactionoftherotationgrouponareferencevector,namely,
the coset of the rotation group over the subgroup of rotations that leave
the reference vector invariant (little group): S2 = SO(3)/SO(2). The sim-
plest invariant over this space is the solid angle subtended by a closed path.
Therefore, parametrizing the vector e in spherical coordinates
 
sinθcosφ
 
e= sinθsinφ (52)
cosθ
we define the spin action as
(cid:2) (cid:2)
I = dtL(θ,φ)=s dt cosθφ˙ . (53)
s
Equation (53) provides us with a spin action in the sense that the time-
evolution (transition amplitude) for spin wave functions
e−imφ
|φ(cid:6)=|m(cid:6)(cid:5)m|φ(cid:6); (cid:5)m|φ(cid:6)= √ (54)
2π
is given by
(cid:2)
(cid:1) (cid:1)
(cid:5)f|i(cid:6)=(cid:5)φ |ei H(t)dt|φ (cid:6),= De ei dtL s −V(J) , (55)
f i
e(tf)=e(φf);e(ti)=e(φi)
where H(t) is a Hamiltonian which describes the spin dynamics (e.g. the
coupling with an external magnetic field, H = s · B) and the boundary
conditions are given in terms of φ only (which is equivalent to specifying
an eigenvalue m of the third component of angular momentum). This result
can be proven by direct computation [5, 6]. We shall instead first show that
the action I Eq. (53) leads to the correct classical dynamics of spin, then
s
quantize it using the general principles of geometric quantization.
Let us first take a closer look at the spin action. Its geometric interpreta-
tion becomes apparent by rewriting it as
(cid:2) (cid:2)
I =σ cosθφ˙dt=σ cosθdφ (56)
s
(cid:2)C (cid:2)C (cid:2) (cid:11) (cid:12)
∂e ∂e
=σ dcosθdφ=σ dS·e=σ × ·e, (57)
∂s ∂t
S S S
where C is the path travsersed by the vector e Eq. (52), and the second step
Eq. (57) holds when the path is closed, in which case S is th surface bound
by C. In such case, Eq. (57) shows explicitly that the spin action coincides
with the solid angle subtended by C.
Equation (57) shows manifestly that there is a4π ambiguity in the defin-
ition of the spin action, which corresponds to the possibility of choosing the

--- Page 92 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 81
upperorlowersolidanglesubtendedbyConthesphere.Inorderforthisam-
biguity to be irrelevant, the parameter σ, which as we shall see corresponds
to the value of spin, must be quantized in half-integer units. The connection
between the spin action and the effective two-dimensional statistics action
Eq. (44) becomes clear by rewriting it as
(cid:2)
I =σ dS·∇×A˜[e], (58)
s
S
whereA˜istheDiracmonopolepotentialEq.(45),inthespaceofspinvectors:
e=∇×A˜[e] (59)
3.2 Classical Dynamics
In order to verify that the spin action defines the action for a classical spin
degree of freedom, we first check that it leads to the Poisson bracket
{si,sj}=(cid:12)ijksk . (60)
This is easily done using the Faddeev-Jackiw formalism [7] for the Hamil-
tonian treatment of systems defined by first-order Lagrangians, i.e. by a La-
grangian of the form
dx
L=f (x) i −V(x). (61)
i dt
Namely, it easy to see that the Euler-Langrange equations implied by the
Langrangian Eq. (61) have the form
dx ∂V
f j = (62)
ij dt ∂x
i
∂f ∂f
f ≡ j − i . (63)
ij ∂x ∂x
i j
This coincides with the canonical Hamiltonian form
dxi ∂V
={xj,xi} ={V,xi} (64)
dt ∂xj
if the Poisson brackets are given by
{xi,xj}=(f −1)ji (65)
Itcanbeshownthatthesameresultisfoundinthemorestandardapproach,
where the Lagrangian Eq. (61) is viewed as defining a constrained dynamics,
which is then treated defining suitable Dirac brackets.
SpecializingthisformalismtothespinactionweseethatitsDiracmonom-
pole form Eq. (58) has the form of Eq. (61) with

--- Page 93 ---

82 S. Forte
f =σA˜ [e]. (66)
i i
Using the definition Eq. (63) this leads to
(cid:9) (cid:10)
f =σ ∂ A˜ −∂ A˜ =σ(cid:12)ijkek . (67)
ij i j j i
Because
1
f
−1
= f (68)
ij σ2 ij
the Poisson Brackets are
1
{ei,ej}= (cid:12)ijkek , (69)
σ
which, identifying the spin vectore s with
s=σe, (70)
immediately lead to the spin Poisson brackets Eq. (60). This also shows that
the parameter σ gives the value of spin.
3.3 Geometric Quantization
The spin action can be quantized using the formalism of geometric or “coad-
joint orbit” quantization [8, 9]. Namely, we view the time evolution of the
(unit) spin vector e(t) as the result of the action of a rotation matrix Λ(t)
on a reference vector e :
0
e(t)=Λ(t)e . (71)
0
This defines a path (orbit) in S2 = SO(3)/SO(2), where SO(2) is the little
group of e (the set of Λ matrices which leaves e invariant).
0 0
ThepathinS2 canbeliftedtoapathinSO(3)byassigningaframe,e.g.
by defining the vector
e˙(t)
n(t)≡ (72)
|e˙(t)|
which satisfies
n·e=0. (73)
The triple e, n, and
b(t)≡e(t)×n(t). (74)
defines a time-dependent frame, which coincides with the standard Frenet
frame if e(t) is viewed as the tangent vector to some path, in which case n
and b are the unit normal and binormal, respectively. The matrix Λ is then
fully specified by Eq. (71) and
n(t)=Λ(t)n . (75)
0

--- Page 94 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 83
It is convenient in particular to choose the set of reference vectors
 
v(3)0 =e
0
 v( 0 1) =n 0  (76)
v(2) =b
0 0
as
v(a) =δa . (77)
0 i i
It is then easy to see that the quantity
(cid:9) (cid:10)
ij
Λ −1Λ˙ =v(i)·v˙(j) (78)
is an element of the SO(3) algebra, the so–called Maurer-Cartan form, given
by (cid:9) (cid:10) (cid:4) (cid:22) (cid:23)
Λ −1Λ˙ = C (Mab) ; (Mab) = δaδb−δaδb . (79)
ab ij ij i j j i
ij
ab
ThecoefficientsC canbeextractedbyexploitingthefactthatthegenerators
ij
are orthogonal under tracing:
(cid:9) (cid:10)
1 1
C = tr M Λ −1Λ˙ = v(i)·v˙(j) . (80)
ij 4 ij 2
We can now use this gometric formalism to rewrite yet again the spin
action Eq. (53) as
(cid:2) (cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:2)
∂e ∂e
I =σ × ·e=σ dt b˙ ·n+integers
s ∂s ∂t
(cid:11)S (cid:2) (cid:9) (cid:10) (cid:12)
1
=σ tr dt Λ
−1Λ˙M
+integers . (81)
2 12
Note that any spin-dependent potential V(σ) can be re-written in terms of
Λ by exploiting Eq. (80) to express the spin vector e in terms of Λ:
(cid:11) (cid:12)
M
ei =σ(cid:12)ijk Λ −1 12Λ . (82)
2
jk
ThisnewformEq.(81)ofthespinactionhasatwofoldadvantage:first,it
doesnotdependontherepresentation,andsecond,itisamenabletogeomet-
ricquantization.Todemonstrateitsrepresentation-independence,letusshow
howthespinorrepresentationisrecoveredfromit.Forspin 1,thegenerators
2
are
M =−i(cid:12)ijkσ , (83)
ij k
where σ are the usual Pauli matrices. We then have
i
(cid:9) (cid:10) (cid:9) (cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:11) (cid:12)(cid:12)
1 σ 11 +σ
tr Λ −1Λ˙M = tr Λ −1Λ˙ 3 = tr Λ −1Λ˙ 3 . (84)
2 12 2i 2i

--- Page 95 ---

84 S. Forte
The connection to (Pauli) spinors is found by introducing the reference
two-component spinor (cid:11) (cid:12)
1
ψ = , (85)
0 0
uponwhichthematrixΛistakentoactinthespinorrepresentation,namely
ψ(t)=T [Λ(t)]ψ , (86)
0
where T[Λ(t)] is the spinor representation of the rotation Λ. The relation
between the spinor and vector representation is provided by constructing
spinor bilinears
ψ ∗ σiψ =Λ ψ ∗ σiψ =Λ ej . (87)
ij 0 0 ij 0
Using this relation, and noting that
(cid:11) (cid:12)
11 +σ
|ψ (cid:6)(cid:5)ψ |= 3 (88)
0 0 2
it is easy to rewrite the spin action I Eq. (81) as
s
(cid:2)
1 dt d
∗
I = ψ (t) ψ(t), (89)
s 2 i dt
which has the form of the kinetic term for a Pauli spinor ψ(t). A generic
spin-dependent potential V(σ) can be written in terms of ψ by using the
relation
∗
e=ψ (t)σψ(t). (90)
The quantization of spin is now reduced to the general problem [9] of
quantizingasystemwhoseconfiurationspaceisthespaceofstates|ψ(cid:6)which
are orbits of a group G:
|φ(cid:6)=T(g)|φ (cid:6), (91)
0
where g ∈ G is an element of the group of which T(g) provides a unitary
representation. The axioms of quantum mechanics imply that transition am-
plitudes for this system are given by the path integral
(cid:2)
(cid:5)f|i(cid:6)= DgeiIw[g] (92)
with the action
(cid:2) (cid:24) (cid:25)
d
I [g]= dt(cid:5)φ | T(g −1(t)) T(g(t))−H(g(t)) |φ (cid:6), (93)
w 0 idt 0
where H is a generic spin-dependent potential (or Hamiltonian, which coin-
cides with the potential for a first-order Lagrangian).
The spin action Eq. (81) is seen to coincide with the kinetic term of the
geometric action Eq. (93) if one identifies the representation matrix T(g)

--- Page 96 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 85
with Λ Eq. (71), and one observes that the projector on the state |φ (cid:6) can
0
be expressed in terms of the generator C0Mij of the little group of |φ (cid:6):
ij 0
|φ (cid:6)(cid:5)φ |=C0Mij . (94)
0 0 ij
Indeed, we get
(cid:2) (cid:24) (cid:25) (cid:2)
d
dt(cid:5)φ | T(g −1(t)) T(g(t)) |φ (cid:6)= dt trC0MijΛ −1(t)Λ˙(t) (95)
0 idt 0 ij
which coincides with the spin action if we choose C0Mij = M . Hence,
ij 12
the spin path integral Eq. (55) with the spin action Eq. (53) follows from
geometric quantization of the space of SO(3) orbits.
The relation of this result to the usual sum over paths a` la Feynman is
apparent if we specialize again to the case of spin 1. The sum over paths
2
is performed by dividing the time evolution from t to t into discrete time
i f
steps ∆t= tf −ti so that t =t +(j−1)∆t, and then letting N →∞. For a
N j i
spin system we get
(cid:2)
(cid:1) (cid:26)N
(cid:5)f|i(cid:6)=(cid:5)ψ f |e −i t t i fHdt|ψ i (cid:6)= dΛ j (cid:5)ψ j+1 |e −i∆tH(tj)|ψ j (cid:6). (96)
j=1
The evolution along an infinitesimal time slice is then given by
(cid:5)ψ |e −i∆tH(ti)|ψ (cid:6)≈(cid:5)ψ |(1−i∆tH(t ))|ψ (cid:6)
j+1 j j+1 j j
1 d
=1+ ∆tψ ∗ ψ−i∆tH(t ) (97)
2 dt j
≈ei[ψ∗
id
d
t
ψ−∆tH(ti)]
,
which coincides with the geometric quantization result Eq. (93). The first-
order quantization of spin is a simple consequence of the fact that a spin
Hamiltonian does not contain a quadratic kinetic term: the action is then
entirely determined by the first-order parallel transport of the spin vector.
The meaning of these results is that first, the probabilty for the time
evolution between two spin states is given by
(cid:2)
(cid:1)
(cid:5)f|i(cid:6)= De ei[Is[e]− dtH(t,e)] (98)
ef(tf)=ef(Λf);ei(ti)=ei(Λi)
and furthermore, the matrix element of any spin-dependent operator F(σ)
can be determined as
(cid:2)
(cid:1)
(cid:5)f|F(σ)|i(cid:6)= De ei[Is[e]− dtH(t,e)]F(e). (99)
ef(tf)=ef(Λf);ei(ti)=ei(Λi)
Summarizing, we have seen that the path-integral quantization of a “sta-
tic”spindegreeoffreedom–ase.g.intheHeisenbergmodel–canbegivenin
termsofageometricallydeterminedfirst-orderspinaction.Theusualformal-
isminthespin-1 caseisobtainedbyspecializingtothespinorrepresentation
2
of spin vectors, but it does not require anticommuting variables or relativity.

--- Page 97 ---

86 S. Forte
4 Relativistic Spinning Particles
As discussed in the introduction, in a relativistic theory physical states are
irreducile representations of the Poincar´e group, i.e. they carry mass and
spin: the one-particle state |m,s(cid:6) satisfies
P2|m,s(cid:6)=m2|m,s(cid:6); W2|m,s(cid:6)=m2s(s+1), (100)
where the Pauli-Lubanski operator W, defined in Eq. (7), generates Lorentz
tranformations which leave the particle momentum invariant, because by
construction W Pµ = 0. In particluar, in the rest frame of the particle (for
µ
massive particles) p = (m,0), so W = (0,s). In a general frame, spin spans
the three dimensional (d−1 dimensional) space orthogonal to momentum.
This introduces a coupling between spin and momentum which determines
the dynamics of a relativistic spinning particle, both at the classical and
quantum level.
4.1 Path Integral for Spinless Particles
Before discussing the quantization of spinning particles, let us review the
path-integralquantizationofamassivespinlessparticle[10].Aswementioned
already, the action Eq. (50) of a spinless free particle, or the kinetic term in
theactionforaninteractingspinlessparticle,coincideswiththearc-lengthof
the path traversed by the particle. This can be written in(cid:14)various equivalent
ways: the simple integral of the arc-length element ds = dxµdx Eq. (50)
µ
can be rewritten in terms of an induced metric g(s) along the path
(cid:2) (cid:27) (cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:28)
1 dxµ 2 m2√
I = ds √ 1 + g . (101)
0 g2 ds 2
Both at the classical and at the quantum level, the equation of motion for g
is the constraint
x˙2
g = , (102)
m2
which shows that indeed g(s) is the induced metric
dx2 =g(s)ds2 , (103)
and leads back to the original form Eq. (50) of the action when substituted
in Eq. (101).
The action Eq. (101) can in turn be rewritten in first-order form
(cid:2) (cid:24) √ (cid:25)
dxµ g (cid:22) (cid:23)
I = ds p − p2−m2 , (104)
0 µ dt 2
where the momentum (tangent vector) pµ is also fixed by a constraint

--- Page 98 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 87
1
pµ = √ x˙µ (105)
g
whichagainleadsbacktotheoriginalformEq.(101)whensubsititutedinthe
action Eq. (104). This first-order form of the action is the most suitable for
geometric quantization, i.e. for describing the dynamics of the spinning par-
ticlesimilarlytothewaywehavedescribedthedynamicsofspininSect.3.3.
The classical equations of motion can be obtained from any of these equiv-
alent forms of the action, and express energy-momentum conservation. For
instance, using the first-order form Eq. (104) we get immediately the Euler-
Lagrange equations
d
pµ =0, p2 =m2 . (106)
dt
Path-integral quantization [10]can beperfomed by exploiting the “gauge
invariance”, i.e. the reparametrization invariance of the system [8]. The
(Euclidean) path integral
(cid:2)
(cid:1) √
(cid:5)x (cid:4)|x(cid:6)=N Dx(s) e −m 0 1ds x˙2 (107)
x(0)=x;x(1)=x(cid:1)
can be rewritten introducing the induced metric g(s) Eq. (102) as
(cid:2)
(cid:22) (cid:23) (cid:1) √
(cid:5)x (cid:4)|x(cid:6)=N Dx(s)Dg(s) δ(∞) x˙2−g e −m 0 1ds g . (108)
x(0)=x;x(1)=x(cid:1)
Reparametrization invariance is now manifest, because upon a general repa-
rametrization s→f(s), the metric g(s) transforms as g(s)→g(f(s))[f˙(s)]2.
We can now perform the path integral by fixing the gauge, e.g. by imposing
the condition
g˙(s)=0. (109)
Because the path-length is
(cid:2) (cid:2)
1 √ 1 (cid:14)
L= ds x˙2 = ds g(s) (110)
0 0
the gauge conditionEq. (109) implies
g(s)=L2 . (111)
We can thus write the gauge-fixed path-integral as
(cid:2) (cid:2)
∞ (cid:22) (cid:23) (cid:22) (cid:23)
(cid:5)x (cid:4)|x(cid:6)=N dL Dx(s)Dg(s) δ(∞) x˙2−g δ g−L2 e −mL
(cid:2)0 (cid:2)x(0)=x;x(1)=x(cid:1)
∞ (cid:22) (cid:23)
=N dL Dx(s) δ(∞) x˙2−L2 e −mL . (112)
0 x(0)=x;x(1)=x(cid:1)
After gauge-fixing, a residual integration over path lengths L remains.

--- Page 99 ---

88 S. Forte
The path-integral can be re-written in terms of geometric variables along
the path: this leads to geometric quantization again. We introduce a tangent
vectoralongthepath,whichforclassicalpaths(thosewhichsatisfytheEuler-
Lagrange equations) coincides with the particle four-momentum:
x˙µ x˙µ
eµ = = . (113)
|x˙| L
We can replace the path-integration over trajectories by a path-integration
over the tangent vectors eµ. However, the boundary conditions now become
a non-local constraint:
(cid:2)
L
xµ(cid:4)−xµ = dseµ(s). (114)
0
We thus get finally
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
∞ (cid:22) (cid:23) L
(cid:5)x (cid:4)|x(cid:6)=N dL De(s)e −mLδ(∞) e2−1 δ(3)(xµ(cid:4)−xµ− dseµ(s))
(cid:2)0 (cid:2) 0
(cid:22) (cid:23) (cid:1)
=N dLdp De(s)e −mLδ(∞) e2−1 eip·(x(cid:1)−x− 0 Ldse(s)) . (115)
The usual expression of the bosonic (Klein-Gordon) propagator is ob-
tained by regularizing the formal expression Eq. (115). To this purpose, we
cut off paths which are coarse on a scale ∼(cid:12) (where, of course (cid:12) has the
dimensionsof[length]).Wethentakethecontinuumlimitwithamassrenor-
malization condition, expressed by defining a renormalized mass M such
phys
that
m∝εM2 . (116)
phys
ThepropagatorK(p)isobtainedastheFouriertransformoftherenormalized
position-space amplitude:
(cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:22) (cid:23)
K(p) = limN dLe −mL De(s)e − 2 ε 0 Ldse˙2 e −ip· 0 Ldse(s)δ(∞) e2−1
ε→ (cid:2)0
1
=N dLe −LεM p 2 hyse −Lεp2 =N . (117)
p2+M2
phys
Up to the irrelevant albeit infinite normalization constant N, we have thus
recovered the standard form of the Klein-Gordon propagator.
4.2 The Classical Spinning Particle
The spinning particle is now obtained by coupling a spin degree of freedom
to the spinless particle of Sect. 4.1, with dynamics governed by the action
discussed in Sect. 3.1. This can be done in an elegant geometric way by
combining the translational and spin configuration spaces. To this purpose,

--- Page 100 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 89
in one time and d−1 space dimensions, we define a set of d−1 orthonormal
vectors eµ, nµ ,...,nµ , which can in turn be obtained by action of a
(1) (d−2)
Lorentz transformation matrix Λ on a set of reference vectors
(cid:29)
eµ = Λµ tˆν
ν . (118)
n µ = Λµ nˆ µ
(i) ν 0(i)
The reference vectors
(cid:11) (cid:12)
1
tˆµ = , nˆ(i)µ =δ µ (119)
0 0 i
define a basis in one time and d−1 space dimensions. The set of vectors
eµ, nµ completely specifies the matrix Λ: indeed, the first vector has d−
(i)
1 independent components (being unimodular), the second, orthogonal to
(cid:3)it, has d−2 independent components and so on, so that overall they have
d−2(d−i−1) = 1d(d−1) independent components, like the O(d−1,1)
i=0 2
matrix Λ.
In the four-dimensional case we are interested in, the matrix Λ has six
independent components. We take the vector eµ as the unit tangent to the
particle trajectory, so that classically is is identified with momentum up to
an overall factor of m:
x˙µ
eµ = ; pµ =meµ (120)
|x˙|
andatthequantumlevelitisthevariableonepath-integratesover(compare
Eq. (115)). The vector nµ is then identified with the spin vector discussed
(1)
in the previous section, it has two independent components and lives in the
S2 orthogonal to eµ:
e nµ =0; sµ =σnµ (121)
µ (1) (1)
Atthequantumlevel,thetwoindependentvectorspµ andsµ entirelyspecify
the configuration of the system, whereas at the classical level the canonical
coordinate xµ must also be given.
Theactionforthespinningparticleisnowsimplyobtainedbycombining
the action for the spinless particle Eq. (104) with the spin action Eq. (81):
by writing both in terms of Λ, the momentum-spin orthogonality constraint
is automatically enforced. We get
(cid:2) (cid:24) dxµ √ g (cid:22) (cid:23) (cid:25) (cid:9) (cid:10)
I = ds p − p2−m2 +σtr Λ −1Λ˙M . (122)
µ dt 2 12
It is straightforward to check that, at the classical level, the correct dy-
namics is obtained: the Euler-Lagrange equations are found by varying the
action upon the most general Poincar´e transformation, namely a translation
of xµ, and a Lorentz transformation of Λ. The variation upon translations
gives trivially the spinless equation of motion Eq. (106) (energy-momentum
conservation). The most general Lorentz variation is

--- Page 101 ---

90 S. Forte
δΛ=iωµνM Λ, (123)
µν
upon which the action transforms as
(cid:11) (cid:12)
d
δI =−itr (ωµνM K)+iσtr S ωµνM (124)
µν dt µν
K ≡(x˙ p −x p˙ν) (125)
µν (cid:22)µ ν ν (cid:23)
S =σ Λ
−1M
Λ . (126)
µν 12 µν
Demanding that the action be stationary leads to the Euler-Lagrange equa-
tions
d
(xµpν −xνpµ+Sµν)=0. (127)
dt
Equation (127) expresses the set of conservation laws of a Lorentz invari-
ant Lagrangian: in particular, the (i,j) components give the conservation
of (total) angular momentum, while the (0,i) components give the equation
p= d (xE) which relates momentum to velocity in the usual way.
dt
4.3 Quantum Spinning Particles and Fermions
The dynamics of the spinning particle, described by the action Eq. (122), is
givenonthespaceofLorentzorbitsΛ(t)whichevolveaccordingtoEq.(118)
the pair of vectors pµ Eq. (120), sµ Eq. (121). The path integral then follows
from geometric quantization [9] Eqs. (92,93):
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:1)
(cid:5)x (cid:4) ,s (cid:4)|x,s(cid:6)= dpeip·(x(cid:1)−x) dLe −mL DΛ(s)e −i 0 Lds[p·Λtˆ−σtr(Λ−1Λ˙M12 )] .
(128)
In practice, the path integral is found by combining the spin path integral
Eq. (98) and the spinless particle path integral Eq. (115).
Letusnowdiscussinparticularthespin-1 caseinthespinorformulation,
2
and show how the Dirac equation is recovered. We can do this promoting to
the Lorentz group the connection between spinor and vector representations
of the rotation group Eq. (90). This is based on the transformation law of
Diracmatrices,whichconnectthefour-vectorrepresentationΛoftheLorentz
group with the corresponding spinor representation T(Λ):
T(Λ −1)γµT(Λ)=Λµ γν . (129)
ν
Now, it is easy to show that given an unimodular vector vµ, the spinor ψ
such that
ψ ∗ γµψ =vµ (130)
satisfies the condition
v γµψ =ψ (131)
µ

--- Page 102 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 91
(in Euclidean space, in Minkowski space the spinor ψ∗ must be replaced by
ψ¯≡ψ∗γ0).
In our case, we associate to the one-particle state with normalized mo-
mentum eµ the spinor ψ[eµ] which satisfies the condition
p γµψ =mψ , (132)
µ
i.e. the Dirac equation. In practice, we can determine ψ[eµ] by acting with
the spinor representation T(Λ) of the transformation Λ Eq. (118)
ψ =T(Λ)ψ (133)
0
on the reference spinor ψ such that ψ∗γµψ =tˆµ, i.e. (using Eq. (131) such
0 0 0
that
γ0ψ =ψ . (134)
0 0
I(cid:11)f one use(cid:12)s the so-called Dirac representation for the γ matrices, γ0 =
11 0
(where each entry is a 2×2 block), so
0 −11
(cid:11) (cid:12)
φ
ψ = , (135)
0
where φ is any two-component spinor.
Theconditionthatthespinvectorbegivenbysµ fixesentirelythespinor
(up to an overall U(1) phase): if Λ is such that Λµsν = sµ, then, choosing
  ν 0
0
1
according to Eq. (119) sν = , the spinor ψ is given by
0 0
0
(cid:11) (cid:12)
1
ψ =T(Λ)ψ ; φ ≡ . (136)
0 0 0
Itiseasytoseethatthespinorconstructedinthiswayisaneigenstateofthe
projection of the Pauli-Lubanski operator along the spin vector sµ = 1nµ:
2
m
Wµn ψ =± ψ(p,s). (137)
µ 2
Thisisobviousintherestframe,becausethenWµs =ms (cid:12)ijkσ =ms·σ,
µ i jk
whereσ arePaulimatrices,andEq.(136)togetherwiththerelationbetween
the spin vector and Pauli matrices Eq. (90) implies that
s·σφ=±1φ. (138)
2
In other words, in the rest frame Wµs is just the standard spin operator
µ
and φ is the two-component spinor Eq. (86) discussed in Sect. 3.3. But since
in the rest frame the low components of ψ Eq. (135) vanish, this implies

--- Page 103 ---

92 S. Forte
Wµs ψ =±1mψ . (139)
µ 2
In a generic frame, the four-vector sµ is boosted by Λ, so
Wµn =WµΛ −1ν n =T(Λ)WµT −1(Λ)n , (140)
µ µ µ µ
butsoisthespinorψ insuchawaythat[Eq.(133)]theeigenvectorcondition
still holds:
m
T(Λ)WµT −1(Λ)n T(Λ)ψ0=± T(Λ)ψ (141)
µ 2 0
Let us now consider the propagator K(p), i.e. momentum-space path in-
tegral, related by Fourier transformation to the path-integral Eq. (128). We
have found that in the spin-1 case, if the spinor representation is adopted,
2
states along the path are instantaneous eigenstates of e γµ, according to
µ
Eq. (132). In follows that momentum eigenstates, which are the boundary
conditions to the momentum-space path-integral (i.e. states of definite eµ)
automatically satisfy the Dirac equation. Furthermore, the spinor states sat-
isfy
ψ ∗ γµψ =eµ , (142)
i.e.,eµ isobtainedbyactingwithγµ ontheinstantaneousspinorstatesalong
thepath.ButinSect.3.3wehaveproven[Eq.(99)]thattheexpectationvalue
of any function F(σ) can be obtained by path-integration of the function
F(Λ) with a weight given by the spin action itself. Applying this in reverse,
weseethataveragingwiththespinactionproducesthesameresultastaking
matrixelementofinstantaneous(path-otrdered)functionsofγµ,whereγµ is
identified with eµ thanks to Eq. (142).
The propagator is therefore given by
(cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:1)
K(p)= dLe
−mL
DΛ(s)e
−i
0
Lds[pµeµ−σtr(ΛΛ˙M12 )]
(cid:2)
= dLe
−mLe −iLpµγµ
(143)
1
= ,
p/ +m
µ
i.e. the usual Dirac form.
The link with Fermi statistics is understood by observing that the spin
factor upon 2π rotation transforms as
(cid:9) (cid:10) (cid:9) (cid:10)
tr Λ −1Λ˙RM R −1 =Rizˆj(cid:12)ijktr Λ −1Λ˙M (144)
12 j jk
soifσ = 1 thepath-integralEq.(128)acquiresaphaseeiπ =−1.Inthemore
2
conventionalapproach,thisfollowsfromtheanticommutingpropertiesofthe
γ matrices,anditrequiresanticommuting(Grassmann)variables.Inthegeo-
metric approach which we have followed this is not necessary, because the

--- Page 104 ---

Spin in Quantum Field Theory 93
anticommutation properties follows automatically from the fact that phys-
ical states are localized on paths (so ordering along the path is enforced),
andpathsaregiven weights thattransformnontrivially uponrotations. This
provides an explicit realization of the general spin-statistics relation derived
inSect.2:oncespinisobtainedasaconsequenceofaninteractiondefinedin
configurationspace,thelinkwithstatisticsfollowsfromthefactthatparticle
interchange can be perfomed by 2π rotation.
Finally, it is interesting to observe that the dynamical coupling of spin
and momentum which follows from the geometric interpretation of spin as a
vector in the space which is orthogonal to momentum actually changes the
nature of the sum over paths: the Hausdorff dimension of paths d that con-
h
tribute to the regularized and renormalized Euclidean path integral in the
continuumlimitisnotthesameforBoseandFermiparticles[11].TheHaus-
dorffdimensionrelatesthetypicallengthscaleLofpathswhichdominatethe
propagator in the continuum limit to the momentum p which is propagated:
L∼pdH (145)
It can be proven thatd = 2 for Bosons while d = 1 for Fermions [11].
H H
A rough and ready way to see this is to compare the bosonic propagator
Eq.(117)andthefermionicpropagatorEq.(143):itappearsthatthescaling
limit requires taking Lma ∼ constant with a = 2 for Bosons and a = 1 for
Fermions. This means that Bosonic paths are coarser then Femionc paths:
Bosonic propagation is an ordinary random walk (like Brownian motion),
whereasFermionicpropagationisadirectedrandomwalk,essentiallybecause
the spin interaction quenches fluctuations of the tangent vector to the path.
5 Conclusion
The discussion of spin presented in these lectures was rooted in quantum
mechanics, and has used few field-theoretic concepts. Yet, we have been able
toderivemanyresultswhichusuallyrequirethefullframeworkofrelativistic
quantum field theory: the spin-statistics connection, multivalued spin wave
functions, the spin propagator, the Dirac equation. In fact, we have shown
that the quantization of spin both in a nonrelativistic and a relativistic set-
tingfollowsfromgeneralpropertiesoftheconfigurationspacefororbitsofthe
rotation group,viewedasasubgroupoftheGalileiorPoincar´e group,respc-
tively. It thus appears that the standard field-theoretic approach is is merely
a convenient way of achieving the quantization of systems of elementary ex-
citations which provide irreducible representations of the Galilei or Poincar´e
group,becausefieldtheoryautomaticallycombinesquantummechanicswith
therelevantsymmetrygroupinalocal,unitaryway.Ofcourse,thestandard
field-theoretic approach, with anticommuting variables and spinors, is by far
more convenient for the sake of practical computations. However, we have

--- Page 105 ---

94 S. Forte
attempted to show that the origin of the quantum field theoretic features of
spin in the way symmetry is realized in quantum mechanics.
Acknowledgement
I thank Walter Po¨tz for giving me the opportunity to present these lectures
in a stimulating interdisciplinary environment, and all those who attended
the lectures for their interest and enthousiasm.
References
1. See e.g. R. Jackiw: Topological Investigations of Quantized Gauge Theories,
in: S. Trieman, R. Jackiw, B. Zumino and E. Witten, Current Algebra and
Anomalies, (World Scientific, Singapore 1985) pp. 211–361
2. See e.g. W.I. Fushchich, A.G. Nikitin: Symmetries of Equations of Quantum
Mechanics (Allerton, New York, 1994)
3. M. G. Laidlaw and C. M. DeWitt, Phys. Rev. D 3, 1375 (1971)
4. See e.g. S. Forte, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 193 (1992)
5. H. B. Nielsen and D. Rohrlich, Nucl. Phys. B 299, 471 (1988)
6. K. Johnson, Annals Phys. 192, 104 (1989)
7. L. D. Faddeev and R. Jackiw, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1692 (1988)
8. A.M. Polyakov, Gauge Field and Strings,(Harwood,1987);Two-Dimensional
QuantumGravity.SuperconductivityAtHighT ,in:Fields, Strings and Crit-
c
ical Phenomena, E. Br´ezin and J. Zinn-Justin, eds. (North-Holland, 1990)
pp. 305–368
9. P. B. Wiegmann, Nucl. Phys. B 323, 311 (1989)
10. R. P. Feynman and A. R Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals,
(McGraw-Hill, 1965)
11. T. Jaroszewicz and P. S. Kurzepa, Annals Phys. 210, 255 (1991)

--- Page 106 ---

Nucleon Spin
E. Leader
Imperial College London, Prince Consort Road, London SW7 2BW
e.leader@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract. Spin in a relativistic context is a subtle concept!
This was brought out dramatically in 1988, when the results of the Euro-
peanMuonCollaboration(EMC)experimentatCERNonpolarizeddeepinelastic
lepton-hadronscattering(usuallyabbreviatedas“polarizedDIS”)seemedtoimply
that the contribution to the proton’s spin coming from the spin of its quarks was
compatible with zero. The EMC paper was the most cited experimental paper for
several years, and led to a major theoretical effort which eventually showed that
the 20 year old, and long accepted, theoretical treatment was incomplete.
Morerecently,aclassicandmuchcitedpaperonangularmomentumsumrules,
i.e. theoretical relations between the nucleon spin and the angular momentum of
its constituents, was also shown to be incorrect.
Both these matters will be covered in the lectures.
1 Introduction
Deepinelasticlepton-hadronscatteringhasplayedaseminalroleinthedevel-
opment of our present understanding of the sub-structure of elementary par-
ticles. The discovery of Bjorken scaling in the late nineteen-sixties provided
the critical impetus for the idea that elementary particles contain almost
pointlike constituents and for the subsequent invention of the Parton Model.
DIS continued to play an essential role in the long period of consolidation
that followed, in the gradual linking of partons and quarks, in the discovery
of the existence of missing constituents, later identified as gluons, and in the
wonderful confluence of all the different parts of the picture into a coherent
dynamicaltheoryofquarksandgluons–QuantumChromodynamics(QCD).
Polarized DIS, involving the collision of a longitudinally polarized lepton
beam on a polarized target (either longitudinally or transversely polarized)
provides a different, complementary and equally important insight into the
structure of the nucleon. Whereas ordinary DIS probes simply the number
density of partons with a fraction x of the momentum of the parent hadron,
polarized DIS can partly answer the more sophisticated question as to the
number density of partons with given x and given spin polarization, in a
hadron of definite polarization, either along or transverse to the motion of
the hadron.
E.Leader:NucleonSpin,Lect.NotesPhys.712,95–128(2007)
DOI10.1007/3-540-38592-44 (cid:1)c Springer-VerlagBerlinHeidelberg2007

--- Page 107 ---

96 E. Leader
But what is quite extraordinary and unexpected ab initio is the rich-
nessandsubtletyofthedynamicaleffectsassociatedwiththepolarizedcase.
Whereas the unpolarized scaling functions F (x) have a simple interpre-
1,2
tation in the Naive Parton Model (where the nucleon is considered as an
ensemble of essentially free massless partons) and a straightforward gener-
alisation in the framework of perturbative QCD, the spin dependent scaling
functions g (x) are much more subtle, each fascinating in its own way. The
1,2
function g (x) which, at first sight, seems trivial to deal with in the Naive
1
Parton Model, turns out, within perturbative QCD, to have an anomalous
gluon contribution associated with it. And g (x) turns out not to have any
2
interpretation at all in purely partonic language.
What is also fascinating is the extraordinary interplay of theory and ex-
periment in the study of g (x). For a long time the theory of g (x) remained
1 1
comfortably atthe levelof theNaive Parton Model.Then,in 1988, came the
disturbingresultsoftheEuropeanMuonCollaboration(EMC)[1],whichdif-
fered significantly from the naive theoretical predictions. These results could
be argued to imply that the sum of the spins carried by the quarks in a
proton (Squarks) was consistent with zero, rather than with 1/2 as given in
z
the quark model, suggesting a “spin crisis in the parton model” [2]. This led
to an intense scrutiny of the basis of the theoretical calculation of g (x) and
1
the discovery of the anomalous gluon contribution [3]. So surprising was this
discovery that the calculation was immediately checked by three different
groups [4, 5, 6] who all arrived at the same result. (Somewhat fortuitously,
as it turns out, as was demonstrated in [5]).
The above argument, leading to the spin crisis, is based upon a sum rule
relatingtheprojectionalongitsdirectionofmotionoftheangularmomentum
of the nucleon to the spin and orbital angular momentum of its constituents.
Although the sum rule is very intuitive in appearance, it turns out that the
derivation of such sum rules is quite tricky.
A key element in deriving such sum rules is a precise knowledge of the
tensorial structure of the expectation values of the angular momentum oper-
atorsJ inastate|p,σ(cid:6)ofthenucleon,labeledbyitsmomentump,andwith
i
some kind of specification of its spin state, denoted here non-commitally by
σ.
In a much cited paper [7], Jaffe and Manohar stressed the subtleties in-
volved in deriving general angular momentum sum rules. As they point out,
too naive an approach leads immediately to highly ambiguous divergent in-
tegrals, and a careful limiting procedure has to be introduced in order to
obtain physically meaningful results. In this it is essential to work with non-
diagonal matrix elements (cid:5)p(cid:4),σ|J|p,σ(cid:6) and this can have some unexpected
consequences.JaffeandManoharcommentthattojustifyrigorouslythesteps
in such a procedure requires the use of normalizable wave packets, though
they do not do this explicitly in their paper.

--- Page 108 ---

Nucleon Spin 97
Itturnsoutthatdespiteallthecareandattentiontosubtleties,thereare
flaws in the analysis in [7] and the results presented there are not entirely
general [10]. Indeed there are cases where the results of [7] are incorrect. We
shallpresentthecorrectresultsaswellasanewangularmomentumsumrule
for the case of a fast moving nucleon polarized perpendicular to its direction
of motion.
These lectures are based mainly on the Physics Report The theory and
phenomenology of polarized deep inelastic scattering byAnselmino,Efremov
andLeader[8],mybookSpin in particle physics [9],andthearticleCritique
of the angular momentum sum rules and a new angular momentum sum rule
by Bakker, Leader and Trueman [10]. For a historical and fundamentally
pedagogical introduction see An introduction to gauge theories and modern
particle physics by Leader and Predazzi [11].
2 Polarized Lepton-Nucleon Deep Inelastic Scattering
Consider the inelastic scattering of polarized leptons on polarized nucleons:
l+N →l (cid:4) +X
in which only the final lepton is detected, so that X stands for a sum over
all possible states compatible with the usual strong interaction conservation
laws. We are interested in this reaction at high energy and large momentum
transfer, where the parton model is applicable and where perturbative QCD
calculations should be reliable.
We denote by m the lepton mass, k (k(cid:4)) the initial (final) lepton four-
momentum and s (s(cid:4)) its covariant spin four-vector, such that s · k = 0
(s(cid:4) · k(cid:4) = 0) and s · s = −1 (s(cid:4) · s(cid:4) = −1); the nucleon mass is M and
the nucleon four-momentum and spin four-vector are, respectively, P and S.
Assuming one photon exchange, see Fig. 1, the differential cross-section for
detecting the final polarized lepton in the solid angle dΩ and in the final
energy range (E(cid:4), E(cid:4) + dE(cid:4)) in the laboratory frame, P = (M,0), k =
(E,k), k(cid:4) = (E(cid:4),k(cid:4)), can be written as (for a pedagogical and historical
introduction see, for example [11])
d2σ α2 E(cid:4)
= L Wµν , (1)
dΩ dE(cid:4) 2Mq4 E µν
where q =k−k(cid:4) and α is the fine structure constant.
In Eq. (1) the leptonic tensor L is known exactly and is given in terms
µν
of Dirac spinors by
(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) ∗ (cid:4) (cid:4)
L (k,s;k ,s)=[u¯(k ,s) γ u(k,s)] [u¯(k ,s) γ u(k,s)] (2)
µν µ ν
The unknown hadronic tensor W describes the interaction between the
µν
virtualphotonandthenucleonanddependsuponfourscalarstructurefunc-
tions(likeinelasticformfactors)theunpolarizedstructurefunctionsF and
1,2

--- Page 109 ---

98 E. Leader
‚
l k k l
q
X
N P
Fig. 1: Feynman diagram for inelastic lepton-hadron scattering
the spin-dependent sructure functions g , which have to be measured and
1,2
can then be studied in theoretical models, in our case in the QCD-modified
partonmodel.Thesecanonlybefunctionsofthescalarsq2 andq·P.Itturns
out to be more convenient to work with
Q2 ≡−q2 and x ≡Q2/2q·P =Q2/2Mν (3)
Bj
where ν =E−E(cid:4) is the energy of the virtual photon in the Lab frame. x
Bj
is known as “x-Bjorken”, and we shall simply write it as x.
The cross-section for unpolarized scattering is given by
d2σ 4πα2s
= [xy2F +(1− y)F ] (4)
dxdy Q4 1 2
where y =P ·q/P ·k =ν/E and s=(P +k)2. (In this and all the following
we neglect lepton masses and assume s(cid:8)M2 and Q2 (cid:8)M2).
It was thought that analogous to the nucleon elastic form factors, F
1,2
would decrease rapidly as Q2 increased. The discovery at SLAC in 1969 that
there is almost no dependence on Q2 at fixed x was referred to as “Bjorken
scaling”. By analogy with the elastic scattering of point-like particles, where
the form factors are constants, the SLAC results were interpreted as the
scattering of the virtual photon on some point-like constituents inside the
nucleon, the partons. After many years of experimentation and analysis it
becameclearthatthepartonshadthesameinternalquantumnumbersasthe
constituentquarks whichhadbeenusedtoconstructlowenergymodelsofthe
hadrons, and which had been assigned masses of order of 1/3 of the nucleon
mass. The partonic quarks are usually taken to be massless in the kinematic
regimewherethepartonmodelisapplicable,andthepreciserelationbetween
theconstituentandpartonicquarks(justquarks fromnowon)isnotknown.
In this picture the nucleon is viewed as simply a beam of parallel moving
quarks and the reaction is visualized as in Fig. 2.
The input for this is the unpolarized quark number density q(x(cid:4))
i.e. the number density of quarks with a fraction x(cid:4) of the parent nucleon’s
momentum as shown in Fig. 3. It is easy to show that in DIS the photon
interacts only with quarks which have x(cid:4) =x ≡x.
Bj

--- Page 110 ---

Nucleon Spin 99
lepton photon
quark
xP
proton
Fig. 2: Parton model interpretation of inelastic lepton-hadron scattering
p=xP
P
proton
quarks
Fig. 3: The unpolarized quark density q(x)
Of course there is a q(x) for each flavour of quark: u(x),d(x),s(x) and
their anti-quarks.
In this simple parton model F and F no longer depend on Q2 are given
1 2
by:
(cid:24) (cid:25)
1 4 1 1
F (x)= u(x)+ d(x)+ s(x)+antiquarks (5)
1 2 9 9 9
with F = 2xF . In Eq. (5) the numerical factors are the squares of the
2 1
quark electric charges. Note the crucial fact that the value of x appearing in
the parton densities is the same as the value of the experimental quantity
Bjorken-x at which F is measured. This follows from the assumption that
1
the quarks all move parallel to their parent hadron, the so-called collinear
approximation i.e. with p=xP and no transverse momentum p .
T
Oncetheq(x)werereasonablywelldeterminedfromexperimentitbecame
clear that something was missing. Given the physical meaning of the q(x) it
is manifest that the “second moment”
(cid:2)
1
dxxq (x)
f
0
represents the fraction of the nucleon’s momentum carried by the quarks of
flavour f. Summing this over all the quark flavours should give 1, but was
found to yield (cid:21)1/2.
Fortunately the invention of QCD provided the (electrically neutral) glu-
ons as the missing partons needed to carry the rest of the nucleon’s momen-
tum.

--- Page 111 ---

100 E. Leader
QCD also induced dynamical corrections to the simple parton model re-
sults, the most important for the unpolarized case being a gentle breaking
of scaling, so that the parton densities become functions of (x,Q2), with a
slow calculable logarithmic dependence on Q2. It may seem strange that the
parton densities depend on Q2. After all, Q2 is a kinematical variable in a
particular physical reaction, whereas the parton densities are a property of
an isolated nucleon. What is hidden is the fact that in a field theoretic con-
text the parton densities are defined as hadronic matrix elements of certain
operators and these have to be renormalized. The renormalization scale or
renormalization point µ2 is supposed to be arbitrary, and it turns out to be
R
mostefficacioustochooseµ2 =Q2 inthetheoryofDIS.Inadditioninfinities
R
appearlinkedtothemasslessnessofthepartons.Thesearerenderedharmless
by factorizing i.e. by splitting the QCD contribution into a soft and a hard
part. The splitting is at some arbitrary factorization scale µ2, and the infi-
F
nite soft part is absorbed into the definition of the parton density. Strictly
speaking then, the parton densities are functions of three variables: x,µ2
R
and µ2! Again, it is simplest to choose µ2 = Q2. Thus the Q2 in the struc-
F F
ture functions refers to the kinematics of the experiment, whereas the Q2 in
the parton densities refers to the renormalization scale and the factorization
scale at which they are defined. With this convention there is a very nice
picture of what is happening physically. Namely, at fixed x what the virtual
photon“sees”inthenucleondependsuponitsvirtualityQ2 orfrequency.As
Q2 increases the “resolution” increases.
Considernowthecasewheretheleptonandthetargetnucleonarepolar-
izedlongitudinally,i.e.alongoroppositetothedirectionoftheleptonbeam,
usually taken as along the positive OZ axis. Under reversal of the nucleon’s
spin direction the cross-section difference is given by
→ → (cid:27) (cid:28)
⇐ ⇒
d2σ d2σ 16πα2 y 2M2xy
− = (1− )g − g . (6)
dxdy dxdy Q2 2 1 Q2 2
Inthekinematicrangeofinterestthesecondtermshouldbenegligibleso
that Eq. (6) provides a method of measuring the spin-dependent structure
function g (x).
1
If the nucleons are polarized transversely in the scattering plane, that is
the nucleon spin is perpendicular to the direction of the incoming lepton,
then one finds
d2σ→⇑ d2σ→⇓ 16α2 (cid:11) 2Mx (cid:12) (cid:14) (cid:7) y (cid:8)
− =− 1−y g +g . (7)
dxdy dxdy Q2 Q 2 1 2
InprincipleEqs.(6)and(7)allowmeasurementofbothg andg ,butthe
1 2
transverse asymmetry is much smaller and therefore much more difficult to
measure.Onlyinthepastfewyearshasitbeenpossibletogatherinformation
on g which turns out to be smaller than g .
2 1

--- Page 112 ---

Nucleon Spin 101
Let us now turn to the interpretation of g in the parton model. Note
1
that there is no parton model for g – its calculation is totally ambiguous.
2
3 The Spin Crisis in the Parton Model
ForsometwentyyearspriortotheEMCexperimenttheacceptedexpression
forg wascompletelyanalogoustoEq.(5)withtheunpolarizedquarkdensity
1
replaced by the (longitudinal) polarized density ∆q(x) shown in Fig. 4:
Fig. 4: The longitudinal polarized quark density ∆q(x)
Let q +/−(x)dx be the number density of quarks whose helicities are
along/opposite to the helicity of the nucleon. Then
∆q(x)≡q
+
(x)−q−(x) (8)
Of course
q(x)=q
+
(x)+q−(x) (9)
(Note that the third independent kind of quark density, the transverse
polarized parton density (sometimes called transversality) ∆ q(x) shown in
T
Fig. 5 in which the nucleon is transversely polarized and q↑ and q↓ are the
number density of quarks whose transverse spin is along or opposite to the
spin of the nucleon, and
∆
T
q(x)≡q↑(x)−q↓(x) (10)
does not play a role in DIS, but will be of interest later on.)
Fig. 5: The transversely polarized quark density ∆ q(x)
T
The expression for g is then:
1
(cid:29)
1 4 1 1
g (x)= ∆u(x)+ ∆d(x)+ ∆s(x)+antiquarks (11)
1 2 9 9 9

--- Page 113 ---

102 E. Leader
It is useful to rearrange this by defining combinations of quark densi-
ties which have specific transformation properties under the group of flavour
transformations SU(3) . Define:
F
∆q =(∆u+∆u)−(∆d+∆d) (12)
3
∆q =(∆u+∆u)+(∆d+∆d)−2(∆s+∆s) (13)
8
∆Σ =(∆u+∆u)+(∆d+∆d)+(∆s+∆s) (14)
which transform respectively as the third component of an isotopic spin
triplet, the eighth component of an SU(3) octet and a flavour singlet.
F
Eq. (11) then becomes:
(cid:24) (cid:25)
1 3 1
g (x)= ∆q (x)+ ∆q (x)+∆Σ (15)
1 9 4 3 4 8
Taking the first moment of this yields
(cid:2) (cid:24) (cid:25)
1 1 1 4
Γ ≡ g (x)dx= a + √ a + a (16)
1 1 12 3 3 8 3 0
0
where
(cid:2)
1
a = dx ∆q (x)
3 3
0 (cid:2)
1 1
a = √ dx ∆q (x)
8 8
3
0 (cid:2)
1
a =∆Σ ≡ dx ∆Σ(x) (17)
0
0
The significance of these first moments lies in the fact that they can
be related to hadronic matrix elements of currents which are measurable in
other processes.ToseethisweneedtobrieflymentiontheOperatorProduct
Expansion.
The fundamental understanding of the Q2-behaviour of the moments in
unpolarized DIS came originally from a study of the Operator Product Ex-
pansion. Later it was discovered that the same results could be obtained in
the QCD Improved Parton Model.
It can be shown that the hadronic tensor Wµν involved in the expression
for the deep inelastic cross-section [see Eq. (1)] is given by the Fourier trans-
form of the nucleon matrix elements of the commutator of electromagnetic
currents J (x):
µ
(cid:2)
1
W (q;P,S)= d4x eiq·x(cid:5)P,S|[J (x),J (0)]|P,S(cid:6) (18)
µν 2π µ ν
where Sµ is the covariant spin vector specifying the nucleon state of mo-
mentum Pµ. It is convenient to introduce an amplitude T which is closely
µν

--- Page 114 ---

Nucleon Spin 103
related to the forward T-matrix element for Compton scattering of a virtual
photon of 4-momentum q and helicities λ and λ(cid:4). In the convention for the
Tˆ-operator
Sˆ=Iˆ+i(2π)4 δ4(P −P ) Tˆ
f i
one has
(cid:5)P,S;q,λ (cid:4)|Tˆ|P,S;q,λ(cid:6)=4πα ε ∗ (λ (cid:4) )Tµνε (λ) (19)
µ ν
where (cid:2)
T (q;P,S)=i d4x eiq·x(cid:5)P,S|T(J (x)J (0))|P,S(cid:6) (20)
µν µ ν
isgivenintermsofthetimeorderedproductofthecurrents.Itcanbeshown
that
1
W = ImT . (21)
µν π µν
The behaviour of T (and therefore W ) in the deep inelastic limit is
µν µν
controlled by the behaviour of the product of currents near the light cone
x2 =0 and can be derived from Wilson’s Operator Product Expansion.
It is important to note that the expressions Eqs. (18) and (20), for which
theoperatorproductapproachcanbeutilized,onlyarisebecauseofthefully
inclusive nature of the deep inelastic reaction being considered. Indeed the
starting point from which Eq. (18) can be derived is the expression
(cid:4)
W ∝ (cid:5)P,S|J |X(cid:6)(cid:5)X|J |P,S(cid:6)
µν µ ν
X
which appears in the formula for the cross-section. Only if the sum is over
all final states |X(cid:6) does this reduce to Eq. (18).
The Operator Product Expansion gives results for the moments of g
1,2
in terms of hadronic matrix elements of certain operators multiplied by per-
turbatively calculable coefficient functions. It turns out that the the a in
i
Eq. (16) are hadronic matrix elements of the octet of quark SU(3) axial-
F
vector currents Jj (j = 1,...,8) and the flavour singlet axial current J0
5µ 5µ
taken between proton states of definite momentum and spin direction.
The octet currents are
(cid:15) (cid:16)
λ
Jj =ψ¯γ γ j ψ (j =1,2,...,8) (22)
5µ µ 5 2
where the λ are the usual Gell-Mann matrices and ψ is a column vector in
j
flavour space  
ψ
u
 
ψ = ψ , (23)
d
ψ
s
and the flavour singlet current is
J0 =ψ¯γ γ ψ. (24)
5µ µ 5

--- Page 115 ---

104 E. Leader
The forward matrix elements of the Jj can only be proportional to Sµ
5µ
and the a are defined by
j
(cid:5)P,S|Jj |P,S(cid:6)=Ma S
5µ j µ
(cid:5)P,S|J0 |P,S(cid:6)=2Ma S . (25)
5µ 0 µ
Analogous to Eq. (22) one introduces an octet of vector currents
(cid:15) (cid:16)
λ
Jj =ψ¯γ j ψ (j=1,...,8) (26)
µ µ 2
whichareconserved currentstotheextentthatSU(3) isasymmetryofthe
F
strong interactions.
Now it is precisely the above octets of currents that control the β-decays
oftheneutronandoftheoctetofhyperons.Thismeansthatthevaluesofa
3
anda are known fromother measurements. Consequently the measurement
8
ofΓ can,viaEq.(16),beinterpretedasameasurementoftheflavoursinglet
1
a .
0
The result of the EMC experiment was that a ≈ 0, which, as we shall
0
see, is somewhat startling.
Letusconsidernowthephysicalsignificanceof∆Σ(x).Since,viaEq.(8),
q±(x) count the number of quarks of momentum fraction x with spin com-
ponent ±1 along the direction of motion of the proton (let us call this the
2
z-direction), the total contribution to J coming from a given flavour quark
z
is
!(cid:15) (cid:16) (cid:15) (cid:16) "
(cid:2)
1 1 1
S = dx q+(x)+ − q − (x)
z 2 2
0
(cid:2)
1 1
= dx ∆q(x). (27)
2
0
It follows that
a =2Squarks (28)
0 z
where Squarks is the contribution to J from the spin of all quarks and anti-
z z
quarks.
Weseethata isplayingtworoles.Herewehavearguedthatitmeasures
0
thez componentofthespincarriedbythequarks;inthesecondofequations
Eq.(25)2a measurestheexpectationvalueoftheflavoursingletaxial-vector
0
current. What is the connection? From Noether’s Theorem the spin density
operatorforaspin1/2particleis1/2ψ¯(x)γρσνλψ(x).Forρ=0,ν =1,λ=2
correspondingtospininthez direction,thisisjust1/2timestheaxialvector
current with µ = 3. Thus, if the nucleon state is written as a superposition
of partonic states, the expectation value of the axial-vector current should
indeed be twice the spin carried by the spin 1/2 quarks. But, as we shall see
presently, the existence of the axial anomaly complicates this somewhat.

--- Page 116 ---

Nucleon Spin 105
Now in the simple parton model p⊥ = 0 and all quarks move parallel
to the parent hadron, i.e. for a quark of momentum p, p = xP. Hence
any orbital angular momentum carried by the quarks is perpendicular to P
and thus does not contribute to J . Hence, in the simple parton model, one
z
expects for a proton of helicity +1/2:
Squarks =J =1/2. (29)
z z
We stress that this ignores p⊥ effects and assumes only quark and antiquark
constituents are polarized.
The EMC result for the value of a , on the contrary, implied that
0
(cid:11) (cid:12)
Squarks =0.03±0.06±0.09. (30)
z
Exp
It was this highly unexpected result which was termed the “spin crisis in the
parton model” [2].
4 Resolution of the Spin Crisis: The Axial Anomaly
Consider the axial current
Jf =ψ¯ (x)γ γ ψ (x) (31)
5µ f µ 5 f
made up of quark operators of definite flavour f. (An implicit colour sum is
always implied). From the free Dirac equation of motion one finds that
∂µJf =2im ψ¯ (x)γ ψ (x) (32)
5µ q f 5 f
where m is the mass of the quark of flavour f.
q
In the chiral limit m → 0 Eq. (32) appears to imply that Jf is con-
q 5µ
served. If this were really true there would be a symmetry between left and
right-handed quarks, leading to a parity degeneracy of the hadron spectrum
e.g. there would exist two protons, of opposite parity. However, the formal
argument from the free equations of motion is not reliable and, as shown
originally by Adler, and by Bell and Jackiw [12] (in the context of QED),
there is an anomalous contribution arising from the triangle diagram shown
in Fig. 6.
As a consequence the axial current is not conserved when m = 0. One
q
has instead, for the QCD case
∂µJf = α s Ga G #µν = α s Tr[G G #µν] (33)
5µ 4π µν a 2π µν
#
whereα istheQCDanalogueofthefinestructureconstant,andwhereGa
s µν
is the dual field tensor

--- Page 117 ---

106 E. Leader
γ γ
µ 5
Fig. 6: The anomalous triangle diagram
G #a ≡ 1 ε Gρσ (34)
µν 2 µνρσ a
and where a field vector or tensor without acolour label stands for a matrix.
In this case (cid:15) (cid:16)
λ
G ≡ a Ga . (35)
µν 2 µν
The result Eq. (33), which emerges from a calculation of the triangle
diagram (Fig. 6) using m = 0 and the gluon virtuality k2 (cid:4)= 0, is really a
q
particular limit of a highly non-uniform function. If we takem (cid:4)= 0, k2 (cid:4)=0
q
the RHS of Eq. (33) is multiplied by
(cid:13)
(cid:15) (cid:16)
T(m2/k2)=1− (cid:13)
2m2
q
/k2
ln (cid:13)
1+4m2
q
/k2+1
. (36)
q
1+4m2/k2 1+4m2/k2−1
q q
WeseethattheanomalycorrespondstoT →1for(m2/k2)→0.Ontheother
q
hand, for on-shell gluons, k2 =0, and m (cid:4)=0, i.e. in the limit (m2/k2)→∞
q q
the terms cancel, T →0, and there is no anomaly.For gluons bound inside a
nucleon one sould utilize k2 (cid:4)=0 and the anomalous contribution is relevant.
TheanomalyinducesapointlikeinteractionbetweenJ0 andgluons.That
5µ
it is pointlike can be seen by taking different gluon momenta k and k in
1 2
Fig. 6 and noting that the amplitude does not depend on the momentum
transferk −k whenm =0.Therefore,incomputingthematrixelementof
1 2 q
J0 in a hadron state, we will get a contribution from the gluon components
5µ
of the hadron as well as the more obvious contribution from quarks. From
Adler’s expression [ABJ 69] for the triangle diagram, modified to QCD, one
finds for the forward gluonic matrix element of the flavour f current (our
convention is ε =1)
0123

--- Page 118 ---

Nucleon Spin 107
iα
(cid:5)k,λ|Jf |k,λ(cid:6) = s ε kνε ∗ρ(λ)εσ(λ)T(m2/k2)
5µ 2π µνρσ q
α
=− s Sg(k,λ)T(m2/k2) (37)
2π µ q
where λ is the gluon helicity and we may take
Sg(k,λ)≈λk (38)
µ µ
as the covariant spin vector for almost massless gluons.
Wemaythencomputethegluoniccontributionstothehadronicexpecta-
tionvalue(cid:5)P,S|J0 |P,S(cid:6).Inthiscasethegluonsbeingboundwillbeslightly
5µ
off-shell i.e. k2 (cid:4)= 0, but small. The full triangle contribution involves a sum
over all quark flavours. We take m ,m and m to be (cid:10)k2 whereas m ,m
u d s c b
and m are (cid:8)k2. The function T(m2/k2) thus takes the values:
t q
T =1 for u, d, s
T =0 for c, b, t (39)
and the gluon contribution is then given by [see Eq. (25)]
(cid:2)
α 1
agluons(Q2)=−3 s dx ∆G(x,Q2)
0 2π
0
α (Q2)
≡−3 s ∆G(Q2) (40)
2π
or from Eq. (16)
1 α (Q2)
Γgluons(Q2)=− s ∆G(Q2). (41)
1p 3 2π
In the above we have implicitly taken into account QCD corrections which
have the effect of replacing α by the effective or running coupling α (Q2)
s s
whichvarieslogarithmicallywithQ2.∆G(x,Q2),thepolarizedgluondensity,
isthedifferencebetweenthenumberdensityofgluonswiththesamehelicity
as the nucleon and those with opposite helicity; its integral ∆G(Q2) is the
total helicity carried by the gluons. In the above we have explicitly stressed
that the gluon density is Q2 dependent. This will be of interest presently.
The result Eq. (40) is of fundamental importance. It tells us that the
simple parton model formulae Eq. (17) and (28) for a (and hence for Γp in
0 1
terms of the ∆q ) are incorrect. We now have, instead,
f
α
a =∆Σ−3 s ∆G (42)
0 2π
We see immediately that it has the fundamental implication that the small
measured value of a does not necessarily imply that ∆Σ is small.
0
ThereareseveralinterestingandsurprisingaspectstotheresultEq.(40).
Firstly, we argued above that the axial-vector current is, effectively, the spin

--- Page 119 ---

108 E. Leader
densityoperatorforspin1/2 particles.YetinEq.(37)itsmatrixelementbe-
tweengluonstatesisproportionaltothespinvectorofthegluons.Thepoint
is that the fields in the axial-vector current are not free fields (as signalled
by the factor α(Q2)) and in a perturbative expansion would contain terms
involving gluon fields. Secondly, the simple parton model is usually thought
of as the limit when the QCD coupling is switched off. Moreover because
QCD possess the property of asymptotic freedom i.e the effective coupling
goes to zero logarithmically as Q2 → ∞, we would expect that as Q2 → ∞
thetermagluons(Q2)shouldvanish,andEq.(42)would reducetothesimple
0
partonmodelresultEq.(17).Howeveritcanbeshownthatthefirstmoment
∆G(Q2)tendstoinfinitylogarithmicallyasQ2 →∞,thusexactlycancelling
the decrease in α(Q2) and the gluonic term survives!
The“spincrisis”wassignalledviaEq.(29),whichisanintuitivestatement
thattheangularmomentumofthenucleonshouldbemadeupoftheangular
momentum of its constituents. This is an example of an angular momentum
sum rule, and it seems obviously true. However, as we shall now see, such
relations in a relativistic theory are highly non-trivial. After studying these
sum rules we shall return to reconsider Eq. (29) when allowing for the fact
that partons have intrinsic perpendicular momentum and that the parton
densities depend on the renormalization scale.
Angular momentum sum rules require explicit expressions for the matrix
elementsoftheangularmomentumoperators.Obtainingtheseisnon-trivial.
5 Matrix Elements of Angular Momentum Operators:
The Problem
In the standard approach one relates the matrix elements of the angular
momentum operators to those of the energy-momentum tensor.
Let Tµν(x) be the total energy-momentum density which is conserved
∂ Tµν(x)=0. (43)
µ
Laterweshalldistinguishbetweentheconservedcanonicalenergy-momentum
tensor Tµν, which emerges from Noether’s theorem, and which is, generally,
C
not symmetric under µ ↔ ν, and the symmetrised Belinfante tensor Tµν,
which for QCD is given by
1
Tµν(x)= (Tµν(x)+Tνµ(x)) (44)
2 C C
and which is also conserved. For the moment, however, this distinction is
irrelevant.
Being a local operator, Tµν(x) transforms under translations as follows
Tµν(x)=eix·PTµν(0)e −ix·P
, (45)

--- Page 120 ---

Nucleon Spin 109
where the Pµ are the total momentum operators of the theory.
By contrast the various angular momentum density operators which are
of interest, the orbital angular momentum densities
Mµνλ(x)≡xνTµλ(x)−xλTµν(x) (46)
orb C C
or the version constructed using the symmetrised stress-energy tensor,
Mµνλ(x)≡xνTµλ(x)−xλTµν(x) (47)
are not local operators (we shall call them compound) and do not transform
according to Eq. (45).
Note that, strictly speaking, the operators relevant to the angular mo-
mentumarethecomponentsM0ij wherei,j arespatialindices.However,for
reasons of simplicity in utilising the Lorentz invariance of theory, it may be
preferable to deal covariantly with the entire tensor Mµνλ. We shall loosely
refer to them also as angular momentum densities.
The total angular momentum density is
Jµνλ(x)=Mµνλ(x)+Mµνλ(x), (48)
orb spin
where the structure of Mµνλ depends on the type of fields involved. From
spin
Noether’s theorem Jµνλ(x) is a set of conserved densities, i.e.,
∂ Jµνλ(x)=0. (49)
µ
Asaconsequenceofthedensitiesbeingconserved,itfollowsthatthetotal
momentum operators (cid:2)
Pν ≡ d3xT0ν(x) (50)
and the total angular momentum operators J,
J =J3 =J12 , (cyclical) (51)
z
with (cid:2)
Jij ≡ d3xJ0ij(x) (52)
are conserved quantities, independent of time.
TherelationshipbetweentheMµνλ(x),constructedusingthesymmetrical
energy-momentum density and the Jµνλ(x) constructed from the canonical
energy-momentum tensor is extremely interesting. One can show that
M0ij(x)=J 0ij(x)+[E of M terms]+[divergence terms]. (53)
The [E of M terms] vanish if it is permissible to use the equations of motion
of the theory. The [divergence terms] are of the form ∂ Fα0ij(x).
α

--- Page 121 ---

110 E. Leader
We shall be primarily interested in the expectation values of the physical
operators, i.e. in their forward matrix elements. If Fα0ij(x) were a local op-
erator, it would follow directly that the forward, momentum-space, matrix
elementsofthedivergencetermsinEq.(53)vanish.Butitisnotalocaloper-
ator. Nonetheless, a careful treatment using wave packets [13] demonstrates
that the forward matrix elements do indeed vanish.
Dropping, as is customary, the [E of M terms], we shall thus assume the
validity of
(cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:5)p,σ| d3xM0ij(x,0)|p,σ(cid:6)=(cid:5)p,σ| d3xJ0ij(x,0)|p,σ(cid:6). (54)
Of primary interest are the matrix elements of the angular momentum
operators Jk or, equivalently, the Jij. Consider the forward matrix element,
at t=0,
(cid:2)
M0ij(p,s) ≡(cid:5)p,s| d3xM0ij(x,0)|p,s(cid:6)
(cid:2)
= d3x(cid:5)p,s|xiT0j(x)−xjT0i(x)|p,s(cid:6)
(cid:2)
=
d3xxi(cid:5)p,s|eiP·xT0j(0)e −iP·x|p,s(cid:6)−(i↔j)
(cid:2)
= d3xxi(cid:5)p,s|T0j|p,s(cid:6)−(i↔j). (55)
(cid:1)
where s is the rest frame spin vector. The integral in Eq. (55), d3xxi, is
totally ambiguous, being either infinite or, by symmetry, zero.
Theessentialproblemistoobtainasensiblephysicalexpression,interms
ofpands,fortheabovematrixelement.Thefundamentalideaistoworkwith
anon-forwardmatrixelementandthentotrytoapproachtheforwardlimit.
This is similar to what is usually done when dealing with non-normalizable
plane wave states and it requires the use of wave packets for a rigorous
justification.
It will turn out that the results are sensitive to the type of relativistic
spin state employed, so in the next Section we present a brief resum´e of the
properties of relativistic spin states.
We mentioned in the Introduction that one of the classic papers on this
subject is incorrect. The most crucial error in that treatment is the mishan-
dlingofthematrixelementsofacovarianttensoroperator.IfTµλ transforms
as a second-rank tensor its non-forward matrix elements do not transform
covariantly. This was the motivation, decades ago, for Stapp to introduce
M-functions [14]. Namely, even if the spin state is specified by the covariant
spinvectorS,thecovarianceisspoilt,forcanonicalspinstatesbytheWigner
rotation,and,forhelicitystatesbytheanalogousWickhelicityrotation[15].
Only by first factoring out the wave-functions (in our case Dirac spinors) i.e.
by writing

--- Page 122 ---

Nucleon Spin 111
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,S (cid:4)|Tµλ|p,S(cid:6)=u¯(p (cid:4) ,S (cid:4) )Tµν(p (cid:4) ,p)u(p,S). (56)
does the remaining M-function, in this case Tµν(p(cid:4),p), transform covari-
antly. For local operators the transformations of the spinors u and u¯ cancel
between themselves for forward matrix elements and so the result does have
the naively expected tensor expansion. This is not true in general for com-
pound operators, in particular the angular momentum and boost operators.
6 Relativistic Spin States
Thedefinitionofaspinstateforaparticleinmotion,inarelativistictheory,is
non-trivial,andisconventiondependent.Namely,startingwiththestatesofa
particleatrest,whichweshalldenoteby|0,m(cid:6),wheremisthespinprojection
inthez-direction,onedefinesstates|p,σ(cid:6)foraparticlewithfour-momentum
p by acting on the rest frame states with various boosts and rotations, and
thechoiceoftheseisconvention-dependent.Notethatinthissectionandthe
following ones we are using p to denote the nucleon momentum. The states
are on-shell so p2 =M2
There are three conventions in general use [9]
(a) Canonicalorbooststatesasusede.g.inBjorkenandDrell[16]orPeskin
and Schroeder [17]
|p,m(cid:6)=B(v)|0,m(cid:6) (57)
whereB(v)isapureboostalongv =p/p ,andp =(p,θ,φ)denotesthe
0
three-vector part of pµ
(b) Jacob-Wick helicity states [18]
|p,λ(cid:6) =R (φ)R (θ)R (−φ)B (v)|0,m=λ(cid:6) (58)
JW z y z z
where B is a boost along OZ, and the later introduced, somewhat sim-
z
pler
(c) Wick helicity states [15]
|p,λ(cid:6)=R (φ)R (θ)B (v)|0,m=λ(cid:6) (59)
z y z
Recall that the physical meaning of helicity is the projection of J along
the direction of motion of the particle i.e. along Pˆ.
From the canonical states of spin-1 one can construct the states
2
|p,s(cid:6)=B(v)|0,s(cid:6)=B(v)D1/2 (R(s))|0,m(cid:6) (60)
m1/2
which, in the rest frame, are eigenstates of spin with spin eigenvector along
the unit vector s. The rotation R(s) rotates a unit vector in the z-direction
into s by first a rotation about y and then a rotation about z.

--- Page 123 ---

112 E. Leader
The canonical states, with their reference to a rest frame, are clearly not
suitable for massless particles like gluons. Helicity states, on the other hand,
can be used for both massive and massless particles. However, it turns out
that the results for the matrix elements for the canonical states are much
more intuitive, so we will generally use them for M (cid:4)=0.
The reason we are emphasizing this distinction between canonical and
helicitystatesisthatthematrixelementsoftheangularmomentumoperators
betweenhelicitystatesarequitebizarre!Since,forarbitraryp,helicitystates
arejustlinearsuperpositionsofcanonicalstates,onemaywonderwhythisis
so.Itresultsfromthefacts(i)thatthecoefficientsinthelinearsuperposition
are p-dependent, i.e. depend upon the polar angles of p and (ii) that the
matrix elements of the angular momentum operators contain derivatives of
δ-functions, and these, as usual, must be interpreted in the sense of partial
integration, i.e.
∂ ∂
f(p,p (cid:4) ) δ3(p−p (cid:4) )=−δ3(p−p (cid:4) ) f(p,p (cid:4) ) (61)
∂p ∂p
i i
In almost all studies of hard processes, where a mixture of perturbative
andnon-perturbativeQCDoccurs,nucleonsaretakentobeinhelicitystates
movingwithhighenergyalongthez-axis,andtypicallyoneisutilizingmatrix
elements of local products of quark or gluon field operators between these
states.Fortheseoperatorsthereisnoproblemindealingwithdiagonalmatrix
elements. But when it comes to an angular momentum sum rule for the
nucleon, care must be taken to decide whether one is dealing with helicity
states |p ,λ(cid:6), where p = (E,0,0,p) or with canonical states |p ,s (cid:6), where
z z z z
s =(0,0,2λ). The point is that even though the initial states are the same,
z
|p ,λ(cid:6)=|p ,s (cid:6) (62)
z z z
thesingularnatureofJ forcesonetodealwithnon-diagonalmatrixelements
i
i.e. to utilize (cid:5)p(cid:4),σ| where p(cid:1) is not along the z-axis, and for these
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,λ|(cid:4)=(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,s | (63)
z
In [10] it is shown that it is possible to give a rigorous derivation of the
structure of the expectation values for canonical states
(cid:5)p,s|J i |p,s(cid:6)≡L p(cid:1)→p (cid:5)p (cid:4) ,s|J i |p,s(cid:6) (64)
wheresisaunitvectoralongtherestframespineigenvector,andforhelicity
states
(cid:5)p,λ|J i |p,λ(cid:6)≡L p(cid:1)→p (cid:5)p (cid:4) ,λ|J i |p,λ(cid:6). (65)
In general, for the arbitrary ith component of J, for spin-1
2
(cid:5)p,λ|J |p,λ(cid:6)(cid:4)=(cid:5)p,s=2λpˆ|J |p,s=2λpˆ(cid:6) (66)
i i

--- Page 124 ---

Nucleon Spin 113
even though s lies along the direction of pˆ in both cases, and even if p is
along OZ where Eq. (62) holds. Only for the specific component of J along
pˆdo the matrix elements agree, i.e. for arbitrary p,
(cid:5)p,λ|J ·p|p,λ(cid:6)=(cid:5)p,s=2λpˆ|J ·p|p,s=2λpˆ(cid:6). (67)
In using the sum rules based on Eq. (64) or Eq. (65) for arbitrary i to
test any model of the nucleon in terms of its constituents, it is essential to
construct wave-functions appropriate to the type of spin state being used
for the nucleon. The equations Eq. (64) and (65) contain delta functions
and derivatives of delta-functions and this is the reason for the special care
required. In the following we use canonical states wherever possible, except
when discussing gluons where we are forced to use helicity states.
7 Matrix Elements of Angular Momentum Operators:
The Results
Since it is claimed that well known results in the literature are incorrect, in
[10]painsweretakentoderivethecorrectexpressionsinthreedifferentways,
two involving explicit physical wave packets and the third, totally indepen-
dent, based upon the rotational properties of the state vectors. Surprisingly
it turns out that the results are very sensitive to the type of relativistic spin
state used to describe the motion of the particle i.e. whether a canonical
(i.e.boost)stateorahelicitystateisutilized.Weshallpresentresultsforthe
matrix elements of the angular momentum operators, valid in an arbitrary
Lorentz frame, both for helicity states and canonical states.
Thebulkoftheanalysisin[10]isbasedonastraightforwardwave-packet
approach.However,thisisrathersubtleforparticleswithnon-zerospin.The
key points requiring care are:
(1) Thewavepacketsshouldbestrictlyphysical,i.e.asuperpositionofphysi-
calplane-wavestates.Thisrequirementturnsouttobeincompatiblewith
some of the steps in [7].
(2) Care is needed in the treatment of the Lorentz covariance properties of
the matrix elements involved in the subsidiary steps of the analysis, as
mentionedinthediscussionofEq.(56).Thisleadstotensorialstructures
which differ in some cases from those in [7].
(3) Because the results differ from [7] the matrix elements have been stud-
ied in a totally different and independent way. This does not use wave
packets and is based upon the transformation properties of momentum
statesunderrotations.Thisverydirectapproachholdsforarbitraryspin,
whereas in the wave packet treatment it was only possible to deal with
spin-1/2particles.Itismuchsimplerthanthewavepacketapproachand
it avoids all the issues of ambiguous integrals, which in the old fashioned

--- Page 125 ---

114 E. Leader
treatment force one to utilize wave packets. It also brings to light some
peculiar and unintuitive properties of helicity states, and this must be
takenintoaccountwhenderivingspinsumrules.Thisisimportantsince
we have to deal with gluons in our sum rules.
The approach via wave packets is long and complicated, so we shall only
utilize the latter method here.
7.1 Canonical Spin State Matrix Elements
In order to utilize the rotational properties of the canonical or boost spin
statesweneedtodisplayexplicitlytheWignerboostoperatorsusedindefin-
ing the states of a moving particle in terms of the rest frame spin states
quantized in the z-direction |0,m(cid:6). Then the transformation properties of
the states becomes explicit.
The state for a spin-s particle at rest in an eigenstate of spin, with spin
pointing along the s direction, is given by
|0,s(cid:6)=Ds (R(s))|0,m(cid:6) (68)
ms
where R(s) rotates a unit vector in the z-direction into s by first a rotation
about y and then a rotation about z, a common convention. Note that we
have constructed an eigenstate with spin eigenvector along s and the state is
thus completely specified no matter what the spin of the particle is.
We will use the definitions of the Lorentz group generators given in
Weinberg [19]. In this section we will write the three vector rotation and
boost operators in terms of the integrated tensor Mij
1
J = (cid:12) Mjk
i 2 ijk
K =Mi0 . (69)
i
where on the left hand side i = x,y,z. For a particle of mass M in motion
the boost (or canonical) state is defined by
|p,m(cid:6)=B(v)|0,m(cid:6)=exp(iζpˆ·K)|0,m(cid:6), (70)
where v =p/p , coshζ =p /M, and pˆis the unit vector along p.
0 0
Now consider a rotation about axis-i through an angle β. The unitary
operator which effects this in Hilbert space is given in terms of the angular
momentum operator J :
i
U[R (β)]=exp(−iβJ ) (71)
i i
and for a particle of arbitrary spin-s
U[R (β))]|p,m(cid:6)=|R (β)p,n(cid:6)Ds (R (p,β)). (72)
i i nm W

--- Page 126 ---

Nucleon Spin 115
where R (p,β) is the Wigner rotation (see for example [9]). For a pure
W
rotation the Wigner rotation R is very simple
W
R (p,β)=R (β);
W i
independent of p. Therefore,
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|U[R (β)]|p,m(cid:6)=(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|R (β)p,n(cid:6)Ds (R (β))
i i nm i
=2p (2π)3δ(3)(p (cid:4)−R (β)p)Ds (R (β)),
0 i m(cid:1)m i
using the conventional normalization
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|p,m(cid:6)=2p 0 (2π)3δ(3)(p (cid:4)−p)δ m(cid:1)m . (73)
Thus
∂
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|J |p,m(cid:6) =i (cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|U[R (β)]|p,m(cid:6)|
i ∂β i β=0
(cid:24)
∂
=2p 0 (2π)3 i(cid:12) ijk p j∂p δ m(cid:1)m
k (cid:25)
$
+i ∂ Ds (R (β)) $ δ(3)(p (cid:1)−p).
∂β m(cid:1)m i β=0
Now [22]
$
i ∂ ∂ β D m s (cid:1)m (R i (β)) $ β=0 =(S i ) m(cid:1)m
where the three (2s+1) dimensional matrices S are the spin matrices for
i
spin-s which satisfy
[S ,S ]=i(cid:12) S
j k jkl l
Thus, our final result for the matrix elements of the angular momentum
operators for arbitrary spin, from Eq. (74), becomes
(cid:24) (cid:25)
∂
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|J |p,m(cid:6)=2p (2π)3 S +i(cid:12) p δ(3)(p (cid:1)−p). (74)
i 0 i ijk j∂p
k m(cid:1)m
For spin-1, of course, the S are just 1 times the Pauli matrices σ . For
2 i 2 i
arbitrary spin they are still very simple:
(S z ) m(cid:1)m =mδ m(cid:1)m
1
(S x ) m(cid:1)m = 2 [C(s,m)δ m(cid:1),m+1 +C(s,−m)δ m(cid:1),m−1 ]
−i
(S y ) m(cid:1)m = 2 [C(s,m)δ m(cid:1),m+1 −C(s,−m)δ m(cid:1),m−1 ]

--- Page 127 ---

116 E. Leader
where
(cid:14)
C(s,m)= (s−m)(s+m+1)
For the case of spin-1 Eq. (74) is exactly equivalent to the result one obtains
2
after much labor using the wave packet approach. It is completely general.
The second term will vanish if integrated over symmetric wave packets, so
does not appear in the wave packet treatment. However it must be kept for
analyzing the Lorentz transformation properties, as we will see, and must,
as usual, always be interpreted in the sense of partial integration. It is very
easytoverifythattheformEq.(74)satisfiestheusualcommutationrelation
relations and so is consistent with rotational invariance.
Combining the result Eq. (74) for the case of spin-1 with Eq. (68) leads
2
directly to
(cid:24) (cid:25)
1
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,s|J |p,s(cid:6)=2p0(2π)3 s +i(p×∇ ) δ3(p (cid:1)−p). (75)
i 2 i p i
We shall compare this result with that of [7] in Sect. 8.4.
Notethattheterminvolvingthederivativeofadelta-functionisapartic-
ularmanifestationoftheambiguousintegralinEq.(55)andinawavepacket
treatment corresponds to the orbital angular momentum about the origin of
the packet as a whole, and vanishes for a symmetric packet. However, when
dealingwiththematrixelementsbetweenparticlesofdefinitemomentum,as
in Eq. (75), it is essential to keep the delta-function term and, moreover, to
interpret it as explained in Eq. (61). In fact it will play a crucial role in the
comparison between matrix elements involving canonical states and helicity
states. We shall refer to this term as theorbital angular momentum.
For the purpose of deriving sum rules our result for the matrix elements
non-diagonal in the spin label is actually more useful, namely, for a spin-1/2
particle
(cid:24) (cid:25)
1 ∂
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|J |p,m(cid:6)=2p (2π)3 σ +i(cid:12) p δ(3)(p (cid:1)−p). (76)
i 0 2 i ijk j∂p
k m(cid:1)m
The proof that these results are consistent with Lorentz invariance is
rather complicated. It can be shown [10] that the matrix elements of the
rotationandboostoperatorsareconsistentwiththecommmutationrelations
of these operators.
7.2 Helicity State Matrix Elements
We now turn to the case of helicity states which have some rather surprising
properties.Onecanproceedjustasinthecanonicalcase;themaindifference
isthattheWignerrotationbecomesaWickhelicityrotation(seeforexample
[9]), always about the z-axis. This simplifies things somewhat; all the com-
plication is in calculating the rotation angle. The result is also convention

--- Page 128 ---

Nucleon Spin 117
dependent, depending on whether one uses the original Jacob and Wick de-
finition [18] or the later one due to Wick [15] [see Eqs. (58) and (59)]. We
give here the result for the first case. The result of this messy calculation is
that, for p=(p,θ,φ)
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,λ (cid:4)|J i |p,λ(cid:6) JW =(2π)32p 0 [λη i +i(p×∇) i ]δ(3)(p (cid:4)−p)δ λ(cid:1)λ (77)
where
η =cos(φ)tan(θ/2), η =sin(φ)tan(θ/2), η =1. (78)
x y z
Althoughthesecomponentslookalittleodd–thesingularityatθ =πresults
from the ambiguity of Jacob and Wick helicity states at that point – it is
easy to verify some important properties: they are manifestly diagonal in λ,
which is required since rotations preserve the helicity, and they satisfy the
requirement that the projection of J along the direction of motion i.e. along
pˆgives the helicity. Namely one finds
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,λ (cid:4)|pˆ·J|p,λ(cid:6) JW =λ2p 0 (2π)3δ(3)(p (cid:4)−p)δ λ(cid:1)λ
and no orbital angular momentum piece survives as expected.
It is enlightening to consider these amplitudes from a different direction:
comparing the definitions of canonical (boost) states to helicity states we
have for the case of spin-1/2
|p,s(cid:6)=|p,m(cid:6)D1/2 (R(s))
m1/2
=|p,λ(cid:6) D1/2(R −1(p))D1/2 (R(s))
JW λm m1/2
=|p,λ(cid:6) D1/2 (R −1(p)R(s)).
JW λ1/2
This has the appearance of an ordinary unitary change of basis, but because
ofthecompoundnatureofJ whenweapplythistothecanonicalform,using
i
the spin-1/2 version of Eq. (75), we get
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,λ (cid:4)|J |p,λ(cid:6) =(2π)32p D1/2(R(p))D1/2 (R(p (cid:4) )) ∗
i JW (cid:24) 0 mλ (cid:25) m(cid:1)λ(cid:1)
1
× i(cid:12) p ∂ + σ δ(3)(p (cid:4)−p).
ijk j k 2 i
m(cid:1)m
We cannot use the unitarity of the D’s because p (cid:4)= p(cid:4), and we must first
pass the first D1/2(R(p)) through the derivative before setting them equal.
This produces an extra term
−(2π)32p i(cid:12) D1/2 (R(p (cid:4) )) ∗ p ∂ D1/2(R(p))δ(3)(p (cid:4)−p) (79)
0 ijk m(cid:1)λ(cid:1) j k mλ
which is tedious to evaluate in the general case. The result of this labour is
identical to Eqs. (77, 78).

--- Page 129 ---

118 E. Leader
8 Angular Momentum Sum Rules
Now that we have an expression for the matrix elements of the angular mo-
mentum operators we can equate the results using on the one hand the nu-
cleon state itself, on the other an expressionfor the nucleon state in termsof
its constituents i.e. a Fock space expansion of the nucleon state.
8.1 General Structure of Sum Rules:
Parton Transverse Momentum
Consider a nucleon with momentum along OZ, p = (0,0,p), in a canonical
spin state with rest-frame spin eigenvector along s, where s could be longi-
tudinal s or transverse s . Sum rules can be constructed by equating the
L T
expressionEq.(76) forthe nucleon matrix elements (cid:5)p(cid:4),m(cid:4)|J |p,m(cid:6) with the
i
expressionobtainedwhenthenucleonstateisexpressedintermsofthewave
functions of its constituents (partons; quarks and gluons). Recall, however,
that the parton picture of the nucleon is only supposed to be valid when
observingaveryfastmovingnucleon,sowewilltakelimitp→∞attheend
in order to obtain the parton model sum rules.
Thereisgreatinterestinsuchsumrulesespecially if thepartonic quanti-
tiescanberelatedtootherphysicallymeasurablequantities.Aclassicexam-
plewasEq.(29),which,asdiscussedearlier,gaverisetothe“spincrisis”.We
will now investigate more carefully the origin and generalization of Eq. (29)
and look at other similar possibilities, using Eq. (76) as the relevant starting
point.
We have mentioned the importance of a wave-packet approach in order
to deal with the derivative of the delta-function in the equations above. As
ithappens,however,whenconstructingsumrules,theexpressionintermsof
constituentsautomaticallyproducesatermwhichcancelsthedelta-function,
irrespectiveoftheactualmodelwave-functionsused,soweneedonlyconcern
ourselveswiththespinterminEq.(76)forthenucleonstate matrixelement.
However, this term must be retained in the partonic state matrix elements.
Thenucleonstateisexpandedasasuperpositionofn-partonFockstates.
It is clear from such a basic concept as the Uncertainty Relations that if the
partons are confined inside the nucleon they must possess both longitudinal
AND transverse momentum. In the high energy, high momentum transfer
reactions we have been considering it was usually assumed that the intrinsic
parton transverse momentum k could be ignored (the collinear approxima-
T
tion discussed previously), but recently it has been appreciated that certain
physical effects which are observed suggest that the transverse momentum is
in some circumstances non-negligible. Moreover, it turns out that some par-
tonic effects of transverse momentum are surprisingly large [20, 21] and can
generatephenomenawhichwouldbeimpossibletoreproduceinthecollinear
treatment:

--- Page 130 ---

Nucleon Spin 119
– the presence of an intrinsic k alters the relationship between the light-
T
cone momentum fraction x of the parton and the Bjorken-x
Bj
,√so that
x (cid:4)= x . Although the shift is small and proportional to k2/(x s)2, it
Bj T
can have asubstantial effectin theregion ofxwherethe partondensities
are varying rapidly. This is a kind of enhanced effect and can lead to up
to an order of magnitude change in a cross section.
– In the presence of transverse momentum, certain spin-dependent effects
can be generated by soft mechanisms and can be used to understand the
large transverse single spin asymmetries (SSA) found in many reactions
like A↑ +B → C +X and the large hyperon polarizations in processes
like A+B →H↑+X.
Thus in the partonic Fock states and their associated wave functions the
state of the ith parton must be specified by a full three-dimensional momen-
tum k .
i
For a nucleon moving along OZ with momentum P, the parton densi-
ties q(k) = q(k ,k ) will now specify the number density of partons with
z T
momentum in d3k=dk d2k =Pdxd2k , with
z T T
(cid:2)
q(x)= d2k q(x,k ) (80)
T T
where q(x,k )=P q (k ,k ).
T z T
The calculation of the angular momentum matrix elements is long and
notationallycomplicated,soweshallberatherschematic,andwillnotdisplay
flavour and colour labels. We write, for the nucleon state,
(cid:2)
(cid:4)(cid:4)
d3k d3k
|p,m(cid:6) =[(2π)32p ]1/2 (cid:14) 1 ···(cid:14) n
0
(2π)32k0 (2π)32k0
n {σ} 1 n
×ψ (k ,σ ,···k ,σ )δ(3)(p−k ···−k )|k ,σ ,···k ,σ (cid:6).
p,m 1 1 n n 1 n 1 1 n n
(81)
where σ denotes either the spin projection on the z-axis or the helicity, as
i
appropriate.ψ isthepartonicwavefunctionofthenucleonnormalizedso
p,m
that
(cid:2)
(cid:4)
d3k ···d3k |ψ (k ,σ ,···k ,σ )|2δ(3)(p−k −···−k )=P .
1 n p,m 1 1 n n 1 n n
{σ}
(82)
withP denotingtheprobabilityofthen-partonstate.Wesubstitutethisex-
n
pansionforthenucleonstateinthematrixelementoftheangularmomentum
operators and we take for the Fock-state matrix elements
(cid:4) (cid:26)
(cid:5)k (cid:4) ,σ (cid:4) ,...,k (cid:4) ,σ (cid:4)|J |k ,σ ,...,k ,σ (cid:6)= (cid:5)k (cid:4) ,σ (cid:4)|J |k ,σ (cid:6) (2π)3
1 1 n n i 1 1 n n r r i r r
r l(cid:9)=r
×2k l 0δ(3)(k l (cid:1)−k l )δ σ
l
(cid:1)σl . (83)

--- Page 131 ---

120 E. Leader
After some manipulation the nucleon matrix element can be written as:
(cid:2)
(cid:4)(cid:4)
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|J |p,m(cid:6) =(2π)32p d3kd3k (cid:4) δ(3)(p (cid:1)−p+k−k (cid:1) )
i 0
n σ,σ(cid:1)
×ρm(cid:1)m(k (cid:1) ,k)a(cid:14) 1 (cid:5)k (cid:1) ,σ (cid:4)|J |k,σ(cid:6)(cid:14) 1 (84)
σ(cid:1)σ (2π)32k(cid:4) i (2π)32k
0 0
where we have introduced a density matrix for the internal motion of type
“a” partons in a proton of momentum p:
(cid:4) (cid:4)(cid:4)
ρm σ(cid:1) (cid:1) σ m(k (cid:1) ,k)a ≡ δ σσr δ σ(cid:1)σ r (cid:1)
(cid:2) n,r(a) σi σ r (cid:1)
× d3k (cid:4) d3k ···d3k ···d3k δ(3)(k−k )δ(3)(k (cid:1)−k (cid:1) )
r 1 r n r r
×ψ ∗ (k ,σ ,···k (cid:1) ,σ (cid:4) ,···k ,σ )ψ (k ,σ ,···k ,σ ,···k ,σ )
p(cid:1)m(cid:1) 1 1 r r n n pm 1 1 r r n n
×δ(3)(p−k ···−k ···−k ) (85)
1 r n
Herea,whichwewillfrequentlysuppress,denotesthetypeofparton:quark,
anti-quark or gluon. The sum goes over all Fock states and, within these
states, over the spin and momentum labels r corresponding to the parton
type a. Equations. (84) and (85) are the basis for the angular momentum
sum rules.
The two terms in Eq. (76) applied to the parton matrix elements in
Eq. (84) suggest a spin part and an orbital part for quarks and gluons. First
considerthespinpartofthematrixelementwhenkisthemomentumcarried
by a quark.
(cid:2)
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|J |p,m(cid:6)quarkspin =(2π)32p δ(3)(p (cid:4)−p) d3kd3k (cid:4) δ(3)(k−k (cid:4) )
i 0
(cid:4)
× 1 2 (σ i ) σ(cid:1)σ ρm σ(cid:1) (cid:1) σ m(k (cid:1) ,k)q , (86)
σ,σ(cid:1)
where here σ denotes the Pauli spin matrix of Eq. (76).
i
The spin part for the gluons is completely analogous, but now σ and σ(cid:4)
in Eqs. 84 and (85) refer to the gluon helicity λ. From Eq. (77), which is
diagonal in helicity, we obtain
(cid:2)
(cid:5)p (cid:4) ,m (cid:4)|J |p,m(cid:6)gluonspin =(2π)32p δ(3)(p (cid:4)−p) d3kd3k (cid:4) δ(3)(k−k (cid:4) )
i 0
×η λρm(cid:1)m(k (cid:1) ,k)G . (87)
i λλ
The orbital part is somewhat different because of the derivative of the
δ-functionthatenters.Wehavementionedtheneedforaproperwavepacket
treatment when dealing with states of definite momentum, but here the par-
tons are not in plane wave states and the partonic wave functionψ plays the

--- Page 132 ---

Nucleon Spin 121
role of a wave packet. Thus we may proceed directly by inserting the orbital
piece of Eqs. (76,77) as was done for the spin part.
After some manipulation and integration by parts, the orbital piece pro-
duces two terms. One involves a derivative of a delta-function containing the
nucleon momenta and eventually yields
∂
2p 0 (2π)3i(cid:12) ijk p j∂p δ(3)(p (cid:1)−p)δ mm(cid:1) (88)
k
which, as mentioned earlier, will just cancel the derivative of the delta-
function in Eq. (76) arising from the matrix element between nucleon states.
The other term yields
2p (2π)3δ(3)(p (cid:1)−p)(cid:5)L (cid:6)a (89)
0 i m(cid:1)m
where(cid:5)L (cid:6)a isthecontributionfromtheinternal angularmomentumaris-
i m(cid:1)m
ing from partons of type a, given by
(cid:2)
(cid:4)(cid:4)
(cid:5)L (cid:6)a = d3k ······d3k ψ ∗ (k ,σ ,...,k ,σ )
i m(cid:1)m 1 n p,m(cid:1) 1 1 n n
n {σ}
(cid:4)
{[−i(k ×∇ ) ]ψ (k ,σ ,···k ,σ ,···k ,σ )}
r kr i p,m 1 1 r r n n
r(a)
δ(3)(p−k −···−k ) (90)
1 n
where the sum over r(a) means a sum over those r-values corresponding to
partons of type a. Note that a can refer to both quarks and gluons; the
structure of Eq. (90) is the same for both.
Putting Eqs. (89), (86) and (87) into Eq. (84), utilizing Eq. (76) for its
LHS, and cancelling the factors 2p (2π)3δ(p(cid:1)−p), we end up with the most
0
general sum rule for a spin-1/2 nucleon:
(cid:2) (cid:24) (cid:25)
2 1 (σ i ) m(cid:1)m = d3k 1 2 (σ i ) σ(cid:1)σ ρm σ(cid:1) (cid:1) σ m(k,k)q+q¯+λ η i (k) ρm λλ (cid:1)m(k,k)G
+(cid:5)L (cid:6)q+q¯ +(cid:5)L (cid:6)G . (91)
i m(cid:1)m i m(cid:1)m
In fact Eq. (91) contains only two independent sum rules, a longitudinal
one and a transverse one. Recall that the nucleon is moving along OZ. Then
for m= m(cid:4) the terms in Eq. (91) are only non-vanishing when i=z i.e. for
J and parity ensures that the two cases m = ±1/2 give identical results –
z
this leads to the longitudinal sum rule. For m = −m(cid:4) the terms are only
non-vanishing for i = x or i = y i.e. for J . Again all four possible cases
x,y
m=±m(cid:4); i=x,y lead to the same result – this is the transverse sum rule.
The density matrix appearing in Eq. (91) is defined in terms of parton
wave-functionsinEq.(85).Weshallnowshowhow,inthesumrules,thiscan
be related to the parton densities utilized in DIS and other hard processes.
We shall suppress all irrelevant labels in the following.

--- Page 133 ---

122 E. Leader
8.2 The Longitudinal Sum Rule
Consider the case of longitudinal polarization with m=m(cid:4) =1/2. The LHS
of Eq. (91) is equal to 1/2. On the RHS, for the quark spin term in Eq. (91)
the integrand will contain
1 1
ρ++− ρ++ (92)
2 ++ 2 −−
where we have used ± to indicate ±1/2.
Now, schematically,
(cid:4)
ρm(cid:1)m
= ψ
∗
(σ
(cid:4)
,X)ψ (σ,X). (93)
σ(cid:1)σ m(cid:1) m
X=all
But the number density of quarks with spin along or opposite to OZ
for a proton with spin along OZ can be expressed in terms of the quark
wave-functions, namely
(cid:4)
q±(k)= |ψ
+
(±,X)|2 . (94)
X=all
We see therefore that the expression in Eq. (92) is just
1
2
[q
+
(k)−q−(k)]. (95)
SubstitutingthisexpressionintoEq.(91)andcarryin(cid:1)gouttheintegration
overd2k andusingEq.(80)andthenEq.(8)yields 1 dx∆q(x).Summing
T 2
over all quarks and antiquarks thus gives 1∆Σ. (cid:1)
2
A similar analysis for the gluons yields ∆G= dx∆G(x).
Including the orbital terms in Eq. (91) we finally have the longitudinal
sum rule
1 1
= ∆Σ+∆G+(cid:5)Lq(cid:6)+(cid:5)LG(cid:6) (96)
2 2 z z
to be compared to the simple parton model result Eq. (29)
1 1
Squarks = ∆Σ = . (97)
z 2 2
Equation (96) is not new. It agrees with the result derived in [7], because
the expression for the matrix elements of the angular momentum operators
given in [7] is correct precisiely for the case where the spin of the nucleon is
along its momentum. This is very fortunate, since the sum rule has such an
intuitive structure that it had been in use for years, long before the formal
proof was given in [7].
We will return to discuss Eq. (96) later, in particular to comment on the
question of the Q2 dependence which we have so far suppressed in Eq. (96).

--- Page 134 ---

Nucleon Spin 123
8.3 The Transverse Case: The New Sum Rulexs
Letusturnnowtothetransversesumrule.Herethenucleonismovingalong
OZ and is polarized along OX. The LHS of Eq. (91) is then equal to 1/2.
The quark spin contribution to the RHS is
(cid:2)
(cid:5) (cid:6)
1 1
d3k ρ+− +ρ+− +ρ −++ρ −+ (98)
2 2
+− −+ −+ +−
where+and-referto±1/2.Therelationofthisexpressiontoquarkdensities
is here rather complicated. By rotating the system through π about the z-
axis, it is easy to see that elements of ρm(cid:1),m with (−1)m−m(cid:1)−σ+σ(cid:1) = −1 are
σ(cid:1),σ
oddunderthisrotationandsowillintegratetozerowhenintegratedoverk .
T
This enables us to rewrite the expression Eq. (98), the quark contribution,
in a way that has a nice interpretation, viz.
(cid:2)
(cid:5) (cid:6)
1 1
d3k ρ+++ρ+++ρ −− +ρ −− +ρ+− +ρ+− +ρ −++ρ −+ . (99)
2 2
+− −+ +− −+ +− −+ −+ +−
Consider the proton state with spin oriented along OX, perpendicular to
the direction of motion
1
|p,s (cid:6)= √ {|p,m=1/2(cid:6)+|p,m=−1/2(cid:6)} (100)
x
2
To understand the content of expression Eq. (99) write schematically
(cid:4)
ρm(cid:1)m
= ψ
∗
(σ
(cid:4)
,X)ψ (σ,X) (101)
σ(cid:1)σ m(cid:1) m
X=all
NowthenumberdensityofquarkswithspinalongoroppositetoOX,denoted
by ±sˆ in a proton spinning along OX is
x
(cid:4)
q±sˆx/sx (k)= |ψ
sx
(±sˆ
x
,X)|2 (102)
X=all
where, via Eq. (100),
1
ψ
sx
(±sˆ
x
)=
2
[ψ
+
(+)±ψ
+
(−)+ψ−(+)±ψ−(−)] (103)
(cid:3)
so that (suppressing the )
X=all
q
sˆx/sx
(k)−q−sˆx/sx (k)=Re{[ψ
+
(+)+ψ−(+)] ∗ [ψ−(−)+ψ
+
(−)]} (104)
which,viaEq.(101),isexactlytheintegrandinEq.(99).Thustheexpression
Eq. (98) is equal to
(cid:2) (cid:2)
1 1
2
d3k[q
sˆx/sx
(k)−q−sˆx/sx (k)]=
2
dxd2k
T
[q
sˆx/sx
(x,k
T
)−q−sˆx/sx (x,k
T
)]
(105)

--- Page 135 ---

124 E. Leader
and there is an an analogous term for the antiquarks.
Now the structure of the integrand in Eq. (105) is known [23]. One has
q
sˆx/sx
(x,k
T
)−q−sˆx/sx (x,k
T
)=∆ (cid:4)
T
(x,k
T
2)
k2 k
+cos2φ T h ⊥ (x,k2)+sinφ Th ⊥ (x,k2)
2M2 1T T M 1 T
(106)
whereφistheazimuthalangleofk and∆(cid:4) qa(x,k2)isrelatedtothetrans-
T T T
verse density introduced in Eq. (10), namely,
(cid:2)
∆ qa(x)= d2k ∆ (cid:4) qa(x,k2). (107)
T T T T
Theunknownfunctionsh⊥ (x,k2)andh⊥(x,k2)playnoroleinthesum
1T T 1 T
rule, since their terms integrate out to zero.
Substituting Eq. (106) into Eq. (105) and integrating over the direction
of k , we end up with the quark spin contribution to the RHS of Eq. (91):
T
(cid:2)
(cid:4)
1
dx ∆ qa(x). (108)
2 T
a,a¯
We turn now to the gluon contribution to the RHS of Eq. (91), which is
(cid:2) (cid:11) (cid:12)
1
d3kη (k) [ρ++−ρ++ +ρ −−−ρ −− +ρ+−−ρ+− +ρ −+−ρ −+ ] ,
x 2 11 −1−1 11 −1−1 11 −1−1 11 −1−1
(109)
where ±1 refers to the gluon helicity. Once again we have added in terms
which integrate to zero in order to get a nice interpretation in terms of den-
sities. (Recall that in Eq. (78) η contains the factor cosφ, and the factor
x
ρm(cid:1),m with(−1)m(cid:1)−m−λ(cid:1)+λ =+1canbeshowntobeevenunderφ→π±φ.)
λ(cid:1)λ
Now consider
∆G
h/sx
≡G
(cid:4)1/sx
−G−1/sx
= {|ψ (1,X)|2−|ψ (−1,X)|2} (110)
sx sx
X=all
Carrying out the analogue of Eq. (103) we find that the RHS of Eq. (110) is
exactly equal to the terms in parenthesis in Eq. (109). Thus the gluon spin
contribution to the RHS of Eq. (91) is
(cid:2) (cid:2)
d3kη (k)∆G (k)= dxd2k η (k)∆G (x, k ) (111)
x h/sx T x h/sx T
It is easy to see, geometrically, that ∆G (x,k ) contains a factor k
h/sx T x
and we make this explicit by writing [24]

--- Page 136 ---

Nucleon Spin 125
k
∆G (x,k )= xgG (x,k2). (112)
h/sx T M 1T T
Then the contribution of the gluon spin to the RHS of Eq. (91) i.e. to the
proton whose spin is in the x-direction is
(cid:2)
k
∆G = dxd2k η xgG (x,k2)
h/sx T xM 1T ⊥
(cid:2) (cid:14)
x2p2+k2 −x p
=π dxk dk T gG (x,k2)). (113)
T T M 1T T
where we have used Eq. (78). As p→∞ this piece vanishes and so the gluon
spin does not contribute to the transverse spin sum rule.
Finally, the internal orbital angular momentum terms (cid:5)L (cid:6)q and (cid:5)L (cid:6)G
x sx x sx
are obtained from Eq. (90) by the replacement
(cid:5) (cid:6)
1
ψ p,m →ψ p,sx = √
2
ψ p,1/2 +ψ p,−1/2 (114)
Putting together the various pieces of the RHS of Eq. (91) we obtain a
new, transverse spin sum rule. Since the same result holds when considering
J with the proton polarized along OY, we prefer to state the result in the
y
more general form: for a proton in an eigenstate of transverse spin with
eigenvector along s
T
(cid:2)
(cid:4) (cid:4)
1 1
= dx∆ qa(x)+ (cid:5)L (cid:6)a (115)
2 2 T sT
q,q¯ q,q¯,G
where L is the component of L along s .
sT T
This has a very intuitive appearance, very similar to Eq. (96).
The function ∆ qa(x) does not play any role in DIS but could be mea-
T
sured in other processes, notably doubly polarized Drell-Yan reactions like
p(s )+p(s )→leptonpair+X ,
T T
in semi-inclusive hadronic reactions like
p+p(s )→H +X
T
where H is a detected hadron, typically a pion, [25], and in semi-inclusive
DIS reactions with a transversely polarized target [26, 27] like
(cid:17)+p(s )→(cid:17)+H +X .
T
8.4 Comparison with Results in the Literature
ThesumrulesEq.(96)andEq.(115)arebaseduponourexpressionEq.(91)
for the matrix elements of the angular momentum operators, and as stressed

--- Page 137 ---

126 E. Leader
earlier, this expression is in disagreement with the results in the literature.
It is interesting to compare results and the consequences for the sum rules.
If we rewrite the spin type term in the Jaffe-Manohar result [7] in terms
of the independent vectors p and s, we find, for the expectation value
(cid:29)
1 3p +M
(cid:5)J (cid:6) = (3p2−M2)s − 0 (p·s)p (116)
i JM 4Mp0 0 i p +M i
0
to be compared to our result
1
(cid:5)J (cid:6)= s (117)
i 2 i
arisingfromthefirstterminEq.(75).Ingeneralthesearedifferent.However,
one may easily check that if s = pˆ the Jaffe-Manohar value agrees with
Eq. (117), while if s⊥pˆthey are not the same.
The agreement for s = pˆ is consistent with the much used and intuitive
longitudinal sum rule given in Eq. (96).
ButforthetransversecasenosumruleispossiblewiththeJaffe-Manohar
formula because, as p→∞, Eq. (116) for i=x,y diverges.
9 Interpretation of the Sum Rules
Once it is accepted that the partons possess intrinsic transverse momentum
i.e. perpendicular to the motion along OZ of the nucleon, they can have
orbital angular momentum L with a component along OZ, as exemplified in
Eq.(96),whichalsoallowsforthepossibilitythatthegluonsarepolarizedand
can have orbital angular momentum. As discussed earlier, the axial anomaly
allows us to escape the conclusion that the EMC result implies a very small
value of ∆Σ, so it is not impossible that the RHS of Eq. (91) is dominated
by ∆Σ. On the other hand, for an object the size of a nucleon the r in an
orbital angular momentum term like r×p can be of order 1 fermi and with
p of order a few hundred MeV, it is easy to produce half a unit of orbital
T
angular momentum along OZ.
In the simple parton model we visualize partons almost like real physical
particles and the above comments are meaningful in such a framework. We
assume implicitly that quantities like ∆Σ, for example, have some objective
physicalsignificance.UnfortunatelyQCDteachesustheunpleasantfactthat
this is not so. Firstly the quantities ∆Σ and ∆G on the RHS of Eq. (96), as
determined from studies of polarized DIS, depend on Q2. Of course theQ 2
of a DIS experiment has no meaning in Eq. (96) which refers to an isolated
nucleon, but, as discussed earlier, what Q2 actually corresponds to, in a
partondensity,isthevalueoftherenormalization scale andthefactorization
sclae,takenequalforsimplicity,andtakenequaltoQ2inDIS.Someasuringa
givenpartondensityinareactionatsomevalueofQ2reallymeansmeasuring
thepartondensityatrenormalizationscaleµ2 =factorizationscaleµ2 =Q2.
R F

--- Page 138 ---

Nucleon Spin 127
But what makes the interpretation even more problematic is that at the
level of what is called next to leading order or NLO perturbative QCD the
behaviour of the quantities in Eq. (96) becomes also scheme dependent i.e.
depends upon what type of renormalization scheme is being utilized, so they
cannot be physical quantities. Moreover, there are, in principle, an infinite
number of possible renormalization schemes!
Perhaps the most natural scheme is the so-called JET scheme (for a dis-
cussion of this and other schemes see e.g. [28]), which has the nice property
that the first moment ∆Σ is independent of the renormalization scale, or, in
the context of DIS, is independent of Q2. Thus there would seem to be some
physical sense in thinking of this as the spin carried by the quarks. In the
most recent analysis of the world data on polarized DIS it was found that
∆Σ = 0.32±0.06 in the JET scheme [29]. This is considerably larger than
the result in the infamous EMC experiment, but still a long way from the
naive value 1. However, in this scheme, the other three terms on the RHS
of Eq. (96) do depend on µ2, so it is not clear what physical significance
they have. Since, as already mentioned, ∆G(Q2) grows like lnQ2 as Q2 in-
creases, it must be that the orbital angular momentum terms become large
and negative as Q2 increases.
All of this is highly unintuitive, and we are left with the unpleasant, but
unavoidable, conclusion that in higher orders of QCD the partons more and
more lose their nice simple particle-like properties, and the question, as to
which constituents carry what fraction of the nucleon’s spin, becomes more
and more intractable and, maybe, meaningless.
References
1. EuropeanMuonCollaboration:J.Ashmanetal:Phys.Lett.B206,364(1988)
2. M. Anselmino and E. Leader: Z. Phys. C 41, 239 (1988)
3. A.V.EfremovandO.V.Teryaev:JINR,ReportNo.E2–88–287(1988);unpub-
lished
4. G. Altarelli and G.G. Ross: Phys. Lett. B 212, 391 (1988)
5. R.D. Carlitz, J.C. Collins and A.H. Mueller: Phys. Lett. B 214, 229 (1988)
6. E.LeaderandM.Anselmino:SantaBarbaraPreprintNSF–88–142,July1988,
unpublished
7. R. L. Jaffe and A. Manohar: Nucl. Phys. B 337, 509 (1990)
8. M. Anselmino, A. Efremov, and E. Leader: Phys. Rep. 261, 4 (1995)
9. E. Leader: Spin in Particle Physics, Cambridge University Press (2001)
10. B. L. G. Bakker, E. Leader, and T. L. Trueman: Phys. Rev. D 70, 114001
(2004)
11. E. Leader and E. Predazzi: An Introduction to Gauge Theories and the New
Physics, Cambridge University Press (1985)
12. S.I. Adler: Phys. Rev. 177 (1969) 2426; J.S. Bell and R. Jackiw, N.C. 51A
(1969) 47
13. G. M. Shore and B. E. White: Nucl. Phys. B 581, 409 (2000)

--- Page 139 ---

128 E. Leader
14. H. P. Stapp: Phys. Rev. 125, 2139 (1962)
15. G. C. Wick: Ann. Phys. 18, 65 (1962)
16. J. D. Bjorken and S. C. Drell: Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, Mcgraw-Hill
(1964)
17. M.E.PeskinandD.V.Schroeder:An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory,
Westview Press (1995)
18. M. Jacob and G. C. Wick: Ann. Phys. 7, 404 (1959)
19. S. Weinberg: Quantum Theory of Fields, Cambridge University Press (1995)
20. M.Anselmino,M.Boglione,U.D’Alesio,E.Leader,andF.Murgia:Phys.Rev.
D 71, 014002 (2005)
21. U. D’Alesio and F. Murgia: Phys. Rev. D 70, 074009 (2004)
22. M. Rose: Elementary Theory of Angular Momentum, Wiley (1957)
23. V. Barone, A. Drago, and P. G. Ratcliffe: Phys. Rep. 359, 1 (2002)
24. P. J. Mulders and R. D. Tangerman: Nucl. Phys. B 461, 197 (1996); erratum
Nucl. Phys. B 484, 538 (1997)
25. For access to the literature see: M. Boglione and E. Leade:, Phys. Rev. D 57,
5780 (1998)
26. D. Boer, and P. J. Mulders: Phys. Rev. D 57, 5780 (1998)
27. A. M. Kotzinian and P. J. Mulders: Phys. Lett. B 406, 373 (1997)
28. E.Leader,A.V.Sidorov,andD.B.Stamenov:Phys.Rev.D58,114028(1998)
29. E. Leader, A. V. Sidorov, and D. B. Stamenov: Part. Nucl. Phys. Lett. V1,
No5, 7 (2004)

--- Page 140 ---

Lecture Notes in Physics
Forinformationaboutearliervolumes
pleasecontactyourbooksellerorSpringer
LNPOnlinearchive:springerlink.com
Vol.666:D.Britz,DigitalSimulationinElectrochem- Vol.690:J.Asch,A.Joye(Eds.),MathematicalPhysics
istry ofQuantumMechanics
Vol.667:W.D.Heiss(Ed.),QuantumDots:aDoorway Vol.691:S.S.Abdullaev,ConstructionofMappingsfor
toNanoscalePhysics HamiltonianSystemsandTheirApplications
Vol.668:H.Ocampo,S.Paycha,A.Vargas(Eds.),Geo- Vol.692:J.Frauendiener,D.J.W.Giulini,V.Perlick
metric and Topological Methods for Quantum Field (Eds.),AnalyticalandNumericalApproachestoMath-
Theory ematicalRelativity
Vol.669: G. Amelino-Camelia, J. Kowalski-Glikman Vol.693:D.Alloin,R.Johnson,P.Lira(Eds.),Physics
(Eds.),PlanckScaleEffectsinAstrophysicsandCos- ofActiveGalacticNucleiatallScales
mology Vol.694:H.Schwoerer,J.Magill,B.Beleites(Eds.),
Vol.670: A. Dinklage, G. Marx, T. Klinger, L. LasersandNuclei
Schweikhard(Eds.),PlasmaPhysics Vol.695: J. Derezin´ski, H. Siedentop (Eds.), Large
Vol.671:J.-R.Chazottes,B.Fernandez(Eds.),Dynam- CoulombSystems
icsofCoupledMapLatticesandofRelatedSpatially Vol.696:K.-S.Choi,J.E.Kim,QuarksandLeptons
ExtendedSystems FromOrbifoldedSuperstring
Vol.672:R.Kh.Zeytounian,TopicsinHyposonicFlow Vol.697:E.Beaurepaire,H.Bulou,F.Scheurer,
Theory J.-P.Kappler(Eds.),Magnetism:ASynchrotronRadi-
Vol.673: C. Bona, C. Palenzula-Luque, Elements of ationApproach
NumericalRelativity Vol.698: S. Bellucci (Ed.), Supersymmetric Mech-
Vol.674:A.G.Hunt,PercolationTheoryforFlowin anics–Vol.1
PorousMedia Vol.699: J.-P. Rozelot (Ed.), Solar and Heliospheric
Vol.675: M. Kröger, Models for Polymeric and OriginsofSpaceWeatherPhenomena
AnisotropicLiquids Vol.700: J. Al-Khalili, E. Roeckl (Eds.), The Eu-
Vol.676: I. Galanakis, P. H. Dederichs (Eds.), Half- roschool Lectures on Physics with Exotic Beams,
metallicAlloys Vol.II
Vol.677:A.Loiseau,P.Launois,P.Petit,S.Roche,J.-P. Vol.701:S.Bellucci,S.Ferrara,A.Marrani,Supersym-
Salvetat(Eds.),UnderstandingCarbonNanotubes metricMechanics–Vol.2
Vol.678:M.Donath,W.Nolting(Eds.),Local-Moment Vol.702:J.Ehlers,C.Lämmerzahl,SpecialRelativity
Ferromagnets Vol.703: M. Ferrario, G. Ciccotti, K. Binder (Eds.),
Vol.679:A.Das,B.K.Chakrabarti(Eds.),Quantum ComputerSimulationsinCondensedMatterSystems:
AnnealingandRelatedOptimizationMethods FromMaterialstoChemicalBiologyVolume1
Vol.680:G.Cuniberti,G.Fagas,K.Richter(Eds.),In- Vol.704: M. Ferrario, G. Ciccotti, K. Binder (Eds.),
troducingMolecularElectronics ComputerSimulationsinCondensedMatterSystems:
Vol.681:A.Llor,StatisticalHydrodynamicModelsfor FromMaterialstoChemicalBiologyVolume2
DevelopedMixingInstabilityFlows Vol.705: P. Bhattacharyya, B.K. Chakrabarti (Eds.),
Vol.682:J.Souchay(Ed.),DynamicsofExtendedCe- Modelling Critical and Catastrophic Phenomena in
lestialBodiesandRings Geoscience
Vol.683: R. Dvorak, F. Freistetter, J. Kurths (Eds.), Vol.706:M.A.L.Marques,C.A.Ullrich,F.Nogueira,
ChaosandStabilityinPlanetarySystems A. Rubio, K. Burke, E.K.U. Gross (Eds.), Time-
DependentDensityFunctionalTheory
Vol.684:J.Dolinšek,M.Vilfan,S.Žumer(Eds.),Novel
Vol.707: A.V. Shchepetilov, Calculus and Mechanics
NMRandEPRTechniques
onTwo-PointHomogenousRiemannianSpaces
Vol.685:C.Klein,O.Richter,ErnstEquationandRie-
Vol.708:F.Iachello,LieAlgebrasandApplications
mannSurfaces
Vol.709:H.-J.BorchersandR.N.Sen,Mathematical
Vol.686: A. D. Yaghjian, Relativistic Dynamics of a
ImplicationsofEinstein-WeylCausality
ChargedSphere
Vol.710: K. Hutter, A.A.F. van de Ven, A. Ursescu,
Vol.687: J. W. LaBelle, R. A. Treumann (Eds.),
Electromagnetic Field Matter Interactions in Ther-
GeospaceElectromagneticWavesandRadiation
moelasticSolidsandViscousFluids
Vol.688:M.C.Miguel,J.M.Rubi(Eds.),Jamming,
Vol.711:H.Linke,ControlledNanoscaleMotioninBi-
Yielding,andIrreversibleDeformationinCondensed
ologicalandArtificalSystems
Matter
Vol.712: W. Pötz, J. Fabian, U. Hohenester (Eds.),
Vol.689: W. Pötz, J. Fabian, U. Hohenester (Eds.),
ModernAspectsofSpinPhysics
QuantumCoherence