

--- Page 1 ---

167
Part Two
Advanced Methods in Biophysical Chemistry
The techniques discussed in Part 1 of this book are essential and broadly appli-
cable tools for the characterization and investigation of biomolecules. However,
many important biomolecular questions have been answered in recent years by
morespecializedtechniques.Someofthemarealreadyverywidespreadinmany
laboratories. The intention of this part is to give an insight into the possibilities
and advantages of such techniques along with selected application examples.
The application examples are often primarily chosen to illustrate the technical
capabilities of the modern techniques and which parameters can be observed
usingthem.Ofcoursetherearemanymoreveryimportantapplicationexamples
thatcannotbeshownwithinthescopeofthisbook.
The first chapter, Chapter 7, describes important aspects of modern fluores-
cence microscopy techniques. Chapter 8 provides a thorough overview into
subdiffraction limited fluorescence microscopy and general aspects such as
imaging in living cells and multicolour images. Inaddition to giving an insight
into modern methods of fluorescence microscopy in general Chapters 7 and 8
also provide the basis for some of the techniques described in subsequent
chapters. Chapter 9 describes several techniques that each observe the behav-
iour of single biomolecules. The elucidation of many important biomolecular
mechanisms is only possible by these methods, which allow us to observe the
movements of, forces exerted by, or ion currents flowing through single bio-
molecules. Chapter 10 discusses methods based on the use of ultrafast lasers.
This chapter covers the advantages of important nonlinear optical methods in
the biosciences, such as two-photon excitation, including a brief insight into
thephysicalbasisofmethodssuchassecond-harmonicgenerationorcoherent
anti-Stokes Raman microscopy. Also, the observation of the fastest processes
in nature, such as the ultrafast energy conversion in photosynthesis, using
ultrafast lasers is discussed. Chapter11givesanoverviewof traditional as well
as modern next-generation DNA sequencing methods that have had a signifi-
cant impact in many fields of recent research. Chapter 12 presents some spe-
cial techniques that are optimized for very distinct biological questions.
Important examples are flow cytometry, DNA chips and DNA origami. This
ModernBiophysicalChemistry:DetectionandAnalysisofBiomolecules,SecondEdition.PeterJomoWalla.
2014Wiley-VCHVerlagGmbH&Co.KGaA.Published2014byWiley-VCHVerlagGmbH&Co.KGaA.

--- Page 2 ---

168 AdvancedMethodsinBiophysicalChemistry
chapteralsodiscussessome generalspecialtechniquesliketheuseoffluoresc-
ing nanoparticles or microspheres or surface plasmon resonance detection.
Finally,inthelast chapter,Chapter13,importantgeneralaspectsofthedevel-
opment of assays to monitor certain biomolecular processes are discussed.
This chapter also presents typical plate formats and plate reader technologies
for the measurement of larger series of samples. The chapter ends with an
application example illustrating how assays for high-throughput screening
helpintheinitialphaseofindustrialdrugdevelopment.