

--- Page 1 ---

11
Part One
Basic Methods in Biophysical Chemistry
In Part 1 of this book the more established modern techniques are presented
that are nowadays very broadly applied in many labs throughout the world. It
starts with a chapter that introduces the basic principles governing the interac-
tions of electromagnetic radiation (“light”) with molecules and biomolecules.
These interactions are the basis for many of the methods presented not only in
Part1butalsoinsomechaptersofPart2.Importantexamplesaregeneralmeth-
ods such as absorption spectroscopy and a plethora of advanced fluorescence
techniques (Chapters 2 and 3) as well as very important techniques such
as NMR studies of biomolecules (Chapter 5), but also methods such as super-
resolution microscopy (Chapter 8), single-biomolecule detection (Chapter 9),
nonlinear spectroscopy (Chapter 10) and next-generation DNA-sequencing
methods(Chapter11).
Theintroductorychapter(Chapter1)aimsatprovidingabriefandconcisebut
still thorough review of the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with mole-
cules for readers with a more chemical or physical background and serves as an
introduction into these interactions for readers with a more biological back-
ground. Readers who require a rather quick overview and who have at least
some basic knowledge about orbitals of molecules might focus on Sections 1.1,
1.3,1.5andthebeginningofSection1.6only.Thesepartsshouldsufficetohave
enough background information to understand the subsequent chapters. For
example,theywillalreadygiveanindepthideaabouttransitiondipolemoments
and the polarization of light, which are central for quite a number of the meth-
odspresentedinthisbook.
In Chapters 2 and 3, absorption and fluorescence properties in the visible
spectral range of important biomolecules and fluorescence markers are pre-
sented as well as the application of the corresponding techniques to investigate
biomolecules and biomolecular processes. Important examples are the determi-
nation of biomolecule concentrations or purities as well as investigations of
receptor–ligand equilibria, enzymatic conversions and activators and inhibitors.
In Chapter 3 some very central concepts in modern biophysical chemistry are
also discussed in more detail, such as labelling and linking techniques, Förster
ModernBiophysicalChemistry:DetectionandAnalysisofBiomolecules,SecondEdition.PeterJomoWalla.
2014Wiley-VCHVerlagGmbH&Co.KGaA.Published2014byWiley-VCHVerlagGmbH&Co.KGaA.

--- Page 2 ---

12 BasicMethodsinBiophysicalChemistry
resonanceenergytransfer(FRET)andfluorescencepolarizationassays.Also,the
mathematicalframeworkforthelattertwoisdiscussedinmoredetail,butread-
ers who require a quick overview can also focus only on the description of the
equations that are marked by boxes, which represent, in general, the central
equationsthroughoutthisbook.
Chapter 4 summarizes some very important optical methods that do not pri-
marily rely on the absorption and emission of unpolarized or linearly polarized
lightinthevisiblespectralrangebutratheronscatteringoflight,theuseofleft-
and right-handed circular light or light in the infrared spectral region. These
techniques are, in general, of great use to derive information about the size,
shape and secondary structural elements of biomolecules without any labelling
ofthesamples.
Chapter 5 gives an overview of the application of nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) techniques, which work with electromagnetic radiation inthe radiowave
range.NMRallowsfortheanalysisofbiomolecularstructuresundermorephys-
iological conditions than is possible with classical electron or X-ray microscop-
ies. Chapter 5 also aims at providing an insight into the physical basics behind
multidimensionalNMRthatareessentialforsuchstudiesandhowtheinforma-
tion derived from such techniques can be used to derive a final 3D structure of
proteins. Also, the use of electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) for investigat-
ingbiomoleculesisdescribedinthischapter.
Chapter 6, finally, presents techniques that allow very accurate determination
of one of the most central parameters for characterizing biomolecules, namely
their molecular weight. In this chapter it is discussed how mass spectrometry
can be applied to biomolecules without harming their structural integrity and
what further very useful information can be derived using advanced mass spec-
trometricmethods.