

--- Page 1 ---

285
11
DNA Sequencing and Next-Generation Sequencing Methods
Many important and major advances in the biosciences are based on modern
methodologies for DNA sequencing. It was not long ago when the traditional
fluorescence-based Sanger method was one of the dominating methods. How-
ever,thehighdemandinfastandaffordablesequencingoflargeDNAsequences
andentiregenomeshasresultedinthedevelopmentofnewsequencingmethods
with significantly increasing pace. It has been just a decade since an entire
human genome was sequenced for the first time in a joint effort of many
research groups around the world (and later also of a private company) taking
several years. However, nowadays the development of so-called next-generation
sequencing methods allows the same task to be performed in one laboratory
evenwithinonlyafewdays.Thisdevelopmentenables,forexample,alsoathor-
ough analysis of the genome of ancient DNA such as from the 5300 year old
mummyofÖtziinacomparativelyshorttime.Fascinatingdetailsbecameavaila-
ble such that he likely had brown eyes, is genetically related to modern day
Sardinians and Corsican (which doesn’t exclude that this genetic relation was
verycommonwhenÖtzilived)hadalactoseintolerance(likemostofthepeople
inthesedays)andsomeDNAsequencesindicatedthathehadaLymedisease.
In this chapter, we give first a brief insight into how the traditional fluores-
cence-basedSangermethodworks.Then,themostimportantprinciplesofmod-
ern next-generation sequencing methods will be described that all enable much
faster sequencing by highly parallelized sequencing. These methods are quite
diverse and technically sophisticated while still being interconnected by several
important steps. To facilitate keeping track of the different methods a flow dia-
gram (Figure 11.2) is provided that visualizes common and different procedures
andcontainsreferencestoallfiguresandsectionsthatexplainthecorresponding
stepsindetail.
11.1
SangerMethod
Figure 11.1 shows the principle of the traditional fluorescence-based Sanger
DNA-sequencing method. In a first step, the DNA sequence of interest is
ModernBiophysicalChemistry:DetectionandAnalysisofBiomolecules,SecondEdition.PeterJomoWalla.
2014Wiley-VCHVerlagGmbH&Co.KGaA.Published2014byWiley-VCHVerlagGmbH&Co.KGaA.

--- Page 2 ---

286 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
Figure11.1 DNAsequencingcanbecarried fragmentswithafluorescencedyeatthe3´-
outbypolymerasechain-reactionamplifica- endencodingthecorrespondingDNAbase.
tionoftheDNAofinterestinthepresenceof Incapillarygelelectrophoresisthedifferently
asmallfractionofnucleotidescarryingdiffer- sizedfragmentsexitthecapillaryoneafterthe
entlyfluorescence-labellednucleotidesand other.ThesequenceoftheDNAcanthenbe
lackingthehydroxylgroupatthe3´end.Asa determinedfromtheobservedsequenceof
result,PCRgeneratesdifferentlysizedDNA fluorescencecolours.
replicated by the enzyme DNA-polymerase in a process called the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). For the Sanger method the standard PCR process is
slightly modified. As in normal PCR, the exact starting point for the replication
isdeterminedbyaDNAprimer,whichisashortsequenceofDNAcomplemen-
tary to the DNA sequence at the desired starting point. Once DNA-polymerase
hasstartedthereplicationitcontinuesaddingcomplementaryDNAinthedirec-
tion5´-endto3´-endofasingle-strandedDNAuntilacertainstopsignalispres-
ent. (The ends of DNA are named after the 5´- and 3´-hydroxyl groups of the
deoxyribose sugars of the DNA backbone.) In normal PCR this replication

--- Page 3 ---

11.2 Next-GenerationSequencingMethods 287
processisreiteratedmanytimesbyrepeatedlyseparatingthefreshlysynthesized
doubleDNAstrandsintosinglestrands.Thisseparationcanbeachievedsimply
by heating the double-stranded DNA over 80°C (cf. the DNA hypochromism
curveinFigure2.8).Obviously,forDNAreplicationthepresenceoftheindivid-
ual nucleotides, guanine, adenine, cytosine and thymine (G, A, C and T) is nec-
essary. In contrast to normal PCR, for the DNA sequencing a small fraction of
the natural nucleotides is substituted bynucleotides labelled with different fluo-
rescencemarkers.Inaddition,thesenucleotidesaremodifiedinsuchawaythat
the deoxyribose is lacking the hydroxyl group at the 3´- end. As a consequence,
DNA replication of an individual strand stops as soon as such a fluorescently
markednucleotidehasbeenbuiltintothenewlysynthesizedDNA.Overall,PCR
generates under these circumstances various sized DNA fragments that all start
with the same primer sequence but end at different lengths with a fluorescence
dye at the 3´-end, which encodes the corresponding base by its specific fluores-
cencecolour.ThismixtureoffluorescentlylabelledDNAfragmentsisnowsepa-
ratedusingcapillarygelelectrophoresis(CGE).CGEcanseparateeachfragment
size one after the other. At the end of the capillary the smallest fragments will
rise first, followed by fragments with increasing numbers of nucleotides. Since
only the nucleotides at the 3´-end of the fragments are labelled the sequence of
detectable fluorescence corresponds exactly to the complementary sequence of
the original DNA. Modern DNA sequencers based on this technology can
sequenceDNAstrandsofupto1000basesinafewhours.
11.2
Next-GenerationSequencingMethods
As of today it seems not to be clear yet which of the currently available next-
generation sequencing methods will be the golden standard in the future and
evennewerapproachesemergeatthehorizon.Nevertheless,becauseofthevery
high relevance of these methods for modern biophysical chemistry we will dis-
cuss here exemplarily five methods. As discussed already in the introduction to
this book also this selection shall not indicate that these methods are the most
important ones but they cover a large part of the different concepts that have
allowed the development of these high-throughput sequencing methods. One
conceptualprincipleiscommoninallofthesemethods–namelythevastparal-
lelization of sequencing. However, important details such as preparation steps
andread-outtechnologiesdiffersignificantly.
All methods can be divided into three steps: 1. Random fragmentation of the
DNAintoafragmentlibrary.2.Immobilizationofthefragmentsatdifferentsur-
faces and 3. Sequencing. Because of the high diversity of different sequencing
approaches albeit still being interconnected by some elementary steps we will
discuss them based on the flow diagram shown in Figure 11.2. As mentioned
above,Figure11.2alsocontainsreferencestothecorrespondingfiguresandsec-
tions in which the individual steps are explained in detail. The fragmentation

--- Page 4 ---

288 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
1. Random 2. Fragment Immobilization 3. Fragment Sequencing
Fragmentation Cluster Generation Computation of Entire DNA Sequence
I. Dye Sequencing by stepwise adding
Immobilization at the surface of a fluorescently labelled nucleotides. (Fig.
flow cell. Cluster generation by 11.5)
surface bridged PCR. (Fig. 11.4)
II. Sequencing by ligating systematically
specific fluoresently labelled oligomers in
several rounds. (Fig. 11.8)
Fragmentation of DNA Imm in o b w ili a z t a e t r io d n r a o t p i l n e d ts iv i i n d u a a n l b o e il ads III. Pyrosequencing by detecting Rec e o n n ti s re tru D c N ti A on - of
(Nebu ( l F iz ig e . r , 1 S 1 o .3 n ) i cator) emulsion. Cluster generationby phosp n h u a c t le e o r t e id le e a s s . e (F d ig a . f t 1 e 1 r . a 9 d ) ding fra se g q m u e e n n t c -s e eq fr u o e m nces.
emulsion PCR. (Fig. 11.7) (Fig. 11.6)
IV. Ion semiconductorsequencing by
detecting hydrogen ionsreleased after
adding nucleotides. (Fig. 11.10)
Immobilization of single DNA-
fragments in subwavelength
sized wells in a siliconwafer. No V. Single-molecule real-time sequencing
Cluster generation. (Fig. 11.11) by detecting single fluorescently labelled
nucleotides at DNA templates. (Fig. 11.11)
Figure11.2 Flowdiagramillustratingthemostimportantstepsinfivedifferentnext-generation
sequencingapproaches.
step1iscrucialforsequencingmanyfragmentsinparallel,whichisakeyprinci-
plefor fastsequencing.Inallapproaches thefragments arethen immobilizedat
differentsurfaces(step2),whichisalsocrucialforsequencingeachfragmentata
different location in parallel. In most approaches the fragments are additionally
locally amplified by different PCR approaches to generate clusters of identical
DNA before sequencing. The sum signal from many identical DNA fragments
provide high signal-to-noise ratios in the sequencing steps of the various tech-
nologies. Three of the five methods share the same cluster-generation technol-
ogy (PCR at bead surfaces in an oil/water emulsion), while one method is based
on PCR at different localized points on a flow-cell surface. One method uses a
sequencing technology that is sensitive enough to directly sequence single frag-
ments without any cluster generation. Since all five approaches differ substan-
tially in step 3, their sequencing method, we will use this step to assign and
distinguish them: The sequencing of the five methods is based on I. fluorescent
dye sequencing (sharing similarities with the Sanger method), II. sequencing by
ligating systematically different short complementary and fluorescently labelled
oligomers (for details see below), III. pyrosequencing that senses the pyro-
phosphate release upon nucleotide incorporation, IV. ion semiconductor
sequencing that senses hydrogen ion release upon nucleotide incorporation and
V.single-moleculereal-timesequencing.
Attheend,inallapproachesthesequenceinformationofallfragmentsisused
toreconstructthesequenceoftheentireoriginalDNAbymatchingoverlapping
sequence information of different fragments. In the following we will first
describeapproach I.inwhich DNAclusters aregeneratedon aflow-cell surface
andthensequencedusingnucleotideslabelledbyfluorescencedyes.

--- Page 5 ---

11.2 Next-GenerationSequencingMethods 289
Figure11.3 Allnext-generationsequencingmethodsfirststartwiththefragmentationofthe
originalDNAandligationofadaptorsequences.
11.2.1
DyeSequencing(ApproachI)
Like in all other next-generation sequencing approaches the DNA is first frag-
mented(Figure 11.3).Thiscanbedone, forexample, byaso-callednebulizerin
which the DNA isforced through a small holebut also other mechanical shear-
ingapproachesarepossible.Analternativefragmentationapproachis,forexam-
ple,usingasonicatorinwhichsoundenergyofultrasonicfrequenciesisapplied.
The resulting mixture of fragments is called a fragment library or sequencing
library.Then,syntheticDNAs–calledadaptors(redandgreeninFigure11.3)–
are added covalently to each fragment using DNA ligase. These adaptors have
specific sequences that are complementary to adaptors covalently linked to a
surface. In the case of the dye sequencing (I) procedure this is the surface of a
flow cell (Figure 11.4). In the initial replication cycle the DNA-template frag-
ment is replicated starting at such surface-linked adaptors (green) that are also
the primers for PCR amplification (initial extension). Due to the following tem-
perature increase the original, not covalently linked mobile DNA fragment is
thenremoved(denaturation)andwashedaway.Acovalentlylinkedcomplemen-
tary strand remains. A speciality in the dye sequencing (I) approach is that the
DNAisthenbridgedtootheradaptorsatthesurfacethatarecomplementaryto
theadaptorsattheotherend(red,Figure11.4).Thisisnecessarytokeepfurther
replications at local positions. Then, PCR can be applied to generate the next
complementarystrandsthatareagaincovalentlylinkedtothesurface.Thiscom-
plimentary copy is now identical to the sequence of the original mobile DNA
fragment. Now the two anti-parallel strands can be denaturated again yielding
two strands that are both covalently attached to the surface. These can now
serve for the next extension round. Obviously, with each PCR cycle new DNA
eithercomplementaryoridenticalinsequencetotheoriginalmobileDNAtem-
plateisgenerated,allcovalentlylinkedtotheflow-cellsurfaceinaverylocalized
region.Asaresult,afterseveralbackandforthPCRcycles,eachclusterconsists

--- Page 6 ---

290 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
Figure11.4 Inthedyesequencing(I) ratiointhedifferentparallelsequencing
approachclustersofidenticalDNAfragments procedures.Sinceinaflowcelltheoriginal
aregeneratedatdifferentlocationsonaflow- DNAtemplateneedstobewashedawayafter
cellsurface.Inmostnext-generationsequenc- theinitialreplicationround,bridgedPCRis
ingmethodsthegenerationofsuchclustersis necessarytokeepfurtherreplicationsatlocal
necessarytogetasufficientsignal-to-noise positions.Fordetailsseethetext.
of about 1000 copies of sequences identical or complementary to a single original
mobilelibraryfragment.ThebridgingandalternatingDNAgeneratingcyclemight
seem inconvenient at first glance but is necessary because the original, mobile
DNAfragmentfromthelibrarycanbeusedonlyonceforinitiatingclustergenera-
tion at a distinct spot. Since in PCR the double strands are always separated in
each cycle by the temperature increase the released mobile library fragment needs
to be washed away. Otherwise more and more clusters would be initiated by this
fragment at various different spots of the cell surface in an uncontrolled manner
and the generated clusters could no longer be locally distinguished because they
would become overcrowded. Therefore only the remaining covalently linked
DNA-copy can be used for further PCR. If the next copy shall also be covalently
linked to the same local region a bridging to another covalently linked primer for
PCRisunavoidableaswellasalternatingreplicationdirections.
After cluster generation, all DNA bound to the cell surface with one of the two
adaptor types (for example the green ones) are cleaved so that only one sequence

--- Page 7 ---

11.2 Next-GenerationSequencingMethods 291
Figure11.5 Inthedyesequencing(I) andthecurrentbaseaddedtoeachclusteris
approachlabellednucleotidesthatare indicatedbythefluorescencemarkercolour
blockedatthe3´-OHareaddedtogetherwith specificforthebase.Inthenextstep,the
DNA-polymerase.Asaresultonlyasingle fluorescencedyesarecleavedandthe3´-OH
nucleotideisaddedtoeachstrand.The areregeneratedsothatthenextbasecanbe
residualnucleotidesarethenwashedaway sequenced.
direction remains at this local cluster. The next step in the dye sequencing (I)
approachisanalysingthissequenceforallclusterssimultaneouslyusinganimage-
based fluorescence approach. First, specifically labelled nucleotides are added
together with DNA-polymerase and an appropriate primer (Figure 11.5a). The
nucleotidesareblockedatthe3´-OHgroupandthereforeonlyonenucleotidecan
be added to each DNA fragment. The residual labelled nucleotides are then
washedaway(Figure11.5b).Thenucleotidesineachclustercannowbeidentified

--- Page 8 ---

292 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
Figure11.6 Inthefinalstep,thesequenceofallfragmentsarealignedinordertoreconstruct
theentireoriginalgenome.
by a standard wide-fieldmicroscope (Figure7.6), capable of differentiating the dif-
ferent clusters spatially and the colours of the actually added nucleotides in the
different clusters by spectral filters. Here, the advantage of the cluster generation
becomes obvious: the thousands of identical fluorescence dyes in a cluster give a
very robust, intensive fluorescence signal that can be used to identify the nucleo-
tidethathascurrentlybeenaddedinthisspecificcluster.Afterread-out,acleavage
step removes the fluorescence dye and regenerates the 3´-OH group of the added
nucleotide (Figure 11.5c). Then, the cycle can be repeated and the next added
nucleotidesineachclustercanbeidentified(Figure11.5d-f).InFigure11.5gexem-
plarilytwoclusters(inthetopleftandbottomright)arehighlightedbyacircle.In
eachcyclethefluorescencespotoriginatingfromtheclusteratthispositionhasan
emissionwavelength that correspondstothe newly added complementary nucleo-
tide.InthisparticularcasethesequencededucedforthetopleftspotisTGCCAG,
whereasthesequencededucedforthebottomrightspotisGAAGTC.
After analysis the sequence for a multitude of fragments is available. In the
final step, the sequences obtained from all individual fragments have to be
aligned in such a way that the entire original genome is reconstructed (Fig-
ure11.6).Itisobviousthatitisadvantageoustohaveseveraldifferentfragments
of the same DNA in order to reconstruct the entire genome robustly and that
advancedbioinformaticalanalysisismandatoryforthistask.
11.2.2
SequencingbyLigation,PyrosequencingandIonSemiconductorSequencing
(ApproachesIItoIV)
11.2.2.1EmulsionPCR
These three approaches differ from the previous one first in the immobilization
of the fragments and in the environment in which fragment clusters are gener-
ated(Figure 11.7).In theseapproaches awater–oil emulsionandbeads carrying
primersareused.Intheemulsionaqueousdropletsrepresentmanyminireactors
within the oil phase. The beads as well as the DNA fragments are present in

--- Page 9 ---

11.2 Next-GenerationSequencingMethods 293
Figure11.7 InemulsionPCR,clustersof DNAstrandscomplementarytothemobile
identicalDNAfragmentsaregeneratedat fragmentareconnectedtothecovalently
individualbeadsthatarecontainedinaque- linkedprimersatthebeadsandinanextstep
ousdropletswithinanoilphase.Thesedrop- theidenticalDNAateachbeadcanbeana-
letsrepresentminireactorsinwhichatmost lysedbeadbybeadusingvariousdifferent
onebeadcarryingcovalentlylinkedprimers sequencingmethods.Inthesequencingby
andatmostonemobileDNAfragmentis ligationapproach(II),forexample,theyare
present.EachdropletalsocontainsDNA-poly- immobilizedonaglassslideandanalysed
merase.Thus,afterseveralPCRcyclesmany withasophisticatedfluorescenceapproach.
these water minireactors. The concentrations are adjusted in a way that one
minireactorcontainsatthebeginningeitheroneornoDNAfragment.Also,the
bead concentration is adjusted in such a way that only either one or none is
presentinasingleminireactor(Figure11.7a).Then,emulsionPCRisconducted.
In the initial cycle the mobile fragments attach to primers at the beads thereby
allowingthegenerationofcomplementaryDNAattheprimerscovalentlylinked
tothebeads(Figure11.7bandc).DuringthenextPCRcyclesbotharegenerated,
DNA complementary to the original mobile fragment as well as DNA fragments

--- Page 10 ---

294 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
identical to the original mobile fragment (Figure 11.7d-f). New mobile fragments
are generatedat the DNAcovalently linked to the beadsand released during each
temperature rise of a PCR cycle (Figure 11.7d). Since, in contrast to the bridged
PCR described in the previous section, the mobile fragments stay here very local-
izedinoneminireactortheycanbeusedmultipletimesatthesamebeadtogener-
ate more and more complementary, covalently linked DNA copies. After several
cyclesabeadinasingleminireactorcarriesexclusivelyalargenumberofidentical
DNAstrandscomplementarytotheinitalfragmentsequence(Figure11.7g).
After the generation of DNA clusters at the bead surfaces the methods of
sequencing by ligation (II), pyrosequencing (III), and ion semiconductor
sequencing(IV)differsignificantlyintheactualwaythesequenceisdetermined.
Wewillstartbydescribingthesequencingbyligation(II)approach.
11.2.2.2SequencingbyLigation(ApproachII)
Theprincipleofthesequencingbyligationapproachisnoteasy tofollowbutis
actually applied quite successfully as demonstrated, for example, in the case of
theanalysisoftheÖtzisgenome.
In the sequencing by ligation approach the beads are first chemically cross-
linkedtoaglassslide(Figure11.7h).Sequencingisthendoneasfollows:First,a
universal primer is added (red in Figure 11.8), that fits the adaptor sequence
(red) of the template DNA fragment linked to the beads (in the following, we
willcalltheDNAcovalentlylinkedtothebeadstemplateDNA.).Inanextstep,
short special oligomers are added. The properties of the synthetic oligomers are
unique.Eacholigonucleotidehasonly8bases.Threebasesofthemaredegener-
ate (depicted in the Figure 11.8 by n) meaning they fit any DNA base. Also the
three universal bases (depicted in Figure 11.8 by z) have no influence on the
binding specificity of the oligomer. Only the two remaining bases are specific
(depictedinFigure11.8byxandy),thatisiftheyfindtwocomplementarybases
at the template DNA the oligomer can bind to it and can be connected to the
primersequencebyligationthroughaDNA-ligaseenzyme.Thus,ifamixtureof
oligomers,eachcontainingdifferentpairsofselectivebasesx,y,isaddedonlythe
typeofoligomerthatcontainsapairofbasesthatmatchthetemplateDNAwill
be ligated to the primer. Figure 11.8a and b illustrates exemplarily the comple-
mentary attachment of an oligomer containing an AT sequence (marked by red
colour) to the template DNAs TA sequence in the first ligation round. The dif-
ferent oligomers carrying different pairs of selective bases x,y can be differenti-
ated in a wide-field microscope by different fluorescence markers (indicated by
theblue,greenyellowandredstars).Inanextstepthelastthreebases(marked
previously by z) and the fluorescence dye at the 5´-end of the oligomer are
cleaved(Figure11.8c).Then,theligationcycleisrepeatedthatallowsidentifica-
tion of two further bases (in the present example TT, indicated by blue colour,
Figure 11.8d) but they are located in the sequence three unknown bases further
than the previously identified bases AT. Thus, when further repeating the

--- Page 11 ---

11.2 Next-GenerationSequencingMethods 295
Figure11.8 Principleofsequencingby strippingawayDNAligatedinaprevious
ligation(II).Inthisapproach,ineachligation round,thepositionoftheperiodically
cycleonlytwooffiveaddednucleotidescan identifiedtwoperfivebasescanbeshifted.
beidentifiedbyfluorescencemarkers Thus,fromseveralroundswithdifferent
(visualizedbycolourintheligationcycles). primersofdifferentlengththeentire
However,whenusingprimersofdifferent sequenceinformationcanbeobtained.For
lengthindifferentprimerroundsafter detailsseethetext.
ligation and cleavage cycles this always gives periodic information about the
sequence of the first two out of five consecutive bases (Figure 11.8e; Cycle 3:
CT, indicated by green colour; Cycle 4: GT, indicated by yellow colour and so
on). To obtain the missing sequence information, the newly generated DNA is
thenentirelystrippedfromthetemplateDNAandtheprocedureisrepeatedbut
now with a primer that is one base shorter (Figure 11.8f). So, in the second
primer round, again periodic information about the sequence of the first two of
five consecutive bases is obtained but now the periodic information pattern is

--- Page 12 ---

296 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
shifted by one base to the left. After several rounds with different primers the
entire sequence information of the fragments is available by using computer
algorithms.Again,theentiregenomesequencecanbereconstructedbyaligning
the sequences obtained from all individual fragments (see Figure 11.6 above). It
should be noted that actually only four different fluorescence markers can be
robustly differentiated spectrally and not 16, which is the possible number of
different oligonucleotides containing two different bases, x and y. However,
becauseoftheredundancyinthesequencinginformationobtainedinthediffer-
entprimerroundstheentiresequencecanstillbededucedalsofromafourcol-
ourcodedsetofthe16oligonucleotidesusingadvancedcomputeralgorithms.
11.2.2.3Pyrosequencing(ApproachIII)
In contrast to the sequencing by ligation (II) approach in pyrosequencing (III) the
beads observed from the emulsion PCR procedure are first randomly deposited
into an array of picoliter wells of a size so small that they can only bear one bead
(Figure 11.9). Then, a single type of nucleotide (e.g. only guanosine phosphate, as
illustrated in Figure 11.9) is flown across the wells. If this nucleotide is comple-
mentary to the base at the template DNA in a certain well then DNA-polymerase
can incorporate this nucleotide to a primer (green in Figure 11.9) and pyro-
phosphate (PP) is released. Smaller beads carrying the enzymes sulphurylase and
i
luciferase are also added. Sulphurylase converts the pyrophosphate into ATP in
the presence of adenosine 5´ phosphosulfate (APS). ATP, in turn, is necessary for
the biochemiluminescence reaction of luciferin to oxyluciferin by luciferase as
describedinSection3.8andFigure3.33.Todetectthebiochemiluminescencesig-
nalsfromthepicoliterwellstheyarebondedtoafibre-opticbundlethatdirectsthe
lightcollectedfromdifferentwellstodifferentpixelsofaCCD.Inthenextcycle,a
differentnucleotideisflownacrossthewells.Again,biochemiluminescenceisonly
detectedinaspecificpicoliterwellifthisnucleotideiscomplementarytothebases
at the DNAtemplate. Afterflowing allfournucleotidesacrossthewells,thebases
of the template strands at the first position are known for each fragment and the
procedurecanberepeatedtoanalysethenextposition.Thisprocedureisrepeated
untilthesequencesofallfragmentsareknown.Again,theentiregenomeinforma-
tion can be reconstructed by aligning the sequences of the individual fragments.
The method is named pyrosequencing (III) since the biochemiluminescence is
caused by a sequence of reactions that are initially started by the pyrophosphate
release upon a successful incorporation of a correct, unlabelled nucleotide. It
shouldbenotedthatineachcycleofflowingaspecificnucleotideacrossthewells
it is possible that more than one nucleotide is incorporated when more than one
consecutivepositioninthetemplateDNAcarriesthesame,complementarynucle-
otide. However, this can be identified by the brightness of the biochemilumines-
cence signal. Two or three identical bases in a row lead to the incorporation of
two or three times more nucleotides and consequently to the release of two or
three times more pyrophosphate. As a consequence, the brightness of the bioche-
miluminescencedetectedfromsuchwellsisalsotwoorthreetimeshigher.

--- Page 13 ---

11.2 Next-GenerationSequencingMethods 297
Figure11.9 Principleofpyrosequencing(III). incorporateitandpyrophosphateisreleased.
Inthisapproach,onlyoneoutoffourpossible Inanenzymaticcascadethepyrophosphateis
typesoftheunlabelled,nativenucleotidesis detectedbybiochemiluminescence.Then,the
flownoverthebeadsthatarethemselvescon- nexttypeofnucleotideisadded.Repeating
tainedinpicoliterwells.Ifthistypeofnucleo- thisprocedureperiodicallywithallfourtypes
tideiscomplementarytothenextbaseinthe ofnucleotidesyieldstheDNAsequenceof
DNA-template,DNA-polymerasewill eachindividualbead.Fordetailsseethetext.
11.2.2.4IonSemiconductorSequencing(ApproachIV)
Conceptually,theionsemiconductorsequencing(IV)sharessimilaritieswiththe
pyrosequencing (III) approach. As in pyrosequencing (III) also in ion semi-
conductor sequencing (IV) the beads covered with clusters of identical DNA

--- Page 14 ---

298 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
fragments are loaded into various wells and single types of unlabelled nucleo-
tides are added step by step. The main difference is the way the addition of an
unlabelled nucleotide complementary to the template DNA is detected. In ion
semiconductor sequencing (IV) the detection of biochemiluminescence in pyro-
sequencing (III) is replaced by the detection of a pH change caused in each
reaction step by the release of hydrogen ions that occurs when nucleotides are
incorporated. This pH change is actually sensed by a specialized silicon chip
(Figure 11.10). As with the pyrosequencing (III) no labelled nucleotides are
neededbutinadditionnospecialenzymessuchassulphurylaseorluciferaseare
required. The analysis of the obtained fragment sequences is the same as with
thepreviousapproaches.
Figure11.10 Principleofionsemiconductor incorporateitandhydrogenionsarereleased.
sequencing(IV).Again,onlyasingletypeout ThefollowingpH-changeisthensensedbya
offourpossibleunlabellednucleotidesis specializedsiliconchip.Afterwards,thenext
flownoverthebeadsthatarethemselvescon- typeofnucleotideisadded.Repeatingthis
tainedinpicoliterwells.Ifthistypeofnucleo- procedureperiodicallywithallfourtypesof
tideiscomplementarytothenextbaseinthe nucleotidesyieldstheDNAsequenceofeach
DNAtemplate,DNA-polymerasewill individualbead.Fordetailsseethetext.

--- Page 15 ---

11.2 Next-GenerationSequencingMethods 299
11.2.3Single-MoleculeReal-TimeSequencing(ApproachV)
As indicated by its name single-molecule real-time sequencing does not require
the generationof clusters of identical fragments as itis basedon highly sensitive
single-molecule detection techniques such as described in Sections 9.2 and 9.3.
This approach has very high read lengths of consecutive bases but limitations
exist of course in the sensitivity of single-molecule detection techniques. In Fig-
ure 11.11 the principle of single-molecule real-time sequencing (V) is visualized.
A nanostructure is generated in which a silicon wafer surface contains a regular
array of thousands of wells that are smaller than the wavelength of light (Fig-
ure 11.11). At the bottom of these wells DNA-polymerase with the DNA
fragments are deposited. The DNA-polymerases are specially engineered. They
have a decreased rate of polymerization and the ability to incorporate fluores-
cently modified nucleotides. Then, four types of fluorescently phospholinked
hexaphosphate nucleotides are added and the DNA-polymerases in each well
start introducing the differently labelled nucleotides after each other. Simulta-
neously, the wells are illuminated from below. Since the dimensions of the wells
Figure11.11 Principleofsingle-moleculereal-timesequencing(V).Fordetailsseethetext.

--- Page 16 ---

300 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
are smaller than the diffraction-limited resolution of light only an evanescent
excitationlightfieldofsignificantlylessthan200nmprotrudesintothewellwith
the polymerase (schematically indicated in Figure 11.11 by blue cylinder). When
lightisguidedintoavolumethatissmallerthanthewavelengthoftheusedlight
this is called a zero-mode waveguide. The limited excitation volume in the zero-
mode waveguide is based on very similar principles to the evanescent field in
TIRF-microscopy (see Chapter 7) and thus has similar advantages that allow for
robust single-moleculedetection.Inparticular,asinTIRF-microscopy, the back-
ground signal is significantly reduced because much less solvent is excited per
fluorescence single molecule, enabling superior single molecule signal-to-noise
ratios.Thus,thepolymerasecanactuallybeobserved“atwork”sinceeachnucle-
otide introduced gives rise to a fluorescence burst detectable with a microscope
set-up similar as in TIRF microscopy (Figure 7.8). The wavelengths of these
burstsarespecificforoneofthefourbasesinthenucleotidesandthechronolog-
ical colour order of these bursts correspond directly to the DNA sequence. The
limited excitation volume in the zero-mode waveguide is also very important to
ensure that really only one nucleotide is observed at a time. For the polymerase
micromolar nucleotide concentrations are necessary that are far too high for sin-
gle-moleculeobservationsindiffraction-limiteddetectionvolumesofstandardflu-
orescence set-ups. As outlined in Section 9.3, optical single-molecule detection,
the concentration of labelled particles would have to be on the order of nano-
moles to be detected individually in such a set-up which is by fartoo lowfor the
polymerase to work properly. However, by using the very limited volume excited
inthezero-modewaveguidessingle-moleculedetectionofnucleotideatmicromo-
larconcentrationsisnotaproblem.
Problems
11.1 Assume that the probability of a false read-out in DNA sequencing is
1/10 000 for a single base. What is the probability that none, exactly one
or more than one base is incorrectly assigned when sequencing a DNA
strandof1000bases?
11.2 What would be the major problems if those components in bridged PCR
areremovedthatallowforPCRamplificationnotonlyintheforwardbut
alsothebackwarddirection?
11.3 Discusswhatnext-generationsequencingapproachmighthaveacompar-
ativelylowandwhatacomparativelyhigherrorrate.
11.4 Assume you have 30 fragments of 300 basepairs in size from statistically
differentpositionsofanoriginalcircularDNA-plasmidof3000basepairs
insize.Howlargeistheprobabilitythatyoucannotreconstructtheorigi-
nal DNA because one specific base pair is not represented in the
fragments?

--- Page 17 ---

Bibliography 301
11.5 How high is the probability that a droplet contains no DNA fragment in
emulsion PCR if the probability for having two different fragments is 1%
or0.1%?Whatpercentageofproductivedropletswouldexistiftheproba-
bilitytohaveexactlyonebeadinthedropletisthesameasinitiallyhaving
exactlyoneDNAfragment?
11.6 How many detected photons are necessary per inserted nucleotide in the
pyrosequencing approach to ensure the ability to differentiate one, two
andthreenucleotidesofthesametypeinarowwithanerrorrateofbet-
terthanonly1falseread-outsper1.000.000?
11.7 What is the drop in pH when 10000 protons are released in ion
semiconductor sequencing into a neutral solution contained in a volume
of1pL?
11.8 In Section 9.3.3 we defined the effective focal detection volume of a nor-
mal diffraction-limited confocal microscope set-up to be V π3=2r2z .
eff 0 0
Calculate the average number of nucleotides that are present in such a
detection volume when assuming a concentration of one micromole and
values for r and z of 250nm and 1000nm, respectively. How much
0 0
smallerdoesthesizeofthedetectionvolumeinsingle-moleculereal-time
sequencingneedtobetoensurethatitcontainsonaverageonly1nucle-
otidewhenassumingthesameconcentration?
Bibliography
SangerMethod
sequencingtechnology.TrendsGenet.,24
(3),142–149.
Sanger,F.(1988)Sequences,sequences,and Shendure,J.andJi,H.(2008)Next-generation
sequences.Annu.Rev.Biochem.,57,1–28. DNAsequencing.NatureBiotechnol.,26,
Sanger,F.etal.(1977)Nucleotidesequenceof 1135–1145.
bacteriophagephiX174DNA.Nature,
265,687–695.
SpecificNext-GenerationSequencing
Methods
GeneralNext-GenerationSequencing
Methods Bentley,D.R.(2006)Whole-genomere-
sequencing.Curr.Opin.Genet.Dev.,16,
Mardis,E.R.(2013)Next-Generation 545–552.
SequencingPlatforms.Annu.Rev.Anal. Dressman,D.,Yan,H.,Traverso,G.,Kinzler,
Chem.,6,287–303. K.W.andVogelstein,B.(2003)
Mardis,E.R.(2008)Theimpactofnext- TransformingsingleDNAmoleculesinto
generationsequencingtechnology fluorescentmagneticparticlesfor
ongenetics.TrendsGenet.,24(3), detectionandenumerationofgenetic
133–141. variations.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA,100,
Metzker,M.L.(2010)Sequencing 8817–8822.
technologies–thenextgeneration.Nature Eid,J.,Fehr,A.,Gray,J.,Luong,K.,Lyle,J.
Rev.Genet.,11,31–46. etal.(2009)Real-timeDNAsequencing
Pop,M.andSalzberg,S.L.(2008) fromsinglepolymerasemolecules.Science,
Bioinformaticschallengesofnew 323,133–138.

--- Page 18 ---

302 11 DNASequencingandNext-GenerationSequencingMethods
Fedurco,M.,Romieu,A.,Williams,S., DNAsequencingusingdetectionof
Lawrence,I.andTurcatti,G.(2006)BTA, pyrophosphaterelease.Anal.Biochem.,
anovelreagentforDNAattachmenton 242,84–89.
glassandefficientgenerationofsolid- Rothberg,J.M.,Hinz,W.,Rearick,T.M.,
phaseamplifiedDNAcolonies.Nucleic Schultz,J.,Mileski,W.etal.(2011)An
AcidsRes.,34,e22. integratedsemiconductordeviceenabling
Margulies,M.etal.(2005)Genome non-opticalgenomesequencing.Nature,
sequencinginmicrofabricatedhigh- 475,348–352.
densitypicolitrereactors.Nature,437, Shendure,J.etal.(2005)Accuratemultiplex
376–380. polonysequencingofanevolvedbacterial
Ronaghi,M.,Karamohamed,S.,Pettersson,B., genome.Science,309,1728–1732.
Uhlen,M.andNyren,P.(1996)Real-time