

--- Page 1 ---

Russian Chemical Reviews62(12) 1073-1082 (1993) ©1993 Russian Academy of Sciences and Turpion Ltd
UDC 541.139
Second generation of magnetic effects in chemical reactions
A L Buchachenko
Contents
I. Two scenarios of chemical reaction 1073
II. Spin dynamics of the radical pair 1074
III. First generation of magnetic effects 1074
IV. Principles of chemical reception of microwaves 1075
V. Reaction yield detected magnetic resonance 1077
VI. Radio induced magnetic isotope effect 1079
VII. Microwave stimulated nuclear polarisation 1080
VIII. Conclusion 1082
Abstract. Spin selective chemical reactions must also be having spin 5=1, only one can undergo a spin allowed reaction
magnetically sensitive. The susceptibility of chemical reactions to and produce the recombination product tetraphenylethylene.
magnetic interactions produces two generations of magnetic The spin of the other eight states (5=1 and 2) is not equal to
effects: the first includes the magnetic field effect, the magnetic that of the reaction product (S = 0), and therefore these states
isotope effect, and the chemical polarisation of nuclei, all are chemically nonreactive.
induced by external or internal magnetic fields. The second In general the spin selectivity of chemical events implies
generation effects are stimulated by external electromagnetic that chemically identical but spin different intermediates (the
fields interacting with the chemically active spin systems. The reaction product precursors) have different, spin dependent
bibliography includes 31 references. chemical reactivities. The only interactions which can alter the
spin of reaction precursors and transform nonreactive, spin
forbidden into the reactive, spin allowed states are magnetic
I. Two scenarios of chemical reaction
interactions. Their contribution to the total energy is insig-
Any chemical event, including its feasibility and its result, is nificant, but they control the spin behaviour of the chemical
traditionally rationalised according to its energy scenario: how species, they modify their chemical reactivity, and they establish
much energy is required, how to pump this energy into the a new, magnetic scenario of chemical reactions.1 ~4
reacting species, and how efficiently is this energy exploited in Spin selectivity (and therefore also the magnetic sensitivity of
the chemical system. chemical reactions) gives rise to two generations of magnetic
However, another physical property besides energy is of effects, illustrated in Fig. 1 for the particular but widely met case
paramount importance in chemistry: the angular momentum of a radical pair (RP). The nonreactive, triplet spin state RP can
(spin) of the electrons and nuclei of the reagents. The be transformed into the reactive, singlet spin state pair either by
fundamental ruling principle of chemical reactions is that both magnetic interactions, characteristic of the reaction itself, or by
the spins and their projections remains unchanged in elementary external radiofrequency or microwave (mw) magnetic fields. The
chemical events. The conservation of the total spin has triplet-singlet spin conversion induced by 'native' magnetic
important consequences: the chemical reactions are spin interactions is responsible for the magnetic effects of the first
selective, they are allowed only for spin states of the products generation, or native magnetic effects, while the triplet-singlet
whose total spin is identical to that of reagents, and they are conversion stimulated by rf or mw magnetic fields induces the
strictly forbidden if they require spin change. For example, the magnetic effects of the second generation. The former includes
transformation of the radical pair into the molecule (through Magnetic Field Effect (MFE), Magnetic Isotope Effect (MIE)
recombination or disproportionation) is allowed only from the and Chemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear Polarisation
singlet spin state of the pair, and forbidden from the triplet one. (CIDNP)—three effects originating from the dependence of the
The reaction H + O2 -> HO2 takes place in the doublet spin reaction probability P in RP on the magnetic field H, hyperfine
state of the reagent (H--O2) since the total spin of the pair in (Fermi) electron-nuclear interaction, and nuclear spin
this state is identical to that of the reaction product, but it is orientation l. The latter are the basis of Reaction Yield
z
forbidden in the quartet spin state of the pair. Of the nine Detected Magnetic Resonance (RYDMR), Radio Induced
possible spin states of the pair of triplet carbenes PI12C:, each Magnetic Isotope Effect (RIMIE) and Stimulated Nuclear
Polarisation (SNP). The relation between these two generations
of magnetic effects is schematically shown in Fig. \b.
A L Buchachenko Institute of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of
Sciences, ul. Kosygina 4, 117334, Moscow,
Fax (7-095) 938 21 56.
Received 8 September 1993
Uspekhi Khimii 62 (12) 1139 -1149 (1993); translated by J I Carasso

--- Page 2 ---

1074 A L Buchachenko
The extended spin dynamics of the RP are the combination
of all three dynamics considered cooperatively. The rate of
r triplet-singlet conversion is directly related to the matrix
magnetic interactions
element Q of the RP spin Hamiltonian evaluated with the spin
wave functions of triplet (T) and singlet (S) states.
^
For the multinuclear RP these Qb values are
a
{ Ri R2 } RiR .R, R2}
2
L J
0 - S) = \ \Ag^H +£/»!?- Y.jm)] , (1)
if, mw magnetic fields
G*(T+ - S) = -(i)I/2 ,-[/,(/,. + 1) - ( - 1)] , (2)
a Wj Wj
P(H) —• MFE RYDMR - ~ S) = + l)-m i (m i +l)], (3)
where the first describes the contribution of the To—S transition
P(H, a, h) P{a) —- MIE RIMIE
to the total rate of T—S conversion, the other two give the
contributions of T+—S and T_ —S transitions; To, T are the
±
P(h) —• CIDNP SNP substates of the triplet spin state, with different electron spin
projections: 0 for To and ±1 for T respectively. The term
±
Ag^H is the difference of Zeeman energies of the radical
partners; Ag is the difference of their g-factors, Ag = g\ — g2;
Figure 1. (a) Transformation of an unreactive triplet radical pair into
a chemically active singlet pair under the influence of magnetic inter- /J.B is the Bohr magneton; H is the strength of magnetic field;
actions and electromagnetic fields (radio-frequency or microwave); a,- and aj are the HFI constants for the i-th and y'-th kind of
(6) relationship between first and second generation magnetic effects. nuclei, with spins /,- and If. ml are the quantum numbers of the
projections of the nuclear spins /,• in the first radical of the pair
and m * are those for its partner.
II. Spin dynamics of the radical pair It follows from Eqns (l)-(3) that the rate of triplet-singlet
conversion (and consequently the probability of chemical
A radical pair is a dynamic intermediate or chemical micro- reaction in the RP) depends firstly on the magnetic field strength
reactor from which the partners can diffuse without reacting, H through the difference in electron Zeeman energies AgfiBH;
travel randomly in space and time, and then return and secondly on the nuclear magnetic moments through the HFI
reencounter. The time between partner contacts, or repeated constant a, since a = (8jt/3)/i/i|\|/(0)|2, where fi* and fi are the
e n n
encounters, is used by the pair for its own spin conversion which magnetic moments of the electron and nucleus, |\K0)|2 is the
is driven by magnetic interactions in the radicals resulting either electron spin density at the nucleus; thirdly on the nuclear spin
in triplet-singlet transformation of the pair (if its starting spin orientation I through the quantum numbers m f and m *.
z
state is triplet) or in singlet-triplet conversion (for pairs with The reaction probability of the RP may be represented in the
singlet starting state). closed form as P = F(H, a, I). This compact formula embodies
z
To transform the triplet RP into a molecule at least four the three main magnetic effects of the first generation (see
simultaneous events are required. Fig. \b).
Firstly, the radicals leaving the RP at time t = 0 should
return and reencounter at some time t. This process of III. First generation of magnetic effects
regeneration of the contacts between RP partners is described by
molecular dynamics. Secondly, at the same instance t the pair 1. Magnetic field effect
must have completed its triplet-singlet conversion and be ready The modern theory of the MFE, based on the extended spin
to form a molecule. This process is controlled by spin dynamics. dynamics, identifies two main MFE sources.
Thirdly, during their diffusional travels the radicals must not 1. In zero and in very low magnetic fields the S and T spin
undergo chemical transformations: for the primary molecule states are almost degenerate and the spin conversion involves
to be reformed the initial pair must survive to time t. The all four states (S, To, T ). In high fields the degeneracy of triplet
±
probability of this event is determined by the chemical dynamics. substates is lifted and the T levels are separated from the
±
Fourthly, the RP now ready to react (i.e. having survived to S state by Zeeman interaction and excluded from the spin
time t and being in a singlet state with the partners in contact) conversion, so that the rate of the triplet-singlet RP trans-
will recombine into a molecule only if a favourable orientation formation is reduced to approximately one third of the rate in
of the partners is achieved by rotational dynamics. Thus, the zero field.
birth of a molecule from the RP is a result of the collective and If the starting spin state of the pair is singlet the magnetic
coordinated efforts of three dynamics: spin, molecular and field closes the S—T channels and partly locks the pair,
±
chemical. increasing its chance to react. Conversely, if the starting state is
The key act of the chemical interaction is spin conversion, triplet the magnetic field switches off the T—S conversion and
controlled by the magnetic interactions, among which Zeeman partially suppresses (by about 60%) intra-pair chemical
and electron-nuclear (Fermi) hyperfine interaction (HFI) are reactions.
the most important. Spin dynamics are modulated by molecular The T —S spin conversion is induced by HFI (usually in
±
dynamics, which produce random variations of the distance the 1 — 150 G range),f and therefore even these low magnetic
between radicals and therefore of the exchange interaction fields (H as a) are sufficient to decouple electron-nuclear spin
potential. This, in its turn, influences the rate of spin conversion subsystems and produce marked and even multiple changes in
and ultimately the spin dynamics of the RP. The chemical reaction rates.
reactions of RP partners destroy the pair, so that the spin
dynamics are controlled by chemical dynamics.
11G = 10-4T.

--- Page 3 ---

Second generation of magnetic effects in chemical reactions 1075
2. The rate of spin conversion by the T—S channel is mag- the 12C nonmagnetic isotope. Thus, because of the difference
o
netic field dependent according to Eqn (1). As in the previous in the rates of triplet-singlet spin conversion, the RPs can
case, the sign of the MFE is a function of the starting spin state: separate the nuclei according to their magnetic moments: they
the magnetic field enhances the leakage of the reactive singlet dispatch the magnetic and the nonmagnetic nuclei into the
pairs into nonreactive triplet pairs, and has the opposite effect different chemical products.
on triplet pairs. As a result the magnetic field accelerates the MIE is a phenomenon of fundamental importance. It estab-
reactions starting from triplet pairs (and triplet RP precursors) lishes a new chemical principle of isotope separation, it provides
and hinders the reactions in singlets and in their precursors. a new method of detection and identification of paramagnetic
These two sources of MFE are easily distinguished because intermediates in chemical and biochemical processes, and it
of the difference in their response to changes in the magnetic offers new ideas and approaches to problems in geochemistry,
field: the field dependence for the MFEs originating from T —S space chemistry, and molecular biology.4'6-7
±
spin conversion channels reaches saturation at H J> a, while the
magnitude of MFEs induced by To—S conversion varies 3. Chemical polarisation of nuclei
monotonically with the magnetic field. For the RP with short- Chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarisation (CIDNP) is
lived radicals (life-time x <C | Qab\ — •*) the effect is proportional to the result of the nuclear spin selectivity of chemical reaction. The
(Ag/i #)2, whereas for long-lived RPs (x>|gi,|-1) the effect is rate of T—S spin conversion according to Eqn (1) is a function
B o
proportional to (Ag/iB-ff)1'2.5 Furthermore it is evident that the of nuclear spin orientation, and therefore RPs which differ in
signs of MFEs arising from these two sources are opposite; this nuclear spin orientation have different chemical reactivities.
provides an important criterion for identifying the spin states of Hence the RP as a chemical reactor can not only separate
the RPs and their precursors through the sign of the MFE. magnetic from nonmagnetic nuclei (as it does in the MIE), but it
can also assign differently oriented magnetic nuclei to different
2. Magnetic isotope effect reaction products.
The coupling between chemical species or spin carriers (between This is the first mechanism of CIDNP, which operates in
radicals, in particular), being electron spin selective, must also be high magnetic fields where the To—S channel of spin conversion
nuclear spin selective, since the two spin subsystems (electronic is predominant. It selects the magnetic nuclei with respect to
and nuclear) are coupled by Fermi HFI interaction. The nuclear their orientations according to Eqn (1), and therefore the
spin system affects the magnetic behaviour of the electron spin CIDNP is directly related to Ag and to at and to a,.
system, thus influencing the chemical reactivity. The nuclear spin The second CIDNP mechanism operates in low fields
selectivity of chemical reactions produces a difference between (H < a), where the T — S channels also contribute to the RP spin
±
the reaction rates of radicals (or, in general, of any other spin evolution. The T —S spin transitions are accompanied by
±
bearing chemical species) having magnetic or nonmagnetic reorientation of the nuclear spins, unlike the To — S transition
nuclei. The name magnetic isotope effect (MIE) has been which selects only the oriented nuclei without changing their
suggested by the present writer for this phenomenon, in contrast alignment.
to the well known classical isotope effect (CIE) which follows An excess of nuclear spins oriented with or against the field
from the nuclear mass selectivity of chemical reactions.4-7 in the product molecules corresponds to overpopulation of the
A striking result of the MIE is the chemically induced lower or the upper Zeeman nuclear levels respectively (for 'H,
separation of magnetic from nonmagnetic isotopes. MIE- I3C, and 31P nuclei with a positive magnetic moment). This non-
induced isotope selectivity may be clearly exemplified by the equilibrium population manifests itself in the NMR spectra of the
photolysis of dibenzylketone (DBK), which is known to occur molecules as an anomalously strong absorption or emission, the
via the fragmentation of the excited triplet molecule and latter corresponding to population inversion of Zeeman levels.
generation of a triplet RP (Scheme 1). The triplet RP can either CIDNP is a well-known phenomenon, widely used as an
undergo triplet-single spin conversion (driven by HFI) and efficient method of identifying reaction mechanisms and of
recombine, recreating the starting ketone, or it can dissociate detecting radicals and radical intermediates. CIDNP is a
into the separate radicals PhCH and PhCHCO; the latter powerful means of defining the spin multiplicity of the radical
2 2
decomposes into PhCH and CO. The main reaction products pairs and of their molecular precursors, it can be used to
2
are dibenzyl (PhCH2)2 and carbon monoxide (Scheme 1). separate radical from nonradical reaction pathways and to
identify unstable intermediate products and reversible radical
Scheme 1 stages which cannot be detected by other methods. From the
CIDNP kinetics we can determine the reaction rate constants,
Av II hv
PhCHCCHPh including those of fast reactions (108-109 s"1). CIDNP can
2 2
determine the signals of HFI constants in radicals in radicals and
the spin-spin coupling constants in molecules, and it can also
(PhCH 2 I3COCH 2 Ph)T (PhCH 2 13COCH 2 Ph)T detect the hot, energy-rich radicals. The mechanisms of many
types of chemical reaction have been studied by CIDNP and
much valuable information has been collected.8'9
T—S-conversion 13C 12C
IV. Principles of chemical reception of microwaves
PhCH13CCHPh PhCHCHPh + 12CO
2 2 2 2 We should stress that the magnetic interactions do not influence
O the chemical reaction itself, i.e. that they do not affect the
motion of chemically reacting atomic systems along the potential
The rate of triplet-singlet conversion for magnetic RPs energy surface. Their effect is to switch the reaction from the
(i.e. the pairs with magnetic 13C nuclei in benzoyl or benzyl spin-forbidden channels into spin-allowed ones, controlling the
radicals) is higher than that for nonmagnetic pairs (with spin behaviour of the reactants (or vice versa, depending on
nonmagnetic 12C nuclei). Therefore the magnetic RPs will whether the starting spin state of the reactants is spin-forbidden
preferentially recombine and regenerate the starting ketone or spin-allowed). This statement applies to both the magnetic
molecules, while the time lag of the triplet-singlet conversion in interactions (Zeeman, Fermi, dipolar, spin-orbital), specific to
nonmagnetic RPs makes dissociation more likely for these pairs. the reaction itself, and to the external electromagnetic fields and
As a result 13C magnetic nuclei are accumulated in the ketone their influence on the spin-carrying reaction precursors (radical
molecules, while carbon monoxide and dibenzyl are enriched in pairs in particular).

--- Page 4 ---

1076 A L Buchachenko
The principles of chemical reception of microwaves will be
demonstrated by considering the RP example. The scheme of
Zeeman energy levels of the RP is shown in Fig. 2. Let the pair
be produced in a singlet spin state strongly coupled (for example,
by HFI) with the triplet To substate, so that the population of
the mixed, ready-to-react STo state is much higher than that of
the T+ or T_ substates. Resonant transitions between the T
o
and T levels stimulated by an electromagnetic field (EMF)
±
depopulate the reactive STo mixed state and suppress the
intrapair reactions, lowering the yield of reaction product from
the singlet reaction channel. Conversely, if the starting spin state
of the pair is triplet the reaction along the singlet channel
depletes the population of the mixed STo state: however, the
T—To pumping induced by the EMF additionally populates
±
the reactive STo state and increases the yield of reaction
products. In general the EMF rearranges the spin system,
switching the reaction between channels of different spin
multiplicity and modifying the chemical reactivity of the RP as is
found with other magnetic interactions.
T_ S
Figure 2. Microwave pumping of the Zeeman levels of a radical pair:
(a) without exchange interaction (J = 0) the T—T transitions
± o
stimulated by the EMF populate or depopulate (by hyperfine Figure 3. Vector diagram of the spin dynamics of a radical pair developed
interaction) the STo state; (b) in the presence of exchange interaction under the influence of the microwave field Hi (symbols defined in the text).
(27 « gn*H) microwave pumping populates or depopulates the reactive
mixed ST_ state. Possible ESR transitions are shown by arrows.
resolved into two circularly polarised vectors Hi rotating with a
frequency co in the XY plane in mutually opposite directions
The exchange interaction J which appears at small inter- (Fig. 3a). One of these vectors, H\, rotating in phase with the
radical distances splits the S and T levels, so that the T-S Larmor precession appears to be motionless in a new frame of
o
mixing now occurs only in the level crossing region (Fig. 2b), coordinates X1, Y', Z chosen to rotate with the magnetic
where gfi^H « 27. However, in the spin evolution of the RP moment Mi.
with distant partners the exchange interaction can be ignored. In this new, rotating frame the vector Mi experiences only
This situation is often met because the RP spends most of its the magnetic field Hi which is now permanent, and rotates
lifetime in the state with remote partners. round its direction with a frequency coi = yH\. This motion is
Microwave pumping of the spin transitions modifies the rate equivalent to a periodic reorientation of the Mj vector with
of spin evolution of the RPs and therefore also their chemistry, respect to the Z axis and therefore to H o . The magnetic moment
providing a new principle of resonant, frequency-tuned chemical M 2 of the partner behaves similarly if the Larmor frequency of
reception of microwaves. The change of the yield of products is its precession is also equal to co. These orientations are easily
the true chemical response to the perturbation of the reacting seen to correspond to T ± — To spin transition.
spin system by the EMF. (The frequency spectrum of the We shall now assume that the magnetic moments Mi and
response is equivalent to the microwave absorption spectrum of M are not equivalent, owing to the difference Ag between their
2
the RP, and is therefore identical to its ESR spectrum.) Varying g-factors or to the hyperfine coupling a. Then the difference in
2
the external magnetic field Ho allows us to detect the ESR the precession frequencies of the M and M vectors, Aco, is
x 2
spectrum of the RP by monitoring the yield of any product equal to Agfi-aHojti or g\i.%a\% respectively. In the X1, Y'', Z
2 2
related to the reaction in the RP. Frankevich, who discovered frame rotating with the Larmor frequency of Mi this vector
the phenomenon, suggested the name Reaction Yield Detected is again motionless. However, the vector M now precesses with
2
Magnetic Resonance (RYDMR) for it.10 respect to M) with a frequency Aco. This motion is equivalent to
In order to visualise the spin transition induced by the EMF a To ?2 S spin evolution (Fig. 3c).
we shall consider the vector representation of spin dynamics in Switching on an EMF small enough (Hi) to satisfy the
the radical pair.2 To extract magnetic energy from the electro- condition coi < Aco stimulates the To ^ T ± transitions
magnetic wave a particular polarisation is required: the responsible for the RYDMR phenomenon. At higher values ^f
magnetic vector H\ of the wave should lie in_ a plane normal H\, when a>i 1* Aco, the vector M x precesses round the vector Hi
to the permanent external magnetic field H o (Fig. 3). The (or <3|) as before, but the magnetic moment M 2 now precesses
magnetic moment M\ of the spin carrier [assumed to have a round a total vector (coi + Aco) with a frequency (co\ + Aco2) '
spin S = (l/2)/i, so that M, = (l/2)g!/j ]^precesses with a (see Fig. 3c). This means that the singlet-triplet spin mixing
B
Larmor frequency w = yHo round the H magnetic field now takes place with new difference frequency
o
directed along the Z axis; y = gifis/h is the gyromagnetic ratio.
The Hi vector of the EMF is directed along the Y axis: its value Q = (coi + Aco2)1/2 - co, ss
Aco2
is 2H\ = 1Hi cos cot. The total motion of the vector 2H\ can be 2coi

--- Page 5 ---

Second generation of magnetic effects in chemical reactions 1077
which is less than Aw itself. This implies that at high enough
EMF amplitudes the mw irradiation alters the spin behaviour of
the radical pair: instead of stimulating triplet-singlet transitions
it begins to suppress them. The spin state of the pair at high
EMF amplitudes when a>\ 2> Acu (see Fig. 3c) appears to be
locked, so that the phenomenon is called spin locking. It
manifests itself in distortion and ultimately in phase inversion of
the RYDMR spectra.11
The jump of the S - T mixing frequency from Am to A«2/a>i
o
can influence the properties of the mixed STo state only
under conditions such that the lifetime of the pair x satisfies the
relation x < an/Aco2. Conversely, for x > cui/Aco2 the ST
0
mixing as well as the chemical properties of the pair will not
depend on W\ and, therefore, on H\ (spin scrambling). By varying
a>\ over wide limits and studying the dependence of the
RYDMR spectra on co\ (or H\) we may determine both Aco and
the lifetime T of the radical pairs.2
V. Reaction yield detected magnetic resonance
The frequency spectrum of the chemical response to mw 609 G
pumping is essentially the RYDMR spectrum, which may be
recorded by monitoring any parameter of the chemical system Figure 4. RYDMR spectra of an ion-radical pair [(naph-
under investigation providing that it is kinetically related to the thalene)+/(naphthalene)~] for a microwave pumping power of 1.3 (a),
RP reaction (and therefore to the population of spin substates of 3.8 (6), and 7.6 W (c).n
the pair). Among the most easily and precisely measurable
parameters used to detect RYDMR spectra are the luminescence
intensity, optical absorption, electric conductivity and radical In order that the mw pumping may influence the spin
concentration. evolution of the pair, two dynamic requirements must be
Electronically excited molecules able to emit from their satisfied:
singlet or triplet states (fluorescence or phosphorescence respec-
tively) are usually produced by the recombination of ion-radical S-TO <, )-1 and TRP w
pairs (or, more precisely, by electron transfer reactions between where H\ is the amplitude of the mw field, {yH\)~x is the
partners). For example, the reaction between the ion radicals characteristic time of the mw-stimulated To—T transitions,
±
D'+ and A#~ may occur along singlet or triplet channels: TS-T and XRP are the characteristic time of the S-T spin
0 o
evolution and of the lifetime of the ion-radical pair respectively.
D + + A— »• '(D" + A--) »• 'D + Ao »• The first relation ensures the fast S—To transition and
efficient chemical leakage of ion-radical pairs along the
*• Do + Ao + hv (fluorescence)
singlet channel, the second ensures that the pair undergoes
mw-stimulated To—T transitions before its disappearance.
±
The RYDMR signals (Fig. 4) are a single line with a
D-+ + A— *- 3(D'+ A—) > 3D + Ao »•
halfwidth of 14 G, evidently due to the unresolved hyperfine
> Do + Ao + hv (phosphorescence) structure of positive and negative naphthalene ion radicals,
since the total HFI splitting is comparable to the width of the
The mw pumping of the singlet pairs stimulates their line. The centre of the RYDMR spectrum lies at 609 G, which
singlet-triplet conversion, thus suppressing the fluorescence in corresponds to the g-factor of aromatic ion radicals at an
favour of the phosphorescence. Conversely, the mw pumping of operating frequency of 1704.6 MHz.
triplet pairs induces the opposite effect. However, the intensity The optically detected RYDMR spectrum with resolved HFI
of fluorescence is usually small, and therefore fluorescence is splitting shown in Fig. 5 belongs to the ion-radical pair
seldom used to detect RYDMR spectra. Most of the RYDMR (M-+ M"~), where M is biphenyl, generated under conditions
experiments are based on fluorescence intensity measurements. similar to those used to generate the naphthalene ion-radical
Fig. 4 shows the RYDMR spectrum for the ion-radical pair pair.13
(M'+ M'~) generated by positron irradiation of a solution of As well as the radical-radical interactions, the chemical and
naphthalene in squalane.12 The reactions resulting in the physical processes in triplet-triplet and triplet-doublet pairs
formation and recombination of aromatic ion-radical pairs are: can be studied by the RYDMR technique in liquids and in
molecular solids. The dynamics and mechanism of the triplet
S *• SI+ + e, exciton annihilation and the quenching of triplet molecules by
radicals and other spin carriers can also be elucidated by this
M + e »• M—, technique. The mw pumping changes the population of the
M + S"+ »• M"+ + S, Zeeman spin levels in T-T or T—D pairs (as it does in D-D
pairs) and thus controls the intensity of the prompt or the
M-+ + M— * M* + M, delayed fluorescence.14
The scheme of spin levels and mw-stimulated interlevel
where S and M are solvent and aromatic molecules, respectively, transitions in a pair of triplet excitons is shown in Fig. 6 as
M' + , M"~, S'+are their cation and anion radicals, and M* is the an example. In a strong magnetic field H two of the nine spin
excited aromatic molecule (the fluorescence emitter). The pairs states of the pair (SQi and SQ) include singlet components
(M' + M"~) are mostly formed in the Onsager sphere and in the with amplitudes equal to \ and | 2 respectively. The singlet com-
singlet spin state, so that their reaction product along the spin- ponents of these states are mixed with the components of the
allowed channel is an excited M* molecule in the singlet spin quintet state, but the other states of the two-triplet pair (Q i
±
state. and Q±2) are pure triplets and quintets.

--- Page 6 ---

1078 A L Buchachenko
100 G
A
t
Figure 7. RYDMR spectrum of a pair of triplet excitons in a tetracene
t
V single crystal, detected by the prompt fluorescence.15
X
'f
one particular orientation of the crystal with respect to the
magnetic field.15
RYDMR spectra have been observed in studies of excitons
and of charge-transfer complexes in liquids and in solids,
F-centres in alkali halide crystals, electron-hole pairs in
amorphous semiconductors, the reaction centres in photo-
synthetic systems, etc.2-5
I
The sensitivity of the RYDMR technique can be estimated.
V The relative variation Ay in the yield of the reaction in pairs
produced by resonant mw-induced transitions is determined by
H 6.0 G
the product of the probability P of the transition under the
action of mw magnetic field H and of the lifetime T of the pair:
Figure 5. RYDMR spectrum of the (biphenyl)+-(biphenyl)- radical pair
(a) and its first derivative (b).13 Ay
(4)
y
Upon exposure to a resonant mw field, transitions involving For a radical as a particle with a spin of \
a change in the projection of the magnetic quantum number m
by Am = ±1, with the total spin S preserved (AS = 0) are \2 TTI.
(5)
allowed. These transitions, shown by arrows in Fig. 6, increase - 2 \ h)
the population—the SQi and SQ2 states which generate the
annihilation product: the excited molecule which emits the The coefficient a ^ 1 determines the relative variation in the
fluorescence. yield y if the multiplicity of the pair is completely changed.
The mw-stimulated spectrum of the triplet exciton At resonance (Ho = H )
Tes
pair detected by the prompt fluorescence of the tetracene
molecule in a tetracene single crystal is shown in Fig. 7 for Ay ,2
(6)
where co\ = (gn^Hx/h). It is easily seen that for pairs with a
lifetime T = 5 x 10~9sa value of Ay/y of about 1% is achieved
for H\ = 1 G at a = 1. The very high sensitivity of the
RYDMR technique is strikingly illustrated for the aromatic ion-
radical pairs in liquids. They are generated at the rate of
2 x 108 s-1, and have a lifetime of 10~7 s,12 and hence the
average concentration of the radical pairs available for detection
by fluorescence intensity measurements is about 20 per sample,
i. e. well below the sensitivity limit of modern ESR spectroscopy
(~ 1011 spins per sample).12
The RYDMR spectra can be detected also by the optical
absorption of triplet molecules produced by the pair-wise
coupling of ion-radicals along the triplet channel. These
molecules are usually sufficiently long-lived to be accumulated in
measurable amounts and monitored by the triplet—triplet
absorption of the probing light (in pulse excitation experiments,
in particular).
The dissociation of ion-radical or electron-hole pairs
produces free charge carriers in concentrations which are
susceptible to the mw pumping of the pairs. Therefore RYDMR
Figure 6. Energy level diagram of a triplet molecule pair: the Q levels are
pure quintet states, SQi and SQ2 are levels of mixed quintet - singlet states. spectra can be also recorded by monitoring the electric
Triplet-levels do not contribute to the spin transitions and are not shown conductivity both in crystals and in liquids.2 Similarly, the
in the diagram. The arrows indicate transitions which populate the dissociation of pairs of neutral radicals in solutions generates
mixed SQ states and the formation of a source of fluorescence (the free radicals. This process is spin-independent, but it competes
•S* molecules). with the spin-selective intrapair coupling, and therefore the yield
of free radicals which have escaped recombination should be as

--- Page 7 ---

Second generation of magnetic effects in chemical reactions 1079
sensitive to the mw pumping as the recombination itself (but, of The concept of the RIMIE was clearly formulated17 in 1981
course, in anti-phase). and experimentally embodied18 in 1991 in the photolysis of
RYDMR spectra detected by counting free radicals were dibenzyl ketone (DBK) in SDS micelles. The photolysing laser
first reported by Okazaki et al.,16 who studied the photo- pulses were synchronised with the mw pulses, and their lengths
reduction of menadione (MD, 2-methylnaphthoquinone) in were chosen so that the RP generated by short laser pulses were
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) micelles. The reaction includes the exposed to the mw pulse throughout their life time. The
removal of a hydrogen atom from the SDS molecule by the frequency of the mw irradiation was chosen to pump selectively
excited MD in triplet state: only the magnetic RPs [PhCH 2 13C(O)CH 2 Ph], while the non-
magnetic RPs [PhCH 12C(O)CH Ph] remained unperturbed by
2 2
-•coupling products the microwaves (see Scheme 1).
3MD + SDSC- (MDH SDS) The isotope enrichment S of dibenzyl ketone as a function of
-*• MDH + SDS chemical conversion is described by the expression
\nS= (l-a)ln(l-/*), (7)
Only SDS radicals are trapped by the added water-soluble
nitroso spin trap TNO (perdeuterodimethylnitrosobenzene where S = <5/<5o, <5o and <5 are respectively the 13C content in the
sulfonate) because the chemical reactivity of the spin trap starting ketone and in its residue after the chemical conversion of
towards the semiquinone radical MDH is negligibly low. The the 'magnetic' ketone PhCH 13C(O)CH Ph has reached the
2 2
yield of the stable spin adduct [the nitroxyl radical T(SDS)NO] value f*.4 The coefficient a is the efficiency of the isotope
measured by ESR was shown to decrease under mw-pumping separation (a one-step enrichment coefficient similar to that
(in keeping with the reaction scheme). Indeed, stimulating the introduced by Bernstein19 for the classical, mass-dependent
triplet-singlet conversion of the RP by resonant mw irradiation isotope effect).
induces chemical annihilation of the pair. As a result, the leakage The experimentally measured isotope enrichment 5 of DBK
of free radical out of the pair (and consequently the yield of spin as a function of 1 — /* in the parameters of Eqn (7) is shown in
adduct) decreases quite noticeably, as shown by Fig. 8. The Fig. 9. As can be seen the one-step enrichment coefficients
largest reduction in the yield reaches 8% for the photolysis of are different: for the photolysis in the presence of mw
protonated SDS micelles and about 14% if the photolysis a = 1.25 ± 0.01, while without mw pumping we have
mw
is carried out in deuterated micelles. The magnetic field ao = 1.21 ± 0.01. Thus the mw irradiation is found to increase
dependences of the mw-stimulated chemical response are in fact the isotope selectivity in the RP and the isotope enrichment of
RYDMR spectra detected by radical escape measurements. the recovered ketone.
The difference in their hyperfine structure confirms the difference
in isotopic composition of one of the RP partners: the SDS
lnS
radical, in which hydrogen nuclei are replaced by deuterons.
Yield of the product (%)
0.2
16 -
12
0.1
0.5 1.0 -In (I-/*)
Figure 9. Isotope enrichment S as a function of the chemical conversion
/* of 13C dibenzyl ketone in the coordinates of Eqn. (7):18 (7) with
microwave pumping (H\ = 4.5 G); (2) without pumping.
The net contribution of the mw pumping to the
336 338 340 342
recombination probability of the magnetic radical pair is about
6%. This value seems too small at first sight, but allowance
Figure 8. Dependence of the yield of the spin adduct under microwave should be made for the unfavourable experimental conditions.
pumping on the strength of the magnetic field H (or RYDMR spectra) for Firstly, the pumping of only one RP was carried out, which
the photolysis of menadione in SDS (1) and deutero-SDS micelles (2).16 reduces the efficiency of mw irradiation at least two-fold.
Secondly, the low amplitude of the mw pumping (H\ =0.3 mT)
corresponds to the characteristic time of the mw-induced
VI. Radio induced magnetic isotope effect electron spin flip (the time of equilibrating the populations of
T -To spin levels) T = (ytfi)"1 = 120 ns. It is much larger
± mw
As a means of resonant chemical reception of microwaves than the time interval between radical reencounters in the radical
RYDMR is nonselective because all the RPs are subjected to the pair (Tenc =136 ns), so that the pair has not enough time
mw perturbation. If the mw pumping is selective with respect to between reencounters to complete the mw-induced spin
magnetic nuclei it induces a new, Radio Induced Magnetic reorientation, and therefore the T -T transition. This
± o
Isotope Effect (RIMIE). The microwave irradiation of magnetic unfavourable relation (t > T ) is probably the main reason
mw enc
RPs should accelerate their spin conversion and stimulate their for the relatively low efficiency of the mw pumping in the isotope
pair-wise reactions (usually recombination), enhancing the selection. High amplitude microwave pumping would be
nuclear isotope selectivity induced by MIE of the first generation. desirable to bring T closer to T c in order to equilibrate the
mw en

--- Page 8 ---

1080 A L Buchachenko
populations of the T and To states of the radical pair before the The fundamental physics of the SNP phenomenon can
±
moment when the probing contact of the partners takes place. again be clearly exemplified by the spin processes in the
From this viewpoint the spin locking regime for the triplet radical pair [PhCH13C(O)CHPh], generated by the
2 2
nonmagnetic pairs (PhCH 13C(O)CH2Ph) is thought to be photolysis of DBK (Fig. 10). The ESR spectrum of the pair
2
favourable to the separation of isotopes, since it prevents their consists of a central group of lines (not shown in Fig. 10)
recombination and thus increases the efficiency of isotope which belong to the PhCH radical, and of a doublet from the
2
selection. A combination of the two regimes (spin locking for the PhCH13CO radical with hyperfine splitting a(13C). Since a(13C)
2
nonmagnetic pairs and stimulating microwave pumping for the is known to be positive, the low-field line of the doublet is
magnetic pairs) would be most efficient. attributed to the ensemble of RPs with 13C nuclei oriented with
In these experiments the ideal selectivity of mw pumping is the field (a spins on the lower Zeeman level), whereas the high-
m
achieved, because the ESR transitions of 'magnetic' and field line belongs to the ensemble with 13C nuclei oriented
'nonmagnetic' RP do not overlap and are separately accessible against the field (p , spins on the upper Zeeman level). The fast
B
to the pumping action. The radio induced magnetic isotope intersystem To—S conversion induced by the HFI equalises the
effect with partially selective pumping was observed by Okazaki populations of these two spin levels. The mw pumping of the
et al.20 even earlier (in 1988) in the photolysis of menadione in ESR transitions in the first ensemble of pairs at a frequency w
a
SDS micelles consisting of a mixture of protonated and of stimulates the T -To spin conversion and additionally
±
deuterated sulfonate molecules in a 1:1 ratio. The RYDMR populates the To states of the pairs with nuclear spins o causing
n
spectra of this system were detected from the yield of SDS acceleration of their recombination and the dominant formation
radicals (see Section V), taken up by the spin trap and measured of the DBK molecules with a. spins (the positive SNP). The mw
n
as nitroxyl radicals. The spectra are shown in Fig. 8: their pumping of the second RP ensemble with p\, nuclear spins at
overlap prevents the separate pumping of the isotopic forms of frequency coj selectively produces DBK molecules with 13C
the radical pairs, but even with joint, nonselective pumping the nuclei having p spins (the negative SNP). As a result the mw
M
yields of protonated and of deuterated SDS are markedly pumping transforms the ESR spectrum of the radical pair into
different.20 NMR spectrum of a molecule with polarised nuclei, or an SNP
spectrum of the absorption-emission, A/E type (Fig. 10,
absorption in the high-field component and emission in the low-
VII. Microwave stimulated nuclear polarisation
field component).
Stimulated Nuclear Polarisation (SNP) is the result of mw As a physical phenomenon SNP offers a powerful method of
pumping of ensembles of RPs with selected orientations of the investigating the chemical reaction mechanisms and of detecting
nuclear spins. It is similar to CIDNP, the only difference being their radical intermediates. This is clearly illustrated by the SNP
that in CIDNP the nuclear spin selection in the RPs via in the photolysis of deoxybenzoin PhCOCHPh in SDS
2
triplet-singlet conversion is accomplished by existing magnetic micelles.22 The quantum yield of its photolysis is very low: the
interactions characteristic of the radicals, whereas in SNP the products are formed in undetectable amounts. In the 13C CIDNP
selection is produced by the resonant microwave field. Again, the spectra no lines are produced by photolysis with the exception of
radical pair acts as a selective chemical microwave receiver, but a single line belonging to the carbonyl 13C nuclei of the starting
now the indicator of the reception is the nuclear polarisation in ketone. It shows strong emission and indicates reversible photo-
reaction products.21 chemical processes accompanied by the almost complete
In chemical reaction subjected to resonant (and therefore regeneration of the starting ketone, so that the reaction scheme is:
nuclear spin selective) mw pumping these two phenomena,
CIDNP and SNP, can coexist, so that the experimentally PhCOCHPh X,
2
measured NMR spectrum of the product molecules displays
both contributions. The experimental technique which can where X is the unknown intermediate responsible for the
distinguish between them by performing the pumping and the CIDNP of this ketone.
detection separately in time and space was developed by Sagdeev Tarasov and Bagryanskaya25 have studied the 13C SNP in
and his coworkers,26 the pioneers and leaders of SNP this system and interpreted the strong SNP spectra (Fig. 11) as a
studies.22"25 This technique eliminates the CIDNP contribution superposition of two doublets. The first (A/E, with a splitting
and measures the net nuclear polarisation, induced by mw of 120 G) has been attributed to the acyl radical Ph13CO,
pumping. whereas the second, a poorly resolved A/E doublet with a
smaller splitting (30 G), was attributed to the radical
PhCH 2 13C CH 2 Ph PhCH 2 I3CCH 2 Ph SNP intensity
O O 1000 r
_J L
I3C spin <*„ P,
frequency coa cu*
500 B o /G
ESR spectrum NMR spectrum
Figure 10. Development of SNP. The selective pumping of the ensemble of
radical pairs with a, and p orientations of the spins of 13C nuclei at
n -1000L
frequencies w and coj accelerates their triplet-singlet conversion and
a
transforms the ESR spectrum of the pair into the NMR spectrum of the
molecule produced by its recombination (the molecule inherits the nuclear Figure 11. SNP spectrum detected during the photolysis of deoxybenzoin
orientations of its precursor: the radical pair).2 in SDS micelles.25

--- Page 9 ---

Second generation of magnetic effects in chemical reactions 1081
SNP intensity SNP experiments the laser and mw pulses are separated by the
time delay id, and therefore TR SNP offers a new possibility of
1000 •»:si o Pt -Ph influencing the ensembles of RPs with lifetimes in selected time
domains but not shorter than the time resolution (about 30 ns in
T
the best experiments by Sagdeev and coworkers26-28).
-
800 The study of the photolysis of benzoyl peroxide in
. o °e CD 3 OD 26 is a good illustration of the application of TR SNP.
• o °o o The reaction is known to involve a sequence of singlet RPs,
600 - • o including the pair (PhCOPh) which contains a phenyl radical
• • O°Q (3 2 o not accessible by convent 2 ional ESR technique under standard
400 o CH 3 * • • 0 c S o N n P d it o i f o n o s p . p T o h s e it e S N si P gn s s p e fo c r t ra t h r e e c c o a r g d e e d ( p a h t e n id y l = b e 0 n z (F oa ig te . ) 1 3 a ) n d s ho th w e
Ph"" ' -C—Ph escape (benzene) products, in excellent agreement with the
200 - H reaction scheme and the SNP mechanism. However the TR SNP
1 • spectra taken with id > 50 ns are found to be completely
inverted for both products. This is because, in the time domain
n I of 50-200 ns, in which the inverted TR SNP spectra have been
200 400 //ns observed, the SNP is generated in the diffusional RPs such as
(PhPh) or (PhCDOD). The sign of the SNP in these pairs is the
2
same as in triplet RP. At times id < 50 ns the SNP is completely
Figure 12. Kinetic behaviour of radical pairs generated by the photo-
attributed to the geminal RP (PhCO Ph) in the singlet state.
dissociation (/) and photoreduction (2) of deoxybenzoin in SDS 2
micelles.25 The phase inversion as a function of id is shown in Fig. 13b: two
time domains corresponding to SNP in geminal and in
diffusional radical pair ensembles are clearly shown.
Ph13C(OH)CHPh, the primary product of the photoreduction A micelle (a microreactor with a boundary surface) confines
2
of the excited triplet ketone by the SDS molecule (RH). These the RP in a restricted volume. Hence the interradical exchange
SNP spectra suggest two competing paths for the photochemical energy J in micellised RP should be a function of the micelle size,
transformation of deoxybenzoin: photodissociation and photo- so that the SNP spectra, being sensitive to /, are in fact probes
reduction via two different intermediates X {the radical pairs which monitor the exchange energy in RP.
(PhCOCHPh)T and [PhC(OH)CHPh R]T respectively}. Both A convincing confirmation of this statement was given by
2 2
are highly reactive with respect to the ketone regeneration Tarasov et al.,29 who studied the photolysis of methyldeoxy-
reaction, though their kinetic behaviour (Fig. 12) is different: benzoin (99% 13C abundance in the carbonyl group) in micelles
the recombination is faster in the former than the dis- of varying size controlled by the number n of carbon atoms in
proportionation is in the latter.25 the detergent molecule CH3(CH)_iSO4Na. As expected the
2n
In stationary SNP detection the radical pairs are exposed to SNP spectra were strongly dependent on n and therefore on the
mw pumping throughout their lifetime. In time-resolved (TR) micelle size (Fig. 14). Both the line broadening and the decrease
in doublet splitting are evidence of an increase in / in the
SNP (arb. un.)
SNP (arb. un.)
n = 12
So/mT
n = 11
n = 9
o ° o o '
o o
50 100 150 T,,/ns n = 7
• • 1
45 49 53 57 61 63 B/mT
0
Figure 13. TR SNP spectra of phenyl benzoate (I) and benzene (2), Figure 14. 13C SNP spectra of the radical pair generated by photo-
detected by 13C NMR during the photolysis of benzoyl peroxide (a), and dissociation of deoxybenzoin in micelles of different size (n is the number
their phase inversion as a function of TJ (b).26 of carbon atoms in the detergent molecule).25

--- Page 10 ---

1082 A L Buchachenko
[Ph13CO CHMePh] RP as the miceUes become smaller. Only References
in SDS micelles (« = 12) / is negligibly small and the doublet
splitting corresponds to the hyperfine coupling constant 1. K M Salikhov, Yu N Molin, R Z Sagdeev, A L Buchachenko Spin
a(13C)in the PhCO radical (124 G). The doublet splitting and Polarisation and Magnetic Effects in Radical Reactions (Amsterdam:
the / values are given below:29 Elsevier, 1984)
2. A L Buchachenko, E L Frankevich Chemical Generation and
n a(13C)/mT //mT Reception of Electromagnetic Waves (New York: VCH Publ., 1993)
3. U E Steiner, T Ulrich Chem. Rev. 89 51 (1989)
12 12.4 <0.1 4. A L Buchachenko Progress in Reaction Kinetics 13 163 (1984)
11 12.0 0.5 5. Ya B Zel'dovich, A L Buchachenko, E L Frankevich Usp. Fiz. Nauk
9 10.0 3.4 155 3(1988)
8 8.4 8.0 6. A L Buchachenko, V F Tarasov Ace. Chem. Res. in press (1993)
7. I R Gould, N J Turro, M B Zimmt Adv. Phys. Org. Chem. 20 1
7 7.6 14.0
(1984)
8. Chemically Induced Magnetic Polarization (Eds A R Lepley,
This information is of value for constructing the potential
G L Closs) (London: Wiley, 1978)
energy surfaces of the interradical reactions and for calculating
9. A L Buchachenko Khimicheskaya Polyarizatsiya Elektronov i Yader
the spin dynamics and the magnetic effects more exactly.
(Chemical Polarisation of Electrons and Nuclei) (Moscow: Nauka,
The strategy of magnetically probing the exchange potential 1974)
(by SNP spectroscopy, in particular) along the reaction 10. E L Frankevich, A I Pristupa, V I Lesin Chem. Phys. Lett. (47) 304
coordinate of chemical bond formation or dissociation is an (1977)
important supplement to the transition state spectroscopy based 11. S I Kubarev, S V Sheberstov, A S Shustov Chem. Phys. Lett.
on the femtosecond time-resolved optical spectroscopy (73)370(1980)
developed by Zewail.30 The difference is that femtosecond 12. O A Anisimov, V M Grigoryants, V K Molchanov, Yu N Molin
spectroscopy probes the transition state at short interatomic Chem. Phys. Lett. (66) 265 (1979)
distances, where / > kT, whereas magnetic probing deals with 13. O A Anisimov, V M Grigoryants, Yu N Molin Pis'ma Zh. Eksp.
the long-distance exchange potential (J < kT). From this point Teor. Fiz. 30 589 (1979)
of view microwave magnetic probing can be treated as the radio 14. E L Frankevich, S I Kubarev Triplet State ODMR Spectroscopy
spectroscopy of the transition state (the analogue of Zewail's (Ed. R H Clarke) (New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1982) p. 138
transition state optical spectroscopy).31 15. E L Frankevich, A I Pristupa, V I Lesin Chem. Phys. Lett. (47) 304
(1977)
16. M Okazaki, S Sakata, R Konaka, T Shida J. Chem. Phys. 86 6792
VIE. Conclusion (1987)
17. A L Buchachenko, V F Tarasov Zh. Fiz. Khim. 55 1921 (1981)
Magnetic interactions (as a principal factor in the magnetic
18. V F Tarasov, E G Bagryanskaya, Yu A Grishin, R Z Sagdeev,
scenario of chemical reactions) regulate the spin dynamics and
A L Buchachenko Mendeleev Commun. 85 (1991)
control the spin multiplicity of the radical pairs (as well as the 19. R Bernstein /. Phys. Chem. 56 893 (1952)
pairs of other spin bearers), and therefore they also control their 20. M Okazaki, T Sakata, T Shida, R Konaka, K Toriyama J. Phys.
chemical reactivity. Electromagnetic fields influence the spin Chem. 92 1402 (1988)
dynamics as a new factor which plays new scenes and initiates 21. R Z Sagdeev, Yu N Molin, K M Salikhov, Yu A Grishin,
new phenomena: RYDMR, SNP, RIMIE, spin locking, A V Dushkin, A Z Gogolev Bull. Magn. Res. 2 66 (1980)
quantum beats (the latter is beyond the scope of this paper). 22. E G Bagryanskaya, Yu A Grishin, R Z Sagdeev, T V Leshina,
These remarkable magnetic effects of the second generation are N I Polyakov Chem. Phys. Lett. (117) 220 (1985)
schematically summarised in Scheme 2 as indicators of the 23. E G Bagryanskaya, Yu A Grishin, N A Avdievich, R Z Sagdeev,
chemical reception of radiowaves and microwaves. Yu N Molin Chem. Phys. Lett. (128) 162 (1986)
24. R Z Sagdeev, E G Bagryanskaya Pure Appl. Chem. 62 1547 (1990)
25. E G Bagryanskaya, R Z Sagdeev Progr. React. Kinetics 18 63 (1993)
Scheme 2
26. N A Avdievich, E G Bagryanskaya, Yu A Grishin, R Z Sagdeev
Chem. Phys. Lett. (155) 141 (1989)
! Microwave pumping
27. I V Koptyug, E G Bagryanskaya, Yu A Grishin, R Z Sagdeev
J. Chem. Phys. 145 375 (1990)
Chemical reaction 28. E G Bagryanskaya, Yu A Grishin, R Z Sagdeev Chem. Phys. Lett.
(128)417(1986)
I Microwave reception 29. V Tarasov, N Ghatlia, N Avdievich, I Shkrob, A Buchachenko,
N Turro /. Am. Chem. Soc. in press (1993)
30. A H Zewail Science 242 1645 (1988)
Yield of reaction products
31. A L Buchachenko, V F Tarasov, N G Ghatlia, N J Turro Chem.
Phys. Lett. (192) 139 (1992)
Phenomena Detection
RYDMR Luminescence
SNP Electric conductivity -
RIMIE Spin traps
Spin locking Isotopic composition -
Stimulated Orientation-
quantum beats of nuclear spins
The author is grateful to the readers of this review and hopes
that it will inspire them to use the achievements of electro-
magnetic spin chemistry. Financial support from the Russian
FFuunndd ffoorr FFuunnddaammeennttaall Research (grant 93-03-5227) is
gratefully acknowledged.