

--- Page 1 ---

BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF MAGNETIC FIELDS
S. Zannella
CISE SpA, Segrate (Milan), Italy
Abstract
The use of devices generating high magnetic fields in industrial
processes, energy production and storage, medical diagnostics, new
transport vehicles and large scale research facilities is expected to
expand significantly in the near future. Scientific and public interest
has focused recently on the biological effects and the potential health
risks associated with the exposure to magnetic fields. Over the last
twenty years several laboratory studies and epidemiological surveys
have been carried out in this field but no definite conclusions
concerning the related risks for personnel or general public have been
drawn. The aim of this article is to provide an overview of these
investigations together with an analysis of the well-established effects
of the interaction between static or ELF magnetic fields and living
matter. The international guidelines and standards for exposure to
magnetic fields are also reported and discussed.
1. INTRODUCTION
Magnetic fields are produced by electrical appliances, power lines, electromagnets and
everything that carries electric current. The level of magnetic fields at which humans may be
exposed has considerably increased over this last century. The exposure level is normally
limited for practical reasons. To work in places with appreciable magnetic fields would be
nearly unrealisable nowadays: computer disks may be erased, monitors would be distorted,
magnetic light objects may experience rotational or translational forces. A much more
important question regards the possible health risks associated to static and ELF magnetic
field exposure. The potential health effects of biomagnetic interactions have been under
discussion over the last twenty years and the debate is still open.
This article is a review of the known biological effects caused by the interaction
between magnetic fields and living matter together with a survey of the laboratory and
epidemiological studies described in the scientific literature. We focus our attention on static
and Extremely Low Frequency (below 3 kHz) magnetic fields. In the ELF range ionising
effects (when the energy carried by the field is so large that it can damage internal organs and
biologic molecules like DNA) do not play a role; usually also the thermal effects (due to
induced electric currents in the tissues) are negligible if we consider the typical magnetic field
strengths associated to common electrical equipment. Nevertheless, there are other ways in
which magnetic fields may interact with biological matter to produce biological changes.
Whether these changes can lead to health risks, in the long term, is still an open question. The
initiatives to establish guidelines and official standards for occupational or public exposure to
static and ELF magnetic fields will be described and discussed.

--- Page 2 ---

2. THE MAGNETIC FIELD
A magnetic field is a region of space that results from the motion of electric charges, it
is always associated with everything that carries electric current. The field may be pictured as
lines of force, also called flux lines: the direction of the field at any point is given by the
direction of the line in that point and its magnitude is proportional to the density of lines near
the point. Unlike electrostatic field lines, the flux lines are continuous without beginning and
end (this means that isolated magnetic poles do not exist). The magnetic field is described by
two vector quantities: the magnetic field strength
(cid:0)
H and the magnetic flux density
(cid:0)
B. These
two quantities are related by the relation
(cid:0) (cid:0)
B H (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2) . The constant of proportionality (cid:3) , the
magnetic permeability, depends on the medium and in the case of biological tissues is
assumed to be equal to the value of the permeability of free space (cid:3) = 4
0
(cid:4)
x 10-7 (T•m/A-1).
The magnetic flux density
(cid:5)
B may be defined in terms of the Lorentz force
(cid:5)
F acting on
a charge q that moves in a magnetic field with a velocity
(cid:5)
v [1]:
(cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:5)
F q v B (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:8) ( ) (1)
The unit of the magnetic field, in the SI system, is the tesla (T) while in the cgs system it is
the gauss (G) with 1 G = 10-4 T. The strength of the magnetic field decreases with the distance
from the source. In the approximation of a long wire carrying an electric current (valid for
small distances r compared to the straight portion of the wire) the magnitude of the field
varies as:
B=
(cid:9) I
0
2
(cid:10)
(2)
r
In the case of a dipole approximation (valid for example for field calculation at large distances
from coils carrying electric current) the field amplitude decays more rapidly as:
B (r,
(cid:11)
)
(cid:12)
(cid:13)
0
4
(cid:14)
m 1
3 r (cid:15)
2 3cos (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:18)
1
2 (3)
where m is the dipole magnetic moment of the coil and
(cid:19)
the angle with respect to the dipole
axis.
3. THE EARTHíS MAGNETIC FIELD
The geomagnetic field of the Earth is dipolar (the magnetic poles are not coincident with
the geographic poles) and varies at the surface from 26
(cid:20)
T near the equator to about 60
(cid:20)
T
near the poles. In the last centuries the dipole moment is continually decreasing and it is
assumed that it reverses every
(cid:21)
200,000 years. The magnetic field is maintained by the so
called geodynamo: the interaction of the already existing Earthís field with the molten iron of
the outer core, that flows around the solid inner core, induces an electric current just as in a
metallic wire that moves across a magnet. Once the electric current is established it generates

--- Page 3 ---

a self-perpetuating magnetic field that sustains the Earthís field. The forces driving the
conducting fluid arise from both the rotation of the Earth and heat.
4. ARTIFICIAL MAGNETIC FIELDS
The Earthís static magnetic field has roughly not exceeded 100
(cid:22)
T over the last 80
million years. The natural magnetic field consists also of time-varying components,
associated mainly with solar activity and thunderstorms, whose intensities vary from about 0.1
(cid:22)
T to 0.1 fT in the ELF range. Prolonged exposure to higher static and ELF fields is
nowadays an ordinary situation as shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Typical values of static and ELF magnetic flux densities associated with different
sources in homes, workplaces and public areas.
Field source Frequency Magnetic flux density
(Hz)
Offices, homes
Background 50/60 0.05–0.4
(cid:22)
T
Household appliances 50/60 0.01–0.5
(cid:22)
T at 1 m
0.1–30
(cid:22)
T at 0.3 m
Video displays 30–3,000 0.02–0.6
(cid:22)
T at 0.3 m
Research facilities (personnel areas)
Linear accelerator 0 0.1–5 mT
Bubble chamber 0 > 50 mT
MHD and fusion plants 0 1–50 mT
NMR 0 1–60 mT
Industries
Electrolytic processes 0, 50/60 1–10 mT
Aluminium production 0 1–10 mT / 60 mT
Electric and induction furnaces 1–10,000 1–50 mT
Welding machines 0, 50/60 0.2–10 mT
Security systems 0.1–10,000 up to 1 mT
Average exposure of workers 50/60 1
(cid:22)
T, electrical
0.17
(cid:22)
T, non electrical
Power systems
380 kV transmission lines 50/60 1–20
(cid:22)
T
15 kV distribution lines 50/60 0.05-0.4
(cid:22)
T
20 MWh S/C Magn. energy storage 0 0.5 T (max. accessible
(SMES) field)
10 mT at 300 m
Transportation
Magnetically-levitated trains 0 2–6 mT (head level)
(MAGLEV) 20–50 mT (floor level)

--- Page 4 ---

Subway 50/60 0.7–1 mT
Medicine
Magnetic resonance imaging 0 0.5–2 mT (operator)
(MRI) 2 T (patient)
Therapeutic devices 12–75 1–10 mT
Static fields of significant intensity are encountered mainly in industrial processes and
in large scale scientific facilities but may be experienced by the public in medical equipment
for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes and in new emerging technologies like magnetically-
levitated trains.
Exposure to ELF magnetic fields, essentially from 50/60 Hz sources, is an ordinary
situation. The magnetic field background level in homes (away from appliances and averaged
over time) ranges from 0.05
(cid:23)
T to 0.4
(cid:23)
T (based on a EPRI study of nearly 1000 homes) and
higher localised magnetic fields are present near household appliances. People living in the
proximity of power transmission lines, or workers in some industrial sites, may be exposed all
the time to magnetic fields higher than 1
(cid:23)
T. Levels of tens of
(cid:23)
T can occur for short periods
in certain working situations.
In the case of both static and ELF fields, ionising and thermal effects are negligible but
other mechanisms play a role. Scientists are investigating the effects of these magnetic
environments on humans. The well-established effects of the interaction between static or
ELF magnetic fields and living organisms may be divided into three main categories:
electrodynamical, magnetomechanical and induction of electric currents. The last one is
effective only for exposure to ELF magnetic fields or in the case of rapid motion in high static
fields.
5. INTERACTION MECHANISMS BETWEEN MAGNETIC FIELDS AND
BIOLOGIC SYSTEMS
5.1 Electrodynamic effects
A well-recognised effect of the interaction of magnetic fields with the cardiovascular
system is the change in electrocardiograms (ECG). Moving ionic charge carriers
(electrolytes) in the blood, when exposed to a magnetic field, are subjected to the Lorentz
force, reported in Eq. (1), that induces an electric potential
(cid:24)
given by:
(cid:25) (cid:26)
v
(cid:27)
B
(cid:27)
d
(cid:27)
sin
(cid:28)
(4)
where v is the velocity, d is the diameter of the artery and
(cid:29)
is the angle between the direction
of the blood flow and the magnetic field. This phenomenon is the basis of the Hall effect in
solid-state materials and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) power generation. For example, in a
man with a blood flow rate of 0.6 m/s and an aortic diameter of 0.025 m, the expected induced
potential is 15 mV/T [2]. These induced electric potentials have been observed by ECG on
mammalians exposed to magnetic field [3]. Clear typical modifications in the ECG signal are
visible in the T-wave region delimiting the opening and closing times of the aortic valve.
The experimental investigations confirmed that:

--- Page 5 ---

a) the magnetically induced alteration in the flow potential is generally well observed
above 0.1 T – 0.3 T (depending on body size);
b) the amplitude of the T-wave increases linearly with the field;
c) no changes in the arterial pressure are observed;
d) the effect is completely reversible without adverse effects and disappears instantly at the
end of the exposure.
The last consideration is important to underline that an observed change in a biologic
system, during field exposure, is not necessarily an evidence for adverse human health effects.
5.2 Magnetomechanical effects
5.2.1 Magnetic orientation
In a uniform magnetic field, both diamagnetic and magnetic substances, are subjected to
a torque that will tend to orientate them. In biological systems, there are several examples of
orientation in strong static fields. Diamagnetic macromolecules undergo a magneto-
orientation owing to the anisotropy in their magnetic susceptibility along the different axes of
rotational symmetry. These molecules, generally with a rod-like shape, will tend to rotate in
order to achieve a minimum energy configuration. The degree of alignment
(cid:30)
is usually very
small; however for stacked assemblies of N macromolecular with parallel rotational axes,
(cid:30)
is
increased of a factor N, giving rise to large effects. Observed examples, by in-vitro studies, of
nearly complete magnetic alignment in static fields of 0.5 T – 2 T, are the outer segments of
retinal rods [4] and cells containing chloroplasts [5]. Also sickled red blood cells have been
observed to orient perpendicular to magnetic fields of 0.2 T to 0.5 T [5, 6]. Both these effects
happen at field strengths used in MR imaging systems and may be important for safety
considerations. However, the magnitude of the response is small and probably does not result
in any detectable clinical consequences in humans.
Also some gel-like tissues, such as the vitreous fluid of the eye and the synovial fluid of
the skeletal joints, may be affected by exposure to magnetic fields. The gelation temperature
of aqueous 1.4 % agarose solutions, similar to these biologic fluids, showed an increase as a
function of the magnetic field strength [7].
There are some interesting cases of orientations of living organisms that synthesise
organic chain structures, containing magnetite (FeO) crystals with a net permanent magnetic
3 4
moment, called magnetosomes. It was discovered that these magnetosomes influence the
direction of motion of magnetotactic bacteria. They align themselves with the Earthís
magnetic field lines and swim toward the north and downward (due to the vertical component
of the geomagnetic field) in the northern hemisphere and to the south and downward in the
southern hemisphere. This motion allows them to survive in the oxygen-poor mud of their
aquatic environments.
There is also experimental evidence that the Earthís magnetic field influences the
geomagnetic orientation and navigation of some migratory (such as some species of salmons)
and elasmobranch (such as sharks, skates and rays) fish, migratory bird species, homing
pigeons, monarch butterflies and honeybees (during their waggle dances) [8, 9].
5.2.2 Magnetic translation

--- Page 6 ---

Ferromagnetic and paramagnetic materials exposed to a magnetic field gradient are
subjected to a magnetomechanical force (that tends to move them along the gradient direction)
given by:
dB
F V B
dx
(cid:31)
"
!
(5)
0
where V is the volume of the magnetic substance and
!
the magnetic susceptibility. Owing to
the limited amount of magnetic substances in most living beings, the influence of this effect
on biological functions is negligible.
Important safety considerations concern the possible displacement of metal implants
and prosthesis that may experience significant forces and torques in strong magnetic field
gradients.
5.3 Electric currents induction
Time-varying magnetic fields induce electric currents in biological systems that may be
evaluated by the Faraday law of induction. In the case of sinusoidal fields with amplitude B
o
and frequency f, the magnitude of the induced current density is given by:
J
# $ %
r
%
f
% & ’
B (4)
o
The proportionality of the induced currents on loop radius r and tissue electrical conductivity
( has important consequences for biological systems. A fixed time-varying field may induce
notable currents at the macroscopic level but much smaller ones at the cellular level. These
currents are usually smaller than those naturally produced by the brain, nerves and heart.
5.3.1 Magnetophospenes
A well known biological effect of ELF magnetic field is the induction of visual
sensations (flickering white light in the eyes), called magnetophosphenes, when exposed to
fields having frequency in the range 10–100 Hz and amplitude above 10–100 mT [3].
Magnetophosphenes have been found to occur also in strong magnetic field during movement
of the head and in transient fields during energising or deenergising of high-field magnets.
This effect was first described by díArsonval in 1896 [10] and the possible explanation was
reported by Lövsund [11]. The maximum sensitivity is at 20 Hz where the flashes are
synchronised with the field.
Other biological effects of circulating currents in the body are: bone healing, nerve
stimulation, electroshock anaesthesia (therapy) and heart fibrillation. They may be classified
on the basis of threshold values of the induced current densities [12] as shown in Table 2.
Table 2
Threshold values of ELF induced current densities for producing biological effects

--- Page 7 ---

Induced current density Effects
(mA/m2)
< 1 Same order of naturally flowing biocurrents, no effects.
1–10 Minor biological effects.
10–100 Magnetophospenes, bone fracture healing, possible nervous
system effects.
100–1000 Influence on neuron excitability; stimulation threshold for
sensory receptors, nerve and muscle cells with possible health
hazards.
> 1000 Possibility of ventricular fibrillation, continuous muscle
contraction; definite health hazards.
Owing to differences in biologic matter conductivities and unknown current loops, the
calculation of induced currents is rather complicated. However, using cautious assumptions,
an estimation of the threshold magnetic field values for the different effects may be made as
reported in Ref. [12]. These estimated values give an idea of the ELF magnetic fields that
should not produce biological effects but may not be used as safe limit values.
6. LABORATORY STUDIES
Several kinds of biological effects have been reported in studies of exposure to magnetic
fields by animal experimentation and by work with cell cultures, trying also to find biological
evidence of adverse health effects. It is not possible to report here on the extensive literature
existing on this topic [13]. Some of the results (change in functions of cells and tissues,
decrease in the hormone melatonin, alterations of immune system, accelerated tumour growth,
changes in brain activity and heart rate) were obtained with field levels that are orders of
magnitude larger than fields involved in ordinary cases. Some effects on cell cultures due to
ELF low fields of a few
)
T and less than 100
)
T were also reported [14].
Laboratory studies confirmed, as shown above, no biological effects for induced
currents lower than 10 mA/m2. In the case of exposure to static fields, the reported studies for
fields lower than 2 T seem to indicate the absence of irreversible effects on the main
biological functions.
These results should be treated, in any case, with great attention because the human
organism has many compensating mechanisms that may modify the effects observed in cell
cultures.
Some researchers also reported data on biodetection of high static magnetic fields or
gradients. In one experiment [15], rats avoided systematically to enter into regions where the
field strength was 4 T and the gradient was up to 13 T/m. These findings were not observed
at 1.5 T.
7. EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES

--- Page 8 ---

Although animal experiments, cell culture studies and computer models provide useful
data, most researchers agree that potentially adverse health effects of static or ELF magnetic
fields may be provided by studies of human population that are ordinary exposed to magnetic
fields in residential or working areas. These observational studies, called epidemiologic, may
show associations that could point out an increased risk of disease associated with some
environmental factors. They already allowed the important risk factors for cancer to be
identified as cigarette smoke (relative risk of 10 for lung cancer) and benzene. In several
cases, scientists cannot be sure whether the association is one of cause and effect or if the
increased risk may be related to other factors.
This methodology requires carefully consideration because a positive association
between a disease and exposure is not necessarily a definite proof especially when the risk is
small. To judge if the increased incidence of risk is real other correlation criteria must be
considered such as consistency with other studies involving different methods and population,
dose-response relationships (increasing exposure levels should correspond to higher disease
rates), plausible biological explanation supported by laboratory results, reliability of
information.
Several epidemiologic surveys on the possible health risks associated with static and
ELF magnetic field exposure have been carried out over the last 20 years, principally on 50/60
Hz fields, but none of them has definitively convinced the legislators.
Table 3 reports a review of epidemiological studies of occupational and residential
exposure to static and ELF magnetic fields. These studies examined mainly electrical workers
that are ordinarily more exposed to ELF magnetic (mean exposure of about 1
*
T against 0.2
*
T of workers in other job categories). The doses of field exposure in the first surveys were
based only on job titles and not on actual measurements fields.
Some epidemiologic residential and occupational studies have suggested a weak relation
with a few types of cancer in humans, particularly leukaemia in children as well as brain and
breast cancer in adults, while others reported no consistent evidence of relations between
magnetic field exposure and any type of cancer. Moreover, the studies reporting a positive
association are not quite concordant and do not agree upon the forms of cancer. Considering
three recent studies we may observe in fact some controversial conclusions. The first one,
conducted by the Swedish National Institute of Working Life, one of the largest studies
involving a broad range of industries and occupations [24], found an association with chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia and an increased risk for brain cancer for men exposed to an average
field of more than 0.2
*
T. The second one, conducted by Canadian and French researchers on
223,292 electric utility workers, between 1979 and 1989, found a relative risk of 3 to contract
acute myeloid leukaemia [17]. The last study, the most recent one, conducted in North
Carolina, and involving 139,000 US utility workers found no association with both types of
leukaemia but supported an association with brain cancer [23].
A noteworthy survey has been conducted in Sweden on people living near high-voltage
transmission lines [25]. This study, highly exposed in the media and government circles,
suggested for the first time a dose/response relationship, although it was based on a small
number of cases. The risk to contract childlike leukaemia was found to be 2.7 times higher
for magnetic fields exposure of 0.2
*
T and 3.8 times for fields above 0.3
*
T. There were no

--- Page 9 ---

Table 3
Epidemiological studies of occupational and
residential exposure to static and ELF magnetic fields
Human population Average exposure Reported risks
Static magnetic fields
Soviet workers in permanent 2–5 mT at hands Subjective and minor physiological
magnet production 0.3–0.5 mT at head effects [16]
(645 exposed people)
US workers in aluminium No field values reported Increased risk of all classes of
plants leukaemia [17]
High-energy accelerator labs, Up to 2 T No increased risk for 19 common
bubble chambers, high-field diseases including cancers [18]
magnet facilities (792 controls)
50/60 Hz magnetic fields
US workers Field exposures based on Increased risk of acute myeloid
438,000 death records job title leukaemia [19]
US workers Field exposures based on Higher incidence of brain cancer, but
death data from 16 States job title not leukaemia [20]
US electric utility workers Field exposures estimated No detection of risks for any type of
(36,000 people) on measurements in the cancer [21]
workplace
Canadian and French electric Field exposures estimated Relative risk of acute myeloid
utility workers on measurements in the leukaemia among workers with higher
(223,292 people) workplace cumulative exposure [22]
US electric utility workers Field exposures estimated No association between occupational
(138,000 people) on measurements in the exposure and leukaemia but link to
workplace brain cancer [23]
1015 different workplaces in Field exposures estimated Increased risk for chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia. Increase risk for brain
Sweden involving 169 on measurements in the
tumours for age under 40 and average
occupations workplace
field above 2
+
T [24].
Swedish report on people Field exposures estimated Childlike leukaemia risk 2.7 times
higher for exposure of 0.2
living near high voltage on measurements in the
transmission lines residential areas.
+
T and 3.8
above 0.3
+
T [25].
elevated risks for other types of cancer. The relative risk values are closer to the border line
of statistical significance and the value of 0.2
+
T distinguishing exposed and unexposed
people may not provide, from current knowledge, a sufficient basis for setting threshold
exposure limits of such low intensity.
On the contrary, a recent survey on 36,000 electric utility workers reported no strong
consistent evidence of association between magnetic fields and any type of cancer [23].
As already mentioned above, different studies disagree in important ways both on the
value of excess risk associated with magnetic exposure and on the type of disease.

--- Page 10 ---

So far there is no laboratory evidence for health effects at the field values considered in
these studies. If some effects occur, they are likely to be so weak that the body is almost able
to compensate, making them very hard to study.
8. STATIC AND ELF MAGNETIC FIELD EXPOSURE GUIDELINES AND
PROTECTIVE MEASURES
Currently available information has not confirmed evident and reproducible adverse
health effects in order to clearly indicate safe limit values and durations for magnetic field
exposure. There are several initiatives to establish official standards for occupational and
public exposure to static and ELF magnetic fields. Some governments, being unable to
determine standards with the support of the scientific knowledge, defined limit values based
on what is technologically achievable and not on medical or epidemiological studies.
Most of the guidelines reported in Table 4 have not been issued by authoritative laws
but have been defined by international institutions as recommended limit values.
Table 4
Limit values for occupational and public exposure to static and ELF magnetic fields.
(These reference values are not intended as a threshold to a dangerous level.)
Static magnetic fields
SLAC CERN CENELEC ACGIH
TC 111
Working day/whole body 20 mT 200 mT 200 mT 60 mT
Working day/limbs 200 mT 600 mT
Short/whole body 200 mT 2 T 2 T
Short/limbs 2 T 5 T 5 T 2 T
General public/whole body 10 mT 40 mT
General public/limbs 100 mT
Persons with pace-maker 0.5 mT 0.5 mT 0.5 mT
(or large metal implants)
Average Earth's field 50
,
T
ELF magnetic fields
CENELEC TC ACGIH ICNIRP Regulations
111 (50/60 Hz) for transmission
lines (50/60 Hz)
Day/whole 80/f 60/f 0.5 mT 100
body 1.6 mT at 1.2 mT at 5 mT (short) Italy
50 Hz 50 Hz
,
T
1 mT
(short)
Day/limbs 1250/f 300/f 25 mT Florida 15
,
T

--- Page 11 ---

25 mT at 50 6 mT at
Hz 50 Hz
General public/ 32/f 0.1 mT New 20
whole body 0.64 mT at 1 mT (short) York
50 Hz
-
T
General public/ 500/f
limbs 10 mT at 50
Hz
People with 0.1 mT
pacemaker
Background 0.1
field
-
T
In Europe, a prestandard was approved in late 1994 by the Technical Committee
CENELEC TC111 ìElectromagnetic fields in the human environmentî. This prestandard,
whose validity is limited initially to three years, is divided into two parts dedicated
respectively to occupational and public exposure to low frequency (0–10 kHz) and high
frequency (10 kHz – 300 Ghz) electromagnetic fields [26]. It was issued for provisional
application and may be modified, before conversion to a standard, on the basis of new
scientific findings and experience gained during its application.
Presently there are no federal standards in the United States but the Federal Energy
Policy Act established in 1994 a five-year program, known as EMF RAPID program (Electric
and Magnetic Fields Research and Public Information Dissemination), managed by DoE and
the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. This program should explore the
potential relevance of EMF exposure for possible health effects.
Among the most important international organisations that developed exposure
guidelines should be mentioned: the International Commission on Non-Ionising Radiation
Protection (ICNIRP) [27], the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) [28] and
the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) [29]. The first
widely used guidelines for researchers working with high magnetic fields were formulated by
the Stanford Linear Accelerator Laboratory (SLAC).
Some studies [24, 25] reported possible long-term effects on health associated with
magnetic field strengths lower than those specified in Table 4. However, as already
mentioned above, they do not prove indisputably that harmful risks exist and are not
supported by evident scientific confirmations. Consequently there are no sufficient bases for
setting threshold exposure limits of such low intensities.
The American Physical Society (APS) issued a bulletin in 1995 on this subject reporting
that both the scientific literature and reviews by other panels show no consistent and
significant links between cancer and ordinary ELF magnetic fields.
On the basis of extensive laboratory studies, various other significant biological
processes do not seem to be influenced significantly by static magnetic fields up to 1–2 T.
These processes include: cell growth and morphology, DNA structure, reproduction,
physiological regulation and circadian rhythms [30].

--- Page 12 ---

8.1 Pacemakers and implanted metal objects
Low intensity magnetic fields may be considered to be safe from the biological point of
view but may cause problems to people with pacemakers. The majority of pacemakers
implanted today are synchronous and are activated only when the heart rate, continuously
monitored, falls below a preset level. Incorporated in the pacemaker is usually a reed relay
that activates fixed-frequency pulses and is helpful for the physician to test the correct
working of the apparatus. It was found that certain types of cardiac pacemakers in the
presence of static fields, above 0.5–1.5 mT, may reverse into this fixed-rate mode (called
asynchronous mode). This circumstance is potentially hazardous and may lead to fibrillation
owing to the competitive pacing between the natural heart rate and the rate stimulated by the
pacemakers [31]. Also time-varying magnetic fields, in excess of 0.1–0.4 mT, may alter the
pacemaker functioning, by inducing voltages that may be recognised as cardiac signals.
Since magnetic fields decrease as the distance from the source increases, the best
protective measure, when the magnetic field is higher than these limit values, is a separation
distance. In any case warning signs for people with cardiac pacemakers or metal implants and
prosthesis (that may experience significant forces and torques) must be displayed in accessible
places where magnetic fields are above 0.5 mT.
9. CONCLUSIONS
There is controversy on the possible health effects of static and ELF magnetic fields on
humans [32]. It is difficult to prove indisputably whether harmful risks exist or not.
Although the potentially exposed population is large, the risks, if any, appear to be small and
limited to specific situations. But, in any case, it is better to keep the public exposure well
below the limit values. A valuable support may come from the new technologies that, if duly
stimulated, may solve problems in ways that are compatible with the environment. There are
already examples, in other sectors, pointing out how high-technology companies are able to
find alternatives in a short time to comply with new regulations.
Most of the public attention is now focused on ELF fields, associated to high voltage
transmission lines but studies on the effects of static fields are also expanding after the large
diffusion of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) systems employing static magnetic fields up
to 2 T. Static fields are expected to attract much more attention when high magnetic field
technologies, based mostly on superconductors, like superconducting magnetic energy storage
plants (SMES), thermonuclear fusion reactors and magnetically levitated trains (MAGLEV),
begin to spread.
REFERENCES
[1] I.S. Grant, W.R. Phillips, Electromagnetism, John Wiley & Sons (1990).
[2] P. Mansfield, P.G. Morris, Biomagnetic effects, (New York, Academic Press), Suppl. 2
(1982) 247-252.

--- Page 13 ---

[3] T.S. Tenford, CRC Handbook of Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields, C. Polk
and E. Postow, eds., CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (1986) 197-225.
[4] F.T. Hong, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 58 (1977) 471-497.
[5] M. Murayama, Nature 206 (1965) 420-422.
[6] C. Ribeiro, et al., Biophys. Journ. 36 (1981) 443-447.
[7] D.R. Kalkwarf, J.C. Langford, Biological Effects of Extremely Low Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields, R.D. Phillips et al. eds., CONF-781016 NTIS, Springfield,
Virginia (1979) 408-416
[8] J. L. Kirschvink, D.S. Jones, Magnetite Biominaralization and Magnetoreception in
Organisms, Plenum Press, New York (1985) 609-610.
[ 9] R.B. Frankel, CRC Handbook of Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields, C. Polk
and E. Postow, eds., CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (1986) 169-196.
[10] M.A. díArsonval, CR Seance Soc. Biol. Ses. Fil. 3 (1896) 451.
[11] P. Lövsund, P.A. Öberg, S.E.G. Nilsson, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 18 (1980)
758-764.
[12] Environmental Health Criteria 69, Magnetic Fields, WHO (1987).
[13] N.J. Simon, Biological effects of static magnetic fields, MS Publications (1992)
[14] T.S. Tenford, Bioelectrochemistry and Bioenergetics 25 (1991) 1-17.
[15] J. Weiss et al., Magnetic Resonance Imaging 10 (4) (1992) 689-694.
[16] A. M. Vyalov, Influence of magnetic fields on biological objects, Springfield, Virginia
National Technical Information Service (1974) 163-174.
[17] S. Milham, Jr, Environ. Health Perspect. 62 (1985) 297-300.
[18] T.F. Budinger et al., 3rd Annual Meeting of Society for Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine, New York, August 4-6, 1984.
[19] S. Milham, Jr, New England J. Med. 307 (4) (1982) 249.
[20] D.P. Loomis, D. A. Savitz, British J. Industr. Med. 47 (1990) 633.
[21] J.D. Sahl, M.A. Kalsh, S. Greenland, Epidemiol. 4 (1993) 104-114.

--- Page 14 ---

[22] Theriault et al., Am. Journal Epidemiol. 139 (1994) 550.
[23] D.A. Savitz, D.P. Loomis, Am. Journal Epidemiol. 141 (2) (1995) 123-134.
[24] B. Floderus et al., Cancer Causes and Control 4 (1993) 465-476.
[25] M. Feychting, A. Ahlbom, Am. J. Epidemiol. 138 (1993) 467-481.
[26] European Prestandard ìHuman Exposure To Electromagnetics Fields – Low Frequency
(0–10 kHz), ENV 50166-1, and High Frequency (10 kHz – 300 Ghz), ENV 50166-2,
CENELEC 1995.
[27] International Commission on Non-Ionising Radiation Protection (ICNIRP), 1994.
[28] Safety Guide for Experiments – Part I, 5.4.5 CERN (1995).
[29] ìThreshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents - Biological
Exposure Indicesî, American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists
(ACGIH), pp. 113-120, 1996.
[30] T.S. Tenford, T.F. Budinger, NMR in Medicine: instrumentation and clinical
applications, New York (1986) 493-548.
[31] W. Pavlicek et al., Radiology 147 (1983) 149-153.
[32] R. Conti, P. Nicolini, et al., Alta Frequenza, Focus on Biological Effects of
Electromagnetic Fields and Safety Standards LVIII (4) (1989) 395-402.