

--- Page 1 ---

+ +
18292 J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 18292-18299
FEATURE ARTICLE
Spin Catalysis of Chemical Reactions
A. L. Buchachenko*,† and V. L. Berdinsky‡
Institute of Chemical Physics, Moscow 117334, Russia, and Institute of Chemical Physics in ChernogoloVka,
Moscow Region 142432, Russia
ReceiVed:April 3, 1996; In Final Form:August 22, 1996X
Thespincatalysisofchemicalreactionsisaphysicalphenomenonofspintransformationofchemicallyreactive
speciesinducedbytheexchangeinteractionofthesespecieswithexternalspincarriers. Itmanifestsitselfin
the radical pair recombination, cis-trans isomerization of molecules with double bonds, recombination of
spin-polarizedandspin-alignedhydrogenatomsatcryogenictemperatures,etc. Thetheoryandquantitative
kineticsofspincatalysisinthree-andfour-spinsystemsareconsidered. Quantitativehierarchyofspincarriers
with respect to their spin catalytic efficiency is discussed.
Introduction SCHEME 1: Spin Chemistry. General Scheme
Spin chemistry as a new field of modern chemistry is
concerned with electron and nuclear spins and with their
behaviorinchemicalreactions. Itisbasedonthefundamental
principle: chemical reactions are allowed only for such spin
statesoftheproductswhosetotalelectronspinisidenticalwith
thatofthereagentsandareforbiddeniftheyrequireachange
of spin.1-3 The conservation of the total spin in chemical
reactions results in electron and nuclear spin selectivity and
differentiationofthechemicalreactivityofreagentspinstates.
Allphenomenainspinchemistrymaybeexemplifiedbythe Spin Catalysis: Experimental Evidence
radicalpair,whichplaysinspinchemistryakeyrolesimilarto
Thefirstdirectexperimentaldemonstrationofspincatalysis
thatofthehydrogenmoleculeinquantumchemistry. Interac-
by radicals has been obtained in the photolysis of d,l-2,4-
tions of three types are able to change the electron spin and
diphenylpentan-3-one (DPP) in the presence of the stable
transform the spin forbidden, nonreactive triplet spin states of
nitroxideradicalTEMPO,whichisknowntobeaverypowerful
theradicalpairintothespin-allowed,chemicallyreactivesinglet
scavenger of carbon-centered radicals.11
state or Vice Versa (Scheme 1). Magnetic interactions of the
Therecombinationprobability,P,ofthetripletsec-phenethyl/
r
electronspinwithnuclearspinsandwiththtexternalmagnetic
sec-phenethylacylradicalpairgeneratedinthephotolysisofDPP
field, Fermi and Zeeman interactions, are the sources of the byNorrishR-cleavageinbenzenewasunexpectedlyshownto
magnetic effects of the first generation: MFE, magnetic field increase3-foldastheconcentrationofTEMPOincreasesfrom
effect;4 MIE, magnetic isotope effect;5 CIDNP, chemically
0 to 0.15 M. The dependence of P on the concentration of
r
induced dynamic nuclear polarization;6 CIDEP, chemically TEMPO is shown in Figure 1.
induced electron spin polarization.7 Resonant microwaves Theseresultscontrastwiththeobservationthattheaddition
produce the spin conversion of the radical pair and stimulate of diamagnetic scavengers, such as dodecanethiol, decreases
the magnetic effects of the second generation: RYDMR, the recombination probability P and demonstrate that a
r
reaction yield detected magnetic resonance;8 RIMIE, radio- paramagnetic scaVenger catalyzes the radical recombination
induced magnetic isotope effect;9 SNP, stimulated nuclear exhibitinganontraditionalspincatalyticeffect. Whatiseven
polarization.10 Lastly,exchangeinteractionoftheradicalpair moreimpressiveisthatthecatalyticeffectdominatesoverthe
electron spins with the electron spin of a foreign spin carrier traditionalscavengingfunctionofnitroxides. Thisisthereason
(radical,ion,paramagneticmolecule,etc.)provokesthemagnetic thatthisnewphenomenonwasatfirstdefinedasanantiscaV-
effect of the third generation: SC, spin catalysis (see Scheme enging effect.11
1). The remarkable feature of this magnetic phenomenon is This amazing inversion, transformation of the radical scav-
that the spin transformation of the radical pair is induced by engerintotheradicalcatalyzer,istheresultofthecompetition
nonmagneticexchangeinteraction. Thepurposeofthepresent oftwoprocesses: thechemicalscavengingofgeminateradicals,
paperistopresentanoverviewofthechemicalmanifestations partners of the triplet radical pair, by nitroxide and the spin
and physics of this new phenomenon in spin chemistry. exchangebetweengeminateradicalsandnitroxide. Theformer
is expected to decrease P; the latter stimulates triplet-singlet
r
conversion of the radical pair and, consequently, increases P.
†InstituteofChemicalPhysics. r
Bothprocessesoccurinaradicaltriadconsistingofaradical
‡InstituteofChemicalPhysicsinChernogolovka.
XAbstractpublishedinAdVanceACSAbstracts,October1,1996. pair and a third radical. The average exchange distance was
S0022-3654(96)01008-8 CCC: $12.00 © 1996 American Chemical Society
+ +
.)CTU(
65:81:10
ta
5202
,92
rebotcO
no
YGOLONHCET
FO
TSNI
STTESUHCASSAM
aiv
dedaolnwoD
.selcitra
dehsilbup
erahs
yletamitigel
ot
woh
no
snoitpo
rof
senilediuggnirahs/gro.sca.sbup//:sptth
eeS

--- Page 2 ---

+ +
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem., Vol. 100, No. 47, 1996 18293
SCHEME 2: Nitroxide Biradicals with Spin Catalytic
Function
Figure 1. of the recombination probability P of the triplet sec-
phenethylacylradicalpairgeneratedbyphotolysisofd,l-DPPinbenzene
asafunctionof2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl(TEMPO)radical
concentration.11
experimentally found to be 2-3 times larger than the hard-
TABLE1: Valuesofk /k fortheReactionofBiradicals
sphere encounter distance so that the exchange interaction in B M
withtheCyanoisopropylRadicalCH(CH)CNat60(cid:176) Cand
thetriadmakesspinconversionintheradicalpairatdistances thesec-PhenethylRadicalCH(CH)Phat 3 8 2 0(cid:176) C
3
much larger than that of hard-sphere chemically reactive
CH(CH)CN CH(CH)Ph
encounters.12 Thisiswhythespincatalyticfunctionofthethird 32 3
radical in a triad dominates over the chemical scavenging. biradical dioxane ethylbenzene dioxane ethylbenzene
The kinetic evidence of the spin catalytic effect in the I 1.1 1.2
recombination of carbon-centered radicals with nitroxide bi- II 1.5 1.5
radicals was reported by Buchachenko et al.13 The reaction III 1.1
IV 1.3 1.4 1.3
schemeofscavengingalkylradicalsbythenitroxidebiradical
V 1.2 1.3
includes two subsequent reactions
VI 1.3 1.0
B+R9 2k B8 M only25%oftheencounterpairsarespinallowedtorecombine.
However, the exchange interaction of the second biradical
k terminus with radical partners in the reactive encounter pair
M+R9M8stableproduct
induces triplet-singlet conversion in the pair and opens an
additionalrecombinationchannelthatisabsentinthereaction
whichimpliesthefirstadditionofalkylradicalRtooneofthe
of a nitroxide monoradical with an alkyl radical.
biradical termini, which transforms biradical B into a mono-
Spincatalysisbyparamagneticlanthanideionswasreported
radicalM. Thefollowingadditionofalkylradicaltonitroxide by Turro et al.14a in the photolysis of p-methyl-substituted
monoradicalMresultsultimatelyinadiamagneticproduct.This
dibenzyl ketone in SDS micelles:
reactionsequencewasconfirmedexperimentallybyESR: the
decay of biradicals was followed by the appearance of mono-
radicals,whichmanifestsitselfinthetransformationoftheESR
spectra of biradical to monoradical.
The rate constant k refers to one monoradical fragment of
B where A ) PhCH and B ) p-CH PhCH . The yield of the
thebiradicalsothatinordertocomparethechemicalreactivity 2 3 2
cage product AB, identified as a cage effect, was shown to
ofnitroxidemoietiesinbiradicalsandmonoradicals,weshould
increaseastheconcentrationoflanthanideionsincreases(Figure
appealtotherateconstantratiok /k ,whichcanbemeasured
B M
2). Thecageeffectreferstotherecombinationofthesecondary
experimentally.
radical pair of alkyl radicals A and B originating from the
These ratios for biradicals of varying chemical structure
primary radical pair by decarbonylation and is identical with
(Scheme 2) are summarized in Table 1.13
therecombinationprobabilityPofthispair. Aswillbeshown
Intuitively,theratiok /k isexpectedtobeequalto1,taking
B M
later,itistheSCeffectthatisresponsiblefortheincreasingP
into account only the chemical consideration. However, as is
seen from Table 1, in all cases k /k > 1, i.e., the chemical inthepresenceoflanthanideions(Figure2). Thesimilareffects
B M
oftheinfluenceoflanthanideionsontheradicalrecombination
reactivityofthenitroxideradicaltowardscavengingofthealkyl
were also recorded by other authors.14b-e
radical appears to depend on the presence of the second spin
withinthebiradicalmolecule. Thepresenceofthesecondspin
Three-Spin Model
accelerates the first recombination of a nitroxide fragment in
the biradical with an alkyl radical by 10-50% vs second Certainly, in radical triads all three radicals are participants
recombination. Therefore, the second radical terminus in the ofthechemicalevent,andthechemicalbehaviorofthetriadis
biradical cannot be considered as a passive spectator; it controlled by spin dynamics induced by pairwise exchange
stimulates the recombination reaction of the first radical interactions in a three-spin system.
terminus. As a model for testing three-spin dynamics, we consider a
Analysis of different plausible reasons (mechanistic, steric, radical triad (R , R , R ) in which one of the radical, R , is
1 2 3 3
chemical factors, spin statistics, etc.) for this effect leaves the supposedtobeaspincatalyzer,buttwoothers,R andR ,are
1 2
spin catalysis as the most probable concept. In the encounter treated as a radical pair born initially in the singlet or triplet
pair of the alkyl radical with one of the biradical termini the spinstate. TheradicalR isintheneighborhoodoftheradical
3
ratioofpopulationsofsingletandtripletspinstatesis1:3,i.e., pair(R ,R )andcoupleswithbothpartnersR andR physically
1 2 1 2
+ +

--- Page 3 ---

+ +
18294 J. Phys. Chem., Vol. 100, No. 47, 1996 Buchachenko and Berdinsky
Figure3. Spinstatesoftheradicaltriad(R,R,R).Dottedarrows
1 2 3
indicate the oscillations between doublet spin states induced by the
difference of the exchange energies ∆J ) J - J . They produce
13 23
triplet-singlet oscillatory time evolution of the selected radical pair
(R,R).
1 2
R) is the noncoherent mixture of triplet states exclusively.
j
Therefore, neither the geminate reaction R + R nor the
1 2
scavengingreactionsR +R andR +R occur. Thesequartet
1 3 2 3
triadsmaydisappearbydestructiononly,andtheyarenotthe
subject of spin catalysis. Only doublet states are exposed to
spin catalysis: the doublet-doublet spin evolution, which
conservesS )+1/2andS )-1/2,istheonlyfeasibledynamic
z z
spin process in the radical triad. The initial spin state of the
radical triad (R , R , R ) composed of the correlated radical
1 2 3
Figure 2. Dependence of the cage effect (CE) and recombination pair(R ,R )inSorTstatesandnonpolarizedradicalcatalyzer
1 2
probability P on the concentration of lanthanide ions.14 C is the ion
i R is not the eigenvector of the spin Hamiltonian (1); it is the
concentrationinmicellarsolution,C isthatinmicellarphase,and 3
mph coherent mixture of these eigenvectors. Therefore, this state
n istheaveragenumberofionsattachedtoanindividualmicelle.For
th i eEu3+,La3+,andLu3+ionsthesmalldependeneofCEandPonthe has to evolve obeying the Schro¨dinger’s equation. This spin
concentrationofionsisduetotheion-inducedchangeofthesizeand evolution is determined by the spin Hamiltonian (1) and is
structureofthemicelleratherthantothespincatalysis. governed by intratriad exchange interactions. The doublet-
doublet spin evolution of the radical triad (R , R , R ) is
1 2 3
orchemically. ThereactionproductR 1 R 2 ispresumablyformed inevitablyaccompaniedbyS-Tconversionoftheradicalpair
fromthepair(R ,R )inthesingletstate. Thisclaimhasbeen
1 2 (R , R ).
confirmed experimentally many times1-3 and is valid for any 1 2
The recombination rate of the radical pair (R , R ) is
1 2
radicalpair(R 1 ,R 2 ),(R 1 ,R 3 ),and(R 2 ,R 3 ). However,wewill proportional to the probability FT (t) of finding the pair in the
focusonthegenerationprobabilityofaselectedmoleculeR R SS
1 2 singletstate. FortheinitialtripletradicalpairFT (t)takesthe
in the triad (R , R , R ). SS
1 2 3 form15
When hyperfine and Zeeman energies are ignored, an
approximationthatisvalidforradicalswithoutmagneticnuclei
FT (t))(∆J/(2Ω))2sin2Ωt (3)
at zero magnetic field, the spin Hamiltonian H of the radical SS
triad can be written as
This is a fundamental equation that demonstrates that the
pH)-pJ (1/2+2S S )-pJ (1/2+2S S )- doublet-doublet evolution in the radical triad (R , R , R ) is
12 1 2 13 1 3 1 2 3
pJ (1/2+2S S ) (1) accompaniedbytheoscillatingS-Tconversionintheselected
23 2 3 radicalpair(R ,R ). Bothconjugatedprocesses,thedoublet-
1 2
where J are the pairwise exchange energies for the pairs of doublet evolution of the radical triad and the triplet-singlet
ij
radicals R and R (i * j) and S are the spin operators for the conversionoftheselectedradicalpair,keepthespinprojection
i j i
unpaired electrons of these radicals (i ) 1, 2, 3). S z ) +1/2 and S z ) -1/2 of the radical triad unchanged.
Theradicaltriadasathreeone-halfspinsystemischaracter- Therefore, the spin evolution in the radical triad, which
izedbyasetofeightspinfunctionsthatshouldbeeigenvectors conservesSandS z ,isequivalenttotheoscillatingmigrationor
ofthetotalspinoperatorS,whichisequaltoS)3/2(quartet “flowing”ofthepairspinstates(S,T,ortheirmixture)between
state) or S ) 1/2 (doublet states), and the spin projection the radical pairs, the components of the triad. The S-T
operatorS. ThequartetstatesS )(3/2,(1/2aredegenerate, evolution frequency Ω is determined by the combination of
z z
and their energy is -p(J + J + J ). The remaining four differences between the exchange energies of radical partners
12 13 23
states with the total spin S ) 1/2 are split into two groups of (eq 2), and the amplitude of oscillations is a function of the
doublets: twostateswithS z )+1/2andtwostateswithS z ) exchangeenergydifference∆J)J 13 -J 23 betweentheradical
-1/2(Figure3). TheirenergiesareindicatedinFigure3where catalyzerR 3 andradicalpartnersR 1 andR 2 oftheradicalpair.
Neitherdoublet-doubletevolutionofthetriadnorthesinglet-
Ω){(1/2)[(J -J )2+(J -J )2+(J -J )2]}1/2 (2) tripletconversionoftheselectedradicalpairareconceivableif
12 13 12 23 13 23
J ) J ; this is the case of the locked spin system.
13 23
Forthequartetstates,aswellasforanycompletelysymmetric Anasymmetricspinexchange(∆J*0)betweentheradical
state of highest multiplicity in multispin systems, any pair pair partners and the radical R can be similarly proved to
3
recombination is spin forbidden if it results in a diamagnetic determinethespinevolutionoftheinitiallysingletradicalpair
molecule. Forsuchradicaltriadsthespinstateofanypair(R, (R , R ). The probability for the pair to survive in a singlet
i 1 2
+ +

--- Page 4 ---

+ +
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem., Vol. 100, No. 47, 1996 18295
carbene, or metal ion, in principle is similar to that of three-
spin triads.
Sixteen spin states of the triad are split into three groups:
five states with total spin S ) 2, nine states with S ) 1, and
twostateswithS)0. Onlytripletstatesaresubjectedtospin
catalysis, i.e., their spin evolution is induced by the exchange
interaction. These nine states |S,Sæ are constructed of linear
z
combinationsoftheindividualspinfunctions|Srpæ ,|Trp æ ,|Scæ
0,(
and |Tc æ , where |Srpæ and |Trp æ describe singlet and triplet
0,( 0,(
statesoftheradicalpair,and|Scæ and|Tc æ refertosingletand
0,(
triplet states of the catalyzer C. Spin orientations in the triad
Figure4. Vectormodeldemonstratesthetriplet-singletconversion canbeeasilyimaginedfromthepresentationofspinvectorsof
oftheselectedradicalpair(R 1 ,R 2 ),inducedbyexchangeinteraction these nine states |S,S z æ : }
J intheradicaltriad(R,R,R).
23 1 2 3
|1,1æ )|SrpTcæ, |1,1æ )2-1/2|TrpTc -TrpTcæ, |1,1æ )|TrpScæ
spin state obeys the equation15 1 + 2 0 + + 0 3 +
|1,0æ )|SrpTcæ, |1,0æ )2-1/2|TrpTc -TrpTcæ, |1,0æ )|TrpScæ (5)
1 0 2 - + + - 3 0
FT (t))1-3(∆J/(2Ω))2sin2Ωt (4)
SS |1,-1æ )|SrpTcæ,|1,-1æ )2-1/2|TrpTc -TrpTcæ,|1,-1æ )|TrpScæ
1 - 2 0 - - 0 3 -
whichindicatesthattheinitialsingletpair(R ,R )intheradical
1 2
triad (R , R , R ) oscillates between singlet and triplet states Zero field splitting in C as well as dipolar, hyperfine, and
1 2 3
withthefrequencyΩ. Again,suchaspinconversiontakesplace Zeemaninteractionsstronglycomplicatethespindynamicsin
onlyifJ *J . Sincetheaveragevaluesin2Ωt)1/2,then the triad. However, being interested in spin catalytic effects
13 23
somepartoftheradicalpairsnj )1-(3/8)∆J2/Ω2isthetriplet only, we can ignore all magnetic couplings except exchange
T
state and another part nj ) 1 - (3/8)∆J2/Ω2 remains in the interactions. Inthisapproximationsomeofthetriadspinstates
S
singletstate. Thus,theexchangeinteractionbetweentheradical (eq5)areinvolvedinthespinevolution,whichtransformsthe
R andthepartnersofthepair(R ,R )decreasesthepopulation states with the singlet radical pair |Srpæ into those with triplet
3 1 2
of the initial singlet pairs in the triad, transforming them into states |Trp (or Vice Versa). The change of spin in the radical
0,(
thetripletones. Thus,radicalR 3 ,beingthespincatalyzerfor pairiscompensatedbythechangeofthespinprojectionS z Cof
thetripletradicalpairs,appearstobetheinhibitorfortheinitial the catalyzer C so that such a spin evolution changes neither
singlet pairs, retarding the rate of the geminate recombination thetotalspinSnoritsprojectionS of(R ,R ,C). Itisworthy
z 1 2
and decreasing the yield of the reaction product. tonotethatanyinteractionsoftwoequiValentelectronspinsof
Spinexchangecanbevisuallyrepresentedastheprecession the spin catalyzer C with partners of the radical pair (R , R )
1 2
oftwospinvectorsS 1 andS 2 aroundthedirectionofthetotal arenotabletochangespinmultiplicitiesofC. Therefore,the
vectorS 1 +S 2 .16 Inaccordancewithsuchavectorrepresenta- exchange interaction within C may be ignored.
tionthespinexchangeintheradicaltriad(R 1 ,R 2 ,R 3 )andthe Physically, spin dynamics in four-spin triads resembles the
spinoscillationintheradicalpair(R 1 ,R 2 )canbeimaginedas spin evolution in the three-spin model. The probability of
follows. Supposethattheinitialspinstateoftheradicaltriad findingtheinitialtripletradicalpairinthesingletstateFT was
SS
is such as shown in Figure 4a. The selected radical pair (R 1 , shown17 to obey the equation
R
2
) is in the state |T+ æ ) |R
1
R
2
æ , and both spins are oriented
up,whilethespinoftheradicalR 3 isdirecteddown. Assume F S T S (t))(4/3)(∆J/(2Ω))2sin2Ωt (6)
now that the exchange interaction J , which relates electron
23
spinsofradicalsR 1 andR 3 andinducesprecessionofspinsS 2 whichissimilartoeq3forthethree-spinsystem. Here,2Ωis
and S 3 around the total spin S 2 + S 3 , is switched on (Figure theenergysplittingbetweentheeigenvaluesoftheHamiltonian
4b). TheinterchangebetweentheorientationsofspinsS 2 and of the four-spin triad (R 1 , R 2 , C) corresponding to oscillating
S 3 after a time τ, such as J 23 τ ) π, transforms the pair spin tripletstatesinwhicharadicalpairisinthesingletandtriplet
state in such a way that the triad is now in a modified spin states,
statewhentheradicalpair(R ,R )isfixedinthesingletstate.
1 2
The change of the radical pair spin is compensated by the 2Ω){[J -J ]2+2(∆J)2}1/2 (7)
12 Σ
reorientation of the spin of the radical R (Figure 4c).
3
Thus,thespinexchangebetweenradicalpartnersinthetriad whereJ istheexchangepotentialbetweenthepartnersofthe
12
canbedescribedbythevectormodelasthedephasingofradical radicalpair,J )(J +J )/2,andJ andJ aretheexchange
Σ 1C 2C 1C 2C
spin precessions. It is absolutely clear that if both radicals in potentialsbetweenthespincatalyzerCandeachofthepartners
thepair(R 1 ,R 2 )areinfluencedbytheexchangeinteractionwith of the radical pair. It follows from eq 7 that the frequency of
R 3 ,thentherateofdephasingisgovernedbythecombination spin oscillation is determined by the combination of pairwise
ofexchangeenergydifferencesΩaccordingtoeqs3and4.It exchange potentials in the triad, while the amplitude of the
isremarkablethatthispictureresemblesthetriplet-singletspin oscillationiscontrolledbythedifference∆J)J -J .Again,
1C 2C
conversioninanisolatedradicalpair;theonlydifferenceisthat we conclude that the driving force of the spin catalysis in the
the latter is induced by the difference of Fermi and Zeeman four-spin system is the difference of the exchange energies
interactions.1 betweenthecatalyzerCandeachoftworadicalsoftheradical
pair.
Four-Spin Model
Chemical Dynamics of Spin Triads
Spindynamicsinfour-spintriads(R ,R ,C)composedofa
1 2
radical pair (R , R ) and a third partner C, which is supposed Spin oscillations in the selected radical pair modulate the
1 2
tobeabiradicaltripletmolecule(oxygen,forinstance),triplet chemical reactivity of the pair and consequently influence the
+ +

--- Page 5 ---

+ +
18296 J. Phys. Chem., Vol. 100, No. 47, 1996 Buchachenko and Berdinsky
SCHEME 3: Two Competitive Pathways of the Radical
Triad Transformation
chemical dynamics of triads. To elucidate what new kinetic
effects are expected to follow from the spin catalysis, we
considerthekineticbehavioroftheinstantlypreparedensemble
of radical triads (R , R , R ) (Scheme 3).
1 2 3
Thetriadissupposedtoundergospincatalyticrecombination,
Figure5. Kineticsoftheaccumulationofthegeminaterecombination
generating the molecule R R with the rate constant w. This
1 2 product RR in the presence of spin catalyzer R at w , k and
spin dependent process is expected to compete with the spin 1 2 3
parameters(k/(2Ω)))0.1(1),0.5(2),1.0(3),and5.0(4).
independent destruction (via the radical escape, for instance)
ofthetriadwiththerateconstantk. SincethemoleculesR 1 R 2 triadandaresimilartothoseinanisolatedradicalpair.19 The
are formed exclusively from radical pairs in singlet state, the onlydifferenceisthattheoscillationsfromanisoloatedradical
yield Y(t) of the reaction product R 1 R 2 obeys the equation pairareinducedbyFermiandZeemaninteractions,whilethose
of the selected pair in the triad are stimulated by exchange
Y(t))w
∫tF
(t)dt (8) interactions.
0 SS AnexampleofthesebeatsisshowninFigure5. AtΩ.k,
whereF (t)isthesingletstaterelatedtothediagonalelement i.e., when the oscillation frequency is higher than the decay
SS
in the density matrix of the radical pair in the triad, i.e., the frequency,quantumbeatsareclearlyseen. Inthecaseofslow
probabilityforthepairtobeinthesingletstate. Thelattercan oscillations, Ω e k, quantum beats are not pronounced, since
bederivedfromthedensitymatrixoftheradicaltriadF,which the main contribution into the kinetics goes from the first
is the solution of the evolution equation nonoscillating part of the eq 11.
dF/dt)-i[H,F]-(w/2){P12F+FP12}-k (9) Quantitative Kinetics
S S F
Figure 1 demonstrates the enhancement of the radical pair
The first term represents the spin dynamics of triads induced recombinationprobabilityinducedbythepresenceofnitroxide
bythespinHamiltonianH,whichincludespairwiseexchange radicals. Suchbehavioroftherecombinationprobabilityimplies
interactions. Thesecondonedescribestheleakageofthetriads thattherearetwocoexistingpathwaysoftheradicalpairspin
duetothespindependentrecombinationofthepairs(R 1 ,R 2 ). transformation: the “native”, induced by intrapair magnetic
P12istheprojectionoperatorselectingthesingletspinstateof interactions(hyperfine,Zeeman,dipolar,etc.)andthecatalytic,
S
pairs. The last term characterizes the decay of the triads via provokedbynitroxides. Scheme4summarizesthesetwospin
spin independent processes with the total rate constant k. transformationchannelsintermsofkineticrateconstants. The
Solutionsofeq9forthedifferentkineticregimeshavebeen directtransformationoftheradicalpair,RP,intotherecombina-
summarized in ref 18. The most characteristic feature of the tion product N with the rate constant r is accompanied by
solutions can be illustrated by the particular case of weakly catalyticconversion,whichincludestheenteringofthenitroxide
recombining radicals, i.e., when w , k. With this condition radicalRintotheRPwithadiffusionalrateconstantk andthe
0
from eq 9 it follows that followingtransformationoftheradicaltriadintotherecombina-
tion product N with the rate constant r*. The process of
F (t))FT (t)exp(-kt) (10) diffusional dissociation of RP and the radical triad, which
SS SS
destroysbothofthem,shouldalsobeconsideredandissupposed
Usingeq3fortheFT (t)andsubstitutingeq10intoeq8,one to be characterized by the rate constant d.
SS
canderivethekineticequationfortheyieldofreactionproduct Within the scope of the Scheme 4 the recombination
R R : probability P along the first noncatalytic pathway is given
1 2 RP
by the expression
Y(t))Y [1-(1+Θ2)e -kt+Θ2e -ktcos(2Ωt+
¥ P )r/(r+d+k [R]) (13)
(cid:230))/cos(cid:230)] (11) RP 0
The probability P of the transformation of the RP within the
where tr
radical triad is
Y )Y(tf¥ ))(w/(2k))[(∆J/(2Ω))2/(1+Θ2)],
¥ P )k [R]/(r+d+k [R]) (14)
Θ)k/(2Ω), (cid:230))arctanΘ, tr 0 0
cos(cid:230))Θ/(1+Θ2)1/2 (12) and the probability for the triad to be transformed into the
reaction product N is
Itisevidentthattheproductyieldofthespincatalyticreaction
dependsonrateconstantskandwcharacterizingthechemical P* )r*/(r*+d) (15)
tr
dynamics, as well as on parameters ∆J and Ω regulating the
spin dynamics. Finally,thetotalradicalpairrecombinationprobabilityPobeys
From eq 11 it follows that the kinetics of spin-catalyzed the equation
reactionconsistsoftwoadditiveparts,andthesecondcontribu-
tion oscillates in time according to eq 11. These oscillations, P)P +P P* (16)
RP tr tr
orquantumbeats,intherateandthereactionyieldarisefrom
thetriplet-singletconversionoftheselectedradicalpairinthe By substitution of eqs 13-15 into eq 16, it is easy to derive
+ +

--- Page 6 ---

+ +
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem., Vol. 100, No. 47, 1996 18297
TABLE2: Ratiosr*/rforLanthanideIons
ion spinS r*/r ion spinS r*/r
i i
La3+ 0 0 Tb3+ 3 0.93
Ce3+ 1/2 0.34 Dy3+ 5/2 0.78
Pr3+ 1 0.28 Ho3+ 2 0.62
Nd3+ 3/2 0.71 Er3+ 3/2 0.47
Pm3+ 2 Tm3+ 1 0.31
Sm3+ 5/2 0.93 Yb3+ 1/2 0.31
Eu3+ 3 0 Lu3+ 0 0
Gd3+ 7/2 3.4
SCHEME 4: Kinetic Presentation of Radical Pair
Reactions
Figure 6. Ratios of the catalytic/noncatalytic rate constants of the
radicalpairrecombination,r*/r,asafunctionofspinS oflanthanide
i
ions.Bothr*andrrefertotheradicalpairrecombinationinamagnetic
fieldof2000G.14
SCHEME 5: Kinetic Presentation of Recombination of
Alkyl Radicals R with Nitroxide Mono- and Biradicals negligible. Combining the Scheme 5 with reactions
2k
B+R9B8M
k
M+R9M8stableproducts
onecanderivefollowingexpressionsforphenomenologicalrate
the final equation constants k and k :
M B
P) r + r* k 0 [R] (17) k ) k 0 r ; k ) k 0 r*t + k 0 r (19)
r+d+k [R] r*+dr+d+k [R] M r+d B (d+t+r)(d+t) d+t+r
0 0
At[R])0themagnitudeofPequals0.033(seeFigure1),so Taking into account evident relations r , d, r* , d, t , d,
the ratio r/d ) 0.033. Thus, the relation r , d reduces eq 17 one can derive from eq 19 the ratio of rate constants of spin-
catalyzed and spin-uncatalyzed RP recombination:
to
r*/r)((cid:230)-1)(d/t) (20)
P) r + r* k 0 [R] (18)
d+k [R] r*+dd+k [R] where(cid:230)istheratiok /k . Sinceextendedmolecularconfor-
0 0 B M
mations of biradicals dominate, the rate constant t is expected
Thequantitativefittingofexperimentaldatatoeq18shownin to be at least an order of magnitude lower than that for the
Figure 1 results in the ratio r*/r ) 6.3 ( 0.1, which is not escape of the biradical terminus from the triad (B‚‚‚R). The
sensitivetotherateconstantk ranginginreasonablediffusional latter is thought to be of the same order of magnitude as the
0
limits of 1010-108 M-1 s-1. dissociationrateconstantd. Fromtheseargumentstherelation
The ratio r*/r ) 6.3 is the quantitative measure of spin t,dunambiguoslyfollows,sofromeq20onecanimmediately
catalytic efficiency and demonstrates that the rate constant of concludethatr*/r.1. Ifweassumetheratiod/ttobewithin
the RP recombination in the triad is almost an order of the reasonable limits of 10-20, and (cid:230) is known to be in the
magnitude higher than that of the isolated RP. range 1.1-1.5,11 then the ratio r*/r falls into the range 1-10,
Nowwewillanalyzequantitativelythespincatalysisinthe in general accordance with that for the radical pair generated
reactionofthenitroxidebiradicalswithalkylradicals.11 Scheme by DPP photolysis in benzene, as has been discussed above.
5describesthesequenceofelementarystepsinthescavenging The lack of known values t and d (or their ratio) prevents a
of alkyl radicals R by nitroxide monoradical M and biradical more careful estimation of the r*/r ratio.
B. ItimpliestheencounterbetweenMandR,resultinginthe Now we address the SC by paramagnetic ions. Figure 2
pair (M‚‚‚R), which is able to recombine into the reaction demonstrates that the addition of lanthanide ions Ln3+ causes
productXordissociatewiththerateconstantd. Thereaction an increase in the recombination probability. However, the
betweenBandRincludestheencounterpair(M‚‚‚R)withone efficiency of different ions in accelerating the recombination
ofthebiradicaltermini. Thepaircandissociateandrecombine processisfarfromidentical. Todifferentiatethespincatalytic
(with rate constants d and r, respectively) or it can be efficiency of the Ln3+ ions, the kinetic scheme similar to that
transformed into the triad (B‚‚‚R) if the other terminus of the for organic radicals has been used20 and the equation for the
biradical enters into the radical pair (M‚‚‚R) with the rate recombination probability as a function of Ln3+ concentration
constant t. The triad is assumed to recombine, resulting the has been derived. The equation is identical with eq 17 with
monoradicalM,ordissociatebyescapingfromthealkylradical the ion concentration in the micellar phase instead of the
or one of the biradical termini. Note that Scheme 5 does not concentration of radicals in a solution.
considerthedirectformationoftriad(B‚‚‚R)viaencounterof The ratios r* for different lanthanide ions are collected in
i
R with B. The reason for that is that nitroxide biradicals in Table2andpresentedinFigure6asafunctionoftheionspin
Scheme 2 are mostly in extended molecular conformations in S. The figure demonstrates the correlation between the ef-
i
which biradical termini are distant so that the probability of ficiency of the ion as a spin catalyser and its electron spin S.
i
theencounterofthealkylradicalwiththegeminateconforma- Thiscorrelationclearlyandunambiguouslyindicates,inagree-
tion of B, when both biradical termini are drawn together, is mentwiththeory,15thattheexchangeinteractionbetweeneach
+ +

--- Page 7 ---

+ +
18298 J. Phys. Chem., Vol. 100, No. 47, 1996 Buchachenko and Berdinsky
of the radical pair partners on one side and the paramagnetic triplet potential energy surface. The difference in these prob-
ion on the other side is responsible for the spin-catalyzed RP abilities for the catalyzed and uncatalyzed reaction reaches 7
transformation. The absence of correlation between the ef- orders of magnitudes in favor of the former.23
ficiency of ions and their magnetic moments pointed out by Spincatalysisissupposedtobeanimportantfactorthatlimits
Turro et al.14 provides additional support in favor of the spin or,probably,evenpreventsobservationofthemostinteresting
catalysis concept. collectivepropertiesofspin-polarizedhydrogenatomsand,in
A kinetic analysis of the spin catalytic effect clearly dif- particular, the observation of Bose-Einstein condensation of
ferentiatesspincarrierswithrespecttotheirabilitytoproduce this boson gas.24-26 To detect this phenomenon, the low-
a spin transformation of radical pairs. The most effective temperature spin-polarized atomic gas compressed to high
carriersarefoundtobeorganicradicals,i.e.,spincarierswith density is required. However, three-body recombination, in
anouterunpairedelectron. Forthesecarrierstheratior*/r≈ which the leading role has been shown to belong to dipolar
10, i.e., the presence of the spin catalyzer in the radical pair andexchangecouplinginthree-spintriadsofpolarizedhydrogen
accelerates the spin conversion of the pair by an order of atoms,resultsinthegenerationofhothydrogenmoleculesand
magnitude. Paramagneticlantanideionsaremuchlesseffective, ultimatelyintheheatingofthegasanddecayofthehydrogen
ratios r*/r fall into the range 0.2-1.0, i.e., the contribution of atoms, preventing Bose condensation. The theory of spin
the spin catalytic effect in the RP spin conversion does not catalysis15 predicts that even a single nonpolarized hydrogen
exceed 20-100% of the noncatalytic pathway. atom in the polarized gas is enough to catalyze the fast,
Thelowefficiencyofionsasspincatalyzersmaybeattributed explosive, nonthreshold hydrogen atom recombination so that
to the inaccessibility of the inner unpaired electrons screened it is hardly able to overcome the high-density barrier to Bose
partlybytheouterelectrons. TheonlyexclusionisGd3+,which condensation of spin-polarized hydrogen atoms.
appearstobeahighlyeffectivespincatalyzer(r*/r)3.5),its As a mechanism of the radical pair spin conversion, spin
efficiency approaching that of organic radicals. The unique catalysis is competitive with the magnetically induced spin
statusofEu3+,whichpossessessixunpairedelectronsbutshows conversionand,therefore,resultsinsuppressionofthemagnetic
no spin catalytic effect, has been discussed by Turro et al.14 field effect in the radical pair reactions. This effect has been
andmaybeattributedtothefactthatthisionisdiamagneticin clearly illustrated by Shkrob et al.27 in the photolysis of
its ground electronic state because of the cancellation of spin deoxybenzoinanditsderivativesinSDSmicelles. Moreover,
and orbital magnetic moments (for details see ref 21). theefficiencyoflanthanideionsinsuppressionofthemagnetic
fieldeffectwasfoundtofollowtheirspincatalyticefficiency.
Conclusion
ItisworthytonotethatthetransitionmetalionMn2+asaspin
catalyzer is comparable with Gd3+.
Spin catalysis as a remarkable property of spin selective
The quantitative hierarchy of spin carriers with respect to
reactionsisatypeofphysicalcatalysisinwhichthecatalyzer
theirspincatalyticefficiencyisinexcellentagreementwiththe
acts as a spin converter, violating the spin forbiddance of
theory, which predicts that the rate of spin conversion in the
reactions.22 Theradicalpairrecombination,thelow-temperature
radical pair has to be proportional to the difference ∆J of
recombination of spin-aligned hydrogen atoms, and cis-trans
exchange energies between the spin catalyzer and each of the
isomerizationofmoleculeswithdoublebondsareexamplesof
radicalpairpartners.15 Thisstatementundoubtedlyimpliesthat
processes spin catalyzed by paramagnetics.
spin carriers with outer unpaired electrons are much more
Asanillustrationofthelatterprocess,weaddressthekinetics
preferable as spin catalyzers than those with inner unpaired
of isomerization of dimethylmaleate into its trans-form, di-
electrons. However, although the former spin carriers are
methylfumarate.23 The reaction was shown to be strongly
effective spin catalyzers, they are usually also chemically
accelerated by stable nitroxide radicals (TEMPO and its
reactive radical scavengers, whereas the latter carriers, being
analogues). Neitherdecayofnitroxideradicalsnortheforma-
rather low efficient spin catalyzers, may be chemically inert.
tionofanybyproductwasobserved,sothisisthecaseoftrue
Thestrategyofspincatalysisisindeedacompromisebetween
paramagneticcatalysis. Theactivationenergyofthecatalyzed
these two functions of spin carrier, to be simultaneously spin
reactionwasshowntobepreciselyequaltothatofanoncata-
catalyzer and spin scavenger.
lyzed reaction (i.e., the reaction in the absence of nitroxide
radicals). However,thepreexponentialfactorofthecatalyzed
Acknowledgment. Financial support of the Russian Fund
reactionappearstobe7ordersofmagnitudeshigherthanthat
for Fundamental Research is gratefully acknowlegded (Grant
ofadirect,noncatalyzedreaction.23 Boththeseargumentsare
96-03-34193).
unambiguously in favor of “nonenergetic” physical catalysis,
based on the violation of the spin conservation rule. References and Notes
Cis-trans isomerization was shown to occur in the weakly
(1) Salikhov,K.M.;Molin,Yu.N.;Sagdeev,R.Z.;Buchachenko,A.
bound paramagnetic complex between the dimethylmaleate
L.SpinPolarizationandMagneticEffectsinRadicalReactions;Elsevier:
molecule and the nitroxide radical. By measurement of the Amsterdam,1984.
NMR paramagnetic shifts and line broadening, it was shown (2) Buchachenko,A.L.;Frankevich,E.L.ChemicalGenerationand
thatinthecomplexthetransferofthespindensityofanunpaired ReceptionofRadio-andMicrowaVes;VCHPublishers: NewYork,1994.
(3) Steiner,U.E.;Ulrich,T.Chem.ReV.1989,89,51.
electron from the nitroxide radical to the double bond of the
(4) Sagdeev,R.Z.;Salikhov,K.M.;Leshina,T.V.;Kamkha,M.A.;
ligandmoleculetakesplace.23 Thetransferredπ-electronspin Shein,S.M.;Molin,Yu.N.JETPLett.1972,16,599.
density in the double bond is 2 × 10-3. (5) Buchachenko,A.L.;Galimov,E.M.;Ershov,V.V.;Nikiforov,
Spin catalysis is supposed to manifest itself in the twisted G.A.;Pershin,A.D.Dokl.Acad.NaukSSSR1976,228,379.
(6) (a)Bargon,J.;Fisher,H.;Johnson,U.Z.Naturforsch.1967,22A,
conformationofthemolecule. Inthisconformationsingletand
1551.(b)Ward,H.;Lawler,R.J.Am.Chem.Soc.1967,89,5518.
triplet states of two π-electrons are energetically degenerate, (7) Fessenden,R.;Schuler,R.J.Chem.Phys.1963,39,2147.
so the pair of these electrons in cooperation with the third (8) Frankevich,E.L.;Pristupa,A.I.;Lesin,V.I.Phys.Lett.1977,47,
unpairedelectronoftheradicalcatalyzermaybeconsideredas 304.
(9) (a)Tarasov,V.F.;Bagryanskaya,E.G.;Grishin,Yu.A.;Sagdeev,
aspintriad. Spinconversioninthistriaddrasticallyincreases R.Z.;Buchachenko,A.L.MendeleeVCommun.1991,85.(b)Okazaki,M.
theprobabilityofthenonadiabaticreactionpathwayalongthe J.Phys.Chem.1988,92,1402.
+ +

--- Page 8 ---

+ +
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem., Vol. 100, No. 47, 1996 18299
(10) Sagdeev,R.Z.;Molin,Yu.N.;Salikhov,K.M.;Grishin,Yu.A.; (20) Buchachenko,A.L.;Berdinsky,V.L.;Turro,N.J.Chem.Phys.
Dushkin,A.V.;Gogolev,A.Z.Bull.Magn.Res.1980,2,66. Lett.,submittedforpublication.
(11) Step,E.N.;Buchachenko,A.L.;Turro,N.J.J.Am.Chem.Soc. (21) Rabek, J. F., Ed. Photochemistry and Photophysics; CRC Press:
1994,116,5462. BocaRaton,FL,1991;Vol.IV,p1.
(12) Bartels,D.M.;Trifunac,A.D.;Lawler,R.G.Chem.Phys.Lett.
(22) Thetermspincatalysissometimesisusedtodefinesuchphenomena
1988,152,109.
as an enhancement of intensity of spin forbidden optical transitions
(13) Buchachenko,A.L.;Step,E.N.;Ruban,V.L.;Turro,N.J.Chem.
stimulatedbyheavyatommoleculesorparamagnetics(see,forinstance,
Phys.Lett.1995,233,315.
MinaevB.F.;AgrenH.Collect.Czech.Chem.Commun.1995,99,8936;
(14) (a)Turro,N.J.;Lei,X.;Gould,I.R.;Zimmt,M.B.Chem.Phys.
Theor.Chim.Acta1996,57,519).Ouropinionisthatsuchadefinitionis
Lett. 1985, 120, 397. (b) Sakaguchi, Y.; Hayashi, H. Chem. Phys. Lett.
notjustifiedbecausethetermcatalysisitselfconcernstraditionallychemical
1984,106,420.(c)Basu,S.;Kundu,L.;Chowdhury,M.Chem.Phys.Lett.
reactionsandhasnothingtodowithspectroscopicphenomena.
1987, 141, 115. (d) Tanimoto, Y.; Kita, A.; Itoh, M.; Okazaky, M.;
Nakagaki,R.;Nagakura,S.Chem.Phys.Lett.1990,165,184.(e)Sakaguchi, (23) Buchachenko,A.L.;RubanV.L.;RozantzevE.G.Kinet.Catal.
Y.;Hayashi,H.Chem.Phys.1992,162,119. 1968,9,915.
(15) Buchachenko,A.L.;Berdinsky,V.L.Chem.Phys.Lett.1995,242, (24) Kagan,Yu.M.;Vartanyants,I.A.;Shlyapnikov,G.V.SoV.Phys.
43. JETP(Engl.Transl.)1982,54,590.
(16) Molin,Yu.N.;Salikhov,K.M.;Zamaraev,K.I.SpinExchange.
(25) Sprik,R.;Walraven,J.T.M.;Silvera,I.F.Phys.ReV.Lett.1983,
Principles and Applications in Chemistry and Biology; Springer-Verlag:
51,479.
Heidelberg,1980.
(17) Berdinsky,V.L.;Buchachenko,A.L.Kinet.Catal.,submittedfor (26) Hess,H.F.;Bell,D.A.;Kochanski,G.P.;Cline,R.W.;Kleppner,
publication. D.;Greytak,T.J.Phys.ReV.Lett.1983,51,483.
(18) Buchachenko,A.L.;Berdinsky,V.L.Russ.Chem.Bull.1995,44, (27) Shkrob,I.A.;Margulis,L.A.;Tarasov,V.F.Russ.J.Phys.Chem.
1578. (Engl.Transl.)1989,63,1827.
(19) Anisimov,O.A.;Bizyaev,V.L.;Lukzen,N.N.;Grigoryants,V.
M.;Molin,Yu.N.Chem.Phys.Lett.1983,101,131. JP961008R
+ +