

--- Page 1 ---



--- Page 2 ---

THE
INTERNATIONAL SERIES
OF
MONOGRAPHS ON PHYSICS
GENERAL EDITORS
W. MARSHALL D. H. WILKINSON

--- Page 3 ---

This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 4 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC
RESONANCE OF
TRANSITION IONS
BY
A.ABRAGAM
Directeur de la Physique au Commissariat a VEnergie Atomique
Professeur au College de France
AND
B. BLEANEY
Dr. Lee's Professor of Experimental Philosophy
Clarendon Laboratory. Oxford
CLARENDON PRESS • OXFORD
1970

--- Page 5 ---

OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 GDP
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 1970
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published 1970
First published in paperback 2012
Reprinted 2013
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
ISBN 978-0-19-965152-8

--- Page 6 ---

TO
J. H. VAN VLECK

--- Page 7 ---

This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 8 ---

PREFACE
ELECTRON paramagnetic resonance was discovered in 1944 by E.
Zavoisky in the U.S.S.R. and has developed into a major scientific
technique. This book is designed to provide a comprehensive intro-
duction to the subject, necessarily omitting a number of topics more
suitable for specialist monographs. The presentation is on three levels.
An introductory survey outlines the main features of the subject for
the beginner in the field. This is followed by a general survey, covering
the resonance phenomenon, the spin Hamiltonian, Endor, spin-spin
and spin-lattice interactions, together with an outline of the known
behaviour of the transition groups, at a level intended for the experi-
mentalist. Finally a theoretical survey makes considerable use of
group theory and symmetry properties in discussing the fundamentals
of paramagnetism with special reference to the resonance spectrum.
A feature of the book is the inclusion of much hitherto unpublished
material. The emphasis is on basic principles, with numerous refer-
ences to publications containing further experimental results and
more detailed developments of the theory.
The authors have pleasure in expressing their gratitude to numerous
colleagues including Drs. G. M. Copland, E. R. Davies, E. A. Harris,
J. Owen, and F. I. B. Williams, to name only a few, who read and
suggested improvements to parts of the manuscript. We are partic-
ularly indebted to Dr. F. S. Ham who generously made available in
advance of publication his article 'Jahn-Teller Effects in Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance Spectra' (Electron Paramagnetic Resonance,
edited by S. Geschwind, Plenum Press, New York) and to Dr. E.
Beloritzky who read and made valuable comments on Chapters 11 to
20.
The authors are equally indebted to Madame Porneuf for her
invaluable assistance both in proof-reading and in preparing much of
the typescript.
A. A.
B. B.

--- Page 9 ---

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
THE authors are indebted to the following for permission to use
published diagrams as a basis for figures in the text—J. H. Anderson
D. M. S. Bagguley J. M. Baker N. Edelstein R. Englman
G. Feher S. Geschwind F. S. Ham I. H. Harrop W. Hayes
K. H. Hellwege Chao-Yuan Huang C. D. Jeffries K. C. Krikorian
D. Mergerian M. C. M. O'Brien R. Orbach J. Owen M. H. L.
Pryce G. Seidel M. D. Sturge Satoru Sugano D. H. Templeton
P.E.Wagner J.E.Wertz F.I. B.Williams W. P. Wolf American
Institute of Physics American Physical Society Institute of Physics
and Physical Society (London) Macmillan (Journals) Ltd. Physical
Society of Japan Royal Society of London Springer-Verlag
Taylor and Francis Ltd.
The following have kindly allowed us to include unpublished
data—Hin Lew, P. Unsworth.

--- Page 10 ---

CONTENTS
PART I
PRELIMINARY SURVEY
page
1. INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC
RESONANCE
1.1. Electronic and nuclear magnetic dipole moments 1
1.2. Hyperfine structure in a free atom or ion 5
1.3. Magnetic resonance 9
1.4. Effective spin and anisotropy 10
1.5. 'Initial splittings' or 'fine structure' 16
1.6. Magnetic hyperfine structure 25
1.7. Hyperfine structure including nuclear electric quadrupole inter-
action 31
1.8. A simple example 33
1.9. Transition group ions and ligand fields 39
1.10. Spin-spin interaction 52
1.11. Spin-lattice interaction 60
1.12. Dynamic nuclear orientation 74
1.13. Endor 87
1.14. Experimental aspects 92
PART II
GENERAL SURVEY
2. THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
2.1. Use of rotating coordinates 95
2.2. Magnetic resonance 96
2.3. Quantum-mechanical analysis 98
2.4. Magnetic resonance in aggregated systems 102
2.5. Adiabatic rapid passage 104
2.6. Relaxation effects 108
2.7. Radio-frequency pulses and spin-echoes 113
2.8. Solution of the macroscopic equations for slow passage 115
2.9. Intensity and line width 119
2.10. Spectrometer sensitivity 125
3. THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
3.1. The spin Hamiltonian 133
3.2. The effect of anisotropy in the {/-factor 135
3.3. Multipole fine structure 139
3.4. Fine structure in cubic fields (S = f, f) 142
3.5. Electronic 'quadrupole' fine structure (S = 1, f) 151
3.6. Electronic 'quadrupole' fine structure in a strong magnetic field 156
3.7. Hyperfine structure I—introductory remarks 163

--- Page 11 ---

x CONTENTS
3.8. Hyperfine structure II—strong external field 167
3.9. Hyperfine structure III—nuclear electric quadrupole interaction 178
3.10. 'Forbidden' hyperfine transitions 186
3.11. Ligand hyperfine structure 192
3.12. The spectrum of a powder 200
3.13. Effects of crystal imperfections 205
3.14. Weak-field Zeeman interaction for non-Kramers ions 209
4. ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
4.1. Introduction 217
4.2. The Endor spectrum 223
4.3. Enhancement of the nuclear transition probability 228
4.4. Endor on donors in silicon 234
4.5. Endor on donors in silicon—relaxation effects 239
4.6. Relaxation effects in Endor—general 243
4.7. The hyperfine structure of europium 251
4.8. The Endor spectrum of Nd3+ in LaCl 255
3
4.9. Endor measurements of ligand hyperfine structure 259
4.10. Endor line widths 264
4.11. 'Indirect'observation of Endor transitions 272
4.12. Summary 274
5. THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
5.1. Lanthanide compounds 277
5.2. The free ions 282
5.3. Crystalline field theory—C symmetry 285
3h
5.4. Magnetic hyperfine structure 296
5.5. Nuclear electric quadrupole interaction 301
5.6. Experimental results for ethylsulphates and anhydrous chlorides 303
5.7. Experimental results for the double nitrates,
Ln Mg (NO ) , 24H O 320
2 3 3 12 2
5.8. Lanthanide ions in cubic symmetry 325
5.9. Ions with a half-filled 4/-shell, 4/7, 8Sj. Eu2+, Gd3+, Tb4+ 335
5.10. Higher-order terms in the spin Hamiltonian 341
6. THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
6.1. Ions and compounds of the actinide group 346
6.2. Tripositive actinide ions 348
6.3. Actinide ions in CaF 350
2
6.4. Actinide ions in octahedral symmetry 354
6.5. Neptunyl and plutonyl ions 359
7. IONS OF THE 3d GROUP IN INTERMEDIATE
LIGAND FIELDS
7.1. Introduction 365
7.2. The intermediate crystal field approach 372
7.3. The strong crystal field approach 377
7.4. The effects of bonding 392
7.5. The electronic spin Hamiltonian 398

--- Page 12 ---

CONTENTS xi
7.6. Magnetic hyperfine interaction 406
7.7. Nuclear electric quadrupole and nuclear Zeeman interaction 414
7.8. 3d1. Ti3+ in an octahedral field. 2D, L = 2, 8 = £ 417
7.9. 3d2. V3+, Cr4+ in an octahedral field. 3F, L = 3, S = I 426
7.10. 3d3. V2+, O3+, Mn4+ in an octahedral field. 4jF, L = 3, S = f 430
7.11. 3d4. Cr2+ in an octahedral field. 5D, L = 2, 8 = 2 434
7.12. 3d5. Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3+ in an octahedral field. 6S, L = 0, S = f 436
7.13. 3d6. Fe2+ in an octahedral field. 5£>, L = 2, 8 = 2 443
7.14. 3d7. Fe+, Co2+, Ni3+ in an octahedral field. *F, L = 3, 8 = f 446
7.15. 3d8. Co+, Ni2+, Cu3+ in an octahedral field. *F, L = 3, S = 1 449
7.16. 3d9. Ni+, Cu2+ in an octahedral field. *D, L = 2, S = % 455
7.17. 3d ions in tetrahedral symmetry 467
8. IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
8.1. The ions and their compounds 472
8.2. The strong ligand field octahedral complex 476
8.3. Hyperfine interaction 478
8.4. d1 in strong octahedral field; (de)1, («), S = J 478
2
8.5. d2 in strong octahedral field; (de)2, (*)2, 8 = I 479
2
8.6. d3 in strong octahedral field; (de)3, (£)3, S = f 479
2
8.7. d4 in strong octahedral field; (de)4, (£)4, 8=1 480
2
8.8. d5 in strong octahedral field; (de)5, (£)5, S =\ 481
2
8.9. d6 in strong octahedral field; (de)6, (*)6, 8=0 486
2
8.10. d7 in strong octahedral field; (de)6(dy), (£)6e, 8 = J 486
2
8.11. d8 in strong octahedral field; (de)6(dy)2, (£)6e2, £ = 1 487
2
8.12. d9 in strong octahedral field; (de)6(dy)3, (*)6e3, S = J 487
2
8.13. d1 in cubic (eightfold) coordination 490
9. SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
9.1. Introduction 491
9.2. Magnetic dipole-dipole interaction 492
9.3. Exchange interaction 495
9.4. Multipole interactions 499
9.5. Interaction between a pair of similar ions 502
9.6. Interaction between a pair of dissimilar ions 509
9.7. Line broadening by spin-spin interaction 514
9.8. Line shape due to dipolar spin-spin interaction 521
9.9. Effect of exchange interaction on line shape 527
9.10. Magnetic dilution, and the spectra of pairs 529
9.11. Temperature-dependent effects 535
10. SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
10.1. The attainment of thermal equilibrium 541
10.2. The phonon radiation bath 547
10.3. Spin-lattice relaxation by phonons—Waller processes 551
10.4. Spin-lattice relaxation by modulation of the ligand field 557
10.5. Summary and comparison with experiment 565
10.6. The phonon 'bottle-neck' and phonon 'avalanche* 574

--- Page 13 ---

xii CONTENTS
PART III
THEORETICAL SURVEY
11. THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
11.1. The interaction between electrons and a magnetic fiel d 585
11.2. The Zeeman effect in a free atom (or ion) 586
11.3. LS-coupling and the Lande formula 587
11.4. Self-consistent field configurations 589
11.5. Spin-orbit coupling 592
11.6. Matrix elements between Slater determinants 593
11.7. Introduction of the crystal field 595
12. GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
12.1. Invariance and degeneracy 601
12.2. Linear representations, equivalence, and irreducibility 602
12.3. Orthogonality relations, characters, and classes 603
12.4. Reduction of a representation and calculation of the characters 605
12.5 . Splitting of a degenerate level by a perturbation of lower
symmetry 607
12.6. The direct product of two representations 611
13. GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
13.1. Angular momentum 615
13.2. The irreducible representations 617
13.3. The coupling of angular momenta 620
13.4. Multiple vector coupling and Racah symbols 622
13.5. Irreducible tensor operators, the Wigner-Eckart theorem, and
equivalent operators 624
14. THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
14.1. The cubic group 629
14.2. The fictitious angular momentum 632
14.3. The multiplets F and F in trigonal axes 633
4 5
14.4. The double cubic group 634
14.5. Groups of lower symmetry 638
14.6. Improper rotations 640
15. TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
15.1. Operations involving the time 643
15.2. Complex conjugation 644
15.3. Determination of the time reversal operator 646
15.4. Kramers degeneracy 647
15.5. Time-reversal operator in the | J, M) representat ion 649
15.6. The 'Spin Hamiltonian' for a Kramers doublet 650
15.7. The rhombic group 654
15.8. Threefold symmetry 654
15.9. Selection rules related to time-reversal 656
15.10. The effect of an applied electric field on a paramagnetic ion 659

--- Page 14 ---

CONTENTS xiii
16. ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
16.1. The crystal field (or crystal potential) 665
16.2. Equivalent operators 670
16.3. Off-diagonal matrix elements of the crystal field 676
16.4. The electronic Zeeman interaction 677
16.5. Electron spin-spin interactions 678
17. HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
17.1. Electrostatic hyperfine interactions 680
17.2. Magnetic hyperfine interactions 687
17.3. Alternative derivation of the magnetic hyperfine interaction 690
17.4. Equivalent operators for the magnetic hyperfine interaction 692
17.5. The effect of s-electrons: configuration interaction 695
17.6. The effect of s-electrons: core polarization 702
17.7. Finer effects in the theory of hyperfine structure 706
18. IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
18.1. Kramers ions in a weak crystal field 713
18.2. Rare-earth ions in cubic symmetry 719
18.3. The quadruplet F 721
8
18.4. Representation of an irreducible tensor within the quadruplet
F —quadrupole coupling 731
8
18.5. Non-Kramers ions in the rare-earth group 732
18.6. Non-Kramers rare-earth ions in cubic surroundings 739
19. INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
19.1. Effect of the cubic crystal potential 742
19.2. 'Singlet' orbital ground state (ions of type A) 745
19.3. Triplet orbital ground state (ions of type B) 751
19.4. Departures from cubic symmetry 755
19.5. The influence of excited terms 758
20. THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
20.1. Summary of the foregoing theory 761
20.2. The molecular orbitals model for covalent bonding 762
20.3. Bonding and anti-bonding orbitals, overlap, and covalency 764
20.4. The ground states in weakly covalent compounds 767
20.5. Orbital momentum and spin-orbit coupling in the presence of
covalent bonding 773
20.6. Ligand hyperfine structure for ions of type A 111
20.7. Orbital singlets: correction terms for the ligand hyperfine
structure 781
20.8. Ligand hyperfine structure for ions of type B 784
20.9. Ligand quadrupole hyperfine structure 788

--- Page 15 ---

xiv CONTENTS
21. THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT IN PARAMAGNETIC
RESONANCE
21.1. Introduction 7 9<
21.2. The Born-Oppenheimer approximation and the Jahn-Teller
theorem 79!
21.3. The magnetic properties of a 2E level 79'
21.4 . The static Jahn-Teller effect in a *E state 80<
21.5. Dynamic features of the static Jahn-Teller effect SO'
21.6. The dynamic Jahn-Teller effect in a *E state 80i
21.7 . Motional narrowing of the Jahn-Teller spectrum 82(
21.8. Comparison with experiment 83(
21.9. The Jahn-Teller effect in a triplet state 83S
21.10. The Jahn-Teller effect in an orbital triplet with F coupling 83£
3
21.11. The Jahn-Teller effect in an orbital triplet with F coupling 841
5
21.12. Comparison with experiment 84(
APPENDIX A. Thermal and magnetic properties of a paramagnetic
substance 84£
APPENDIX B. Tables 1 to 26 85(
BIBLIOGRAPHY 87£
AUTHOR INDEX 893
SUBJECT INDEX 89S

--- Page 16 ---

PART I.
PRELIMINARY SURVEY
1
INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRON
PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE
1.1. Electronic and nuclear magnetic dipole moments
A PARAMAGNETIC substance may be defined as one that possesses
no resultant magnetic moment in the absence of an external magnetic
field but acquires a magnetic moment in the direction of an applied
field whose size is a function of the field. Such a resultant moment of
the substance may be partly due to induced dipoles, which appear
only through the action of the applied field and result from a change
in the motion of the constituent electrons of each atom or ion. In all
cases this gives rise to a negative induced moment (i.e. a moment
anti-parallel to the applied field), and hence to the diamagnetism that
is a basic property of all substances. Superimposed on this in certain
cases there may be a positive induced moment, resulting in para-
magnetism (this phenomenon is often referred to as 'Van Vleck
paramagnetism'). Both of these effects are independent of temperature
except in temperature regions where excited states are becoming
appreciably populated.
A more important class of paramagnetic substances, with which we
shall be mainly concerned, consists of those where the constituent
atoms (or ions) have permanent magnetic moments of atomic or nuclear
magnitude. In the absence of an external field such dipoles are randomly
oriented, but the application of a field results in a redistribution over
the various orientations in such a way that the substance acquires a
net magnetic moment. Such permanent magnetic dipoles occur only
when the atom or nucleus possesses a resultant angular momentum,
and the two are related by the formula
2

--- Page 17 ---

2 INTRODUCTION TO
where JJL is the magnetic dipole moment, G the angular momentum
(an integral or half-integral multiple of hj27r = H, where h is Planck's
constant), and y is the magnetogyric ratio, which is of order (e/mc)
for electrons and (e/Mc) for nuclei. When such a dipole is subjected
to a magnetic field H, it experiences a couple (JL A H, and the equation
of motion is
FIG. 1.1. Precession of a magnetic dipole (JL with angular momentum G about an applied
magnetic field H. The angular velocity to = — yH is positive if y is negative, as for an
x
electron; the direction of precession is then that of a right-handed screw advancing
along H, as shown.
which may be combined with eqn (1.1) to give
or
If the magnetic field H is assumed to lie along the z-axis of a system
of Cartesian coordinates, the solution of this equation can be written
in the form :
with analogous equations for JJL. The motion of the vectors G, jx
consists of a uniform precession about H with angular velocity (cf.
Fig. 1.1)

--- Page 18 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 3
where the negative sign means that the precession is in the direction
of a left-handed screw advancing along H if y is positive, and vice
versa. The component of G, (x along H remains fixed in magnitude,
so that the energy of the dipole in the field H (the 'Zeeman energy')
is a constant of the motion.
When a free atom or ion has a resultant angular momentum in its
electron system, it will possess a permanent magnetic dipole moment.
The magnetogyric ratio is then
where the negative sign occurs because of the negative charge on the
electron; e, m are the charge and mass of the electron (both taken as
positive numbers). The quantity g is a pure number of order unity,
whose value depends on the relative contributions of orbit and spin to
the total angular momentum. If only orbital momentum is present
we can write
where L is the quantum number of the total orbital momentum, and
the value of g is unity apart from some small corrections due to
L
diamagnetic and relativistic effects; these are usually less than 10~4
and we shall neglect them as lying outside the precision of most solid
state experiments, which form our main concern. If only electron spin
momentum is present we write similarly
where S is the quantum number of the total spin momentum. Apart
from diamagnetic and relativistic corrections which are of the same
order as in the orbital case, we have the important quantum electro-
dynamical correction
where a is the fine-structure constant. For many (but not all) solid-
state experiments it is sufficient to take g = 2.
s
When both orbital and spin momentum are present, the value of g
depends on the nature of the coupling between them. In i/S-coupling,
the resultant angular momentum is associated with a quantum number
J, where J = L + S, and the appropriate value of g is

--- Page 19 ---

4 INTRODUCTION TO
which reduces to the usual Lande formula
if we set g = 1, g = 2 exactly. The resultant electronic magnetic
L s
dipole moment is
where ft = (eH/Zmc) is the Bohr magneton (again a positive number).
Equation (1.14) is valid so long as we can neglect any interactions
that would admix states of different J; this means that the energy
associated with such interactions (such as the Zeeman interaction with
an external field) must be small compared with the energy differences
between levels of different J. These energy differences are predominantly
due to spin-orbit coupling, which in its simplest form can be represented
by a term
The energy of a level J is then given by the Lande formula
so that the separation between successive levels is
a result known as the Lande interval rule. For transition group ions
X is of order 102 to 103 cm"1, so that at temperatures well below room
temperature (for which kT is 200 cm"1) only the lowest level is occupied.
For a nucleus with spin quantum number /, the value of y is
where M is now the mass of the proton and g is a number that is
n
positive for many (but not all) isotopes. The nuclear magnetic moment
is then
where (5n = (eH/2Mc) is the nuclear magneton. It is often conveniei
to express the nuclear magnetic moment in terms of the Bohr magneto
where g = g (mlM) = </ /1836 and is therefore of order 10~3. (The
z n n
nomenclature g , g is used rather indiscriminately in the literature, but
n z
the distinction we have made here is a convenient one and will be

--- Page 20 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 5
retained in later chapters.) As different sign conventions are used by
different authors, we note here that we take both g and g to have the
n z
same sign as ({X//I).
1.2. Hyperfine structure in a free atom or ion
In a free atom or ion which has a resultant electronic angular
momentum J, and a nuclear spin I, the two are generally coupled
together through the magnetic interaction between the electronic and
FIG. 1.2. Magnetic hyperfine multiplet for the system J = 1, / = 1 corresponding to
the Hamilton (1.21), with weak field Zeeman splitting. Note that when J = I the value
of g — \gj for all values of F, see eqn (1.26); or more accurately, including the nuclear
F
contribution, g = ^(gj—gj) for all values of F when J = I, from eqn (1.25).
F
nuclear dipole moments. Within a manifold of given J this usually
takes the form
which couples J, I together to form a set of levels with quantum
numbers F = («/+/), (J+I — 1), . . . , \J—I\. The energy of a level
with quantum number F is
so that the separation between successive levels is
The splitting of the hyperfine multiplet (Fig. 1.2) given by eqn

--- Page 21 ---

6 INTRODUCTION TO
is similar to the Lande interval rule, eqn (1.17), and follows from
the fact that the magnetic hyperfine interaction (1.21) is similar in
form to the spin-orbit coupling (1.15). If both J and / are equal to 1
or more the electronic system and the nucleus may possess electric
quadrupole moments, and interaction between these gives a coupling
different in form from (1.21) so that the splitting of the hyperfine
multiplet no longer obeys the interval rule.
In a weak external magnetic field, sufficiently small that the Zeeman
energy is small compared with the hyperfine energy, each manifold of
(2F + 1) states belonging to a given value of F is split by an amount
proportional to H (see Fig. 1.2). The manifold behaves as though it
had a magnetic dipole moment
where
a result that can be obtained directly from (1.12) by replacing J, L, 8
by F, J, / respectively, and g by g g by —g. Since g is about
L j} s z I
10~3 gj it is often possible to use the approximation
which corresponds just to the projection of the electronic moment (Xj
onto F, and neglects the corresponding projection of the nuclear
moment fx.
z
The hyperfine interaction energy is seldom larger than about
10"1 cm"1, and is often much smaller. Thus until we reach temperatures
below 1°K (for 1°K, kT = 0-7 cm"1) all levels in the hyperfine multiplet
are nearly equally populated. More important for our purposes is the
fact that the hyperfine energy is generally smaller than the Zeeman
energy
(where for completeness we have included the nuclear Zeeman energy,
though the important term is the electronic Zeeman energy), if H is of
order 104 G. The scheme in which J, I couple to form a resultant F
is then not applicable, since the electronic Zeeman energy (<^1 cm."1)
is larger than the hyperfine energy. In the strong field limit (the Back-
Goudsmit region) the electronic moment precesses about the external

--- Page 22 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 7
field independently of the nuclear moment. The magnetic hyperfine
interaction (1.21) then results in a magnetic field at the nucleus, set up
by the precessing electronic magnetic moment, whose steady component
H is parallel to the external field H. In this approximation the nuclear
e
magnetic moment processes about the combined field (H+H ). Con-
e
versely this sets up a nuclear magnetic field whose steady component
H is again parallel to H, and the electronic moment thus processes
n
about a combined field (H-f H ).
n
This approximation means that, if H is along the z-axis, we are
retaining from the magnetic hyperfine energy (1.21) only the term
Similarly we retain only the z-components of the Zeeman interactions,
so that the total energy is just
For the electrons we have
where, since H is proportional to I , it has (2/ + 1) values, equally
n z
spaced. Similarly for the nucleus we have
where, since H is proportional to J , it has (2J + 1) values, equally
e z
spaced. A typical set of energy levels is shown in Fig. 1.3.
We have spelt out the position in the Back-Goudsmit region rather
carefully, because it is the region we shall be most concerned with in
electron paramagnetic resonance, and to emphasize the orders of
magnitude involved. If we take as typical,
electronic Zeeman interaction ~ 1 cm."1,
magnetic hyperfine interaction ~ 10"1 cm"1,
nuclear Zeeman interaction <—' 10~3 cm"1,
then the magnetic fields involved are
showing that the precession frequency of the electronic moment is
determined primarily by the external field H, with the nuclear field
H adding a subsidiary amount, while the precession frequency of the
n
nuclear dipole moment is determined mainly by the electronic field
H , to which the external field H adds a small contribution.
e

--- Page 23 ---

8 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.3. Hyperfine energy levels in a strong external magnetic field H along the z-axis,
for a system with J — 1, / = 1. The diagram corresponds to the strong field limit, eqns
(1.29) and (1.32), except that displacements due to the nuclear Zeeman term —g^Ifl
are omitted. Note that the order of the nuclear levels due to the magnetic hyperfine
interaction (proportional to J and hence to —H) is reversed top and bottom, unlike the
z e
quadrupole contributions.
For completeness we include here the contribution to the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction in the strong external magnetic field
limit. This adds an energy
where the coefficient (6/4) is the value of W in the extreme case
J = J, I = I. As before, the quadrupole term occurs only if both J, /
z z
are 1 or more. The effect of the quadrupole energy is illustrated in
Fig. 1.3.

--- Page 24 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 9
1.3. Magnetic resonance
We have seen that a magnetic dipole (JL = yG (see eqn (1.1)), when
placed in a field H, precesses about the field with angular velocity
u> = —yH (eqn (1.6)). This precession produces an oscillatory
L
magnetic moment in any direction normal to the field H, which can
interact with an oscillatory magnetic field H cos cot, which is also
1
normal to H. The interaction has a marked effect on the motion of the
dipole only when co is close to the natural precession frequency CD,
L
so that we are concerned with a resonance phenomenon. When the
resonance condition co = CO is fulfilled, the component // cos a of the
L
dipole along the steady field H can be altered materially even by
oscillatory fields whose amplitude H <#. This effect is known as
1
'magnetic resonance'.
From eqn (1.7), a change in the component p cos a means a change
in the energy of the dipole, which is W = —pH cos a, which, from
(1.1), we can write as
The stationary values of the component G cos a of the angular
momentum are restricted in quantum mechanics to HM, H(M — 1),
etc., where the magnetic quantum number M has a series of integral
or half-integral values differing by unity between successive values.
The allowed transitions for this simple system, when a suitably oriented
oscillatory magnetic field is applied, are given by the selection rule
AJf = ±1, and hence require a quantum of energy
or
The minus sign is significant only if circularly polarized radiation is
used, in which case the applied magnetic field must rotate in the same
sense as the dipole precesses about H in order to achieve resonance.
In practice linearly polarized radiation is almost always used (unless
an experimental determination of the sign of y is required); such radia-
tion can be decomposed into two circularly polarized components, one
of which will then be in the correct sense for resonance.
The simple quantum approach gives the same resonance condition
as we expected from classical considerations. We shall show in Chapter
2 that the equation of motion (1.2), (1.3), or (1.4) is quantum mechani-
cally correct, and discuss both the classical and quantum approaches

--- Page 25 ---

10 INTRODUCTION TO
in detail. The numerical value of the resonance frequency is easily
found. For an electronic dipole y = — g(e/2m) with e in e.m.u., so that,
)
using the value ejm = 1-758796(17) X 107 e.m.u./g,
The value of g is thus easily determined from a measurement of field
and frequency, since
Most measurements are made at centimetre wavelengths, so that in
terms of wave-number v (in cm"1) or wavelength A (in cm) (1.36)
becomes
This shows that if g = 2, a field of 10-7 kG is required for resonance at
a wavelength of 1 cm. In practice the most commonly used wavelengths
are about 3 cm (v ^ 10 GHz), 0-8 cm (v & 40 GHz), and harmonics of
the latter.
Since nuclear magnetic moments are about 10~3/?, their resonance
frequencies are correspondingly smaller in the same field. For the
proton the resonance frequency is
so that the resonance frequency is 42-577 MHz in a field of 10 kG. In
an electron resonance experiment, the proton magnetic resonance
frequency is often determined in order to find the value of the magnetic
field H at the sample, using (1.38). The value of g for the electronic
dipoles can be found directly from the ratio of the electron and proton
resonance frequencies, using the relation
If the electron sample and proton sample are not located at the same
point, it may be necessary to apply a small correction for the difference
in magnetic field at the two samples.
1.4. Effective spin and anisotropy
For a free atom the electronic magnetic dipole moment can generally
be written in the form \LJ = —gjfiJ (eqn (1.14)) and the Hamiltonian

--- Page 26 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 11
for its Zeeman interaction with a field H is
For a stationary state whose magnetic quantum number is M, corre-
sponding to a component hM of angular momentum in the direction
of H, the energy is
and allowed transitions of the type AJf = ±1 require an energy
quantum
This simple form of the Zeeman interaction is valid when we are dealing
with a group of (2J + 1) levels, degenerate when H = 0, and well
separated from other levels, i.e. the Zeeman energy gjfiH < A, where
A is the energy difference from the next level or group of levels.
In the solid state we are concerned mostly with ions rather than
with atoms. Many such ions have closed electron shells which have no
resultant angular momentum and hence no permanent electronic
magnetic dipole moment. Partly filled shells, with permanent dipole
moments due to the orbital motion of the electrons, or to their intrinsic
spin, or to both, occur in the 'transition groups'. These comprise the
3d ('iron' group), the 4td ('palladium' group), the 5d ('platinum' group),
the 4/ ('lanthanide' or 'rare earth' group), and the 5/ ('actinide' group).
Other paramagnetic ions may occur as defects or be created by irradia-
tion. We shall mainly be concerned with localized states of transition
group ions in non-conducting crystals. Furthermore, we are primarily
concerned with 'paramagnetic' substances in which each permanent
dipole is substantially unaffected by the presence of the other permanent
dipoles. The theory then treats each dipole separately, and the interac-
tion with neighboring permanent magnetic dipoles enters only in a
subsidiary manner.
Nevertheless, in the solid state a paramagnetic ion is by no means
'free'. It is surrounded by a cage of diamagnetic ions, the nearest at
distances of order 0*2 to 0-3 nm, the complex forming part of an
extended lattice. These charged 'ligand' ions ha\re a strong interaction
with the paramagnetic ion, producing a strong electrostatic field (the
'ligand' field), through which the paramagnetic electrons must move.
The energy associated with the interaction between the paramagnetic
electrons and this ligand field varies roughly from 102 to 104 cm"1; it
may thus exceed the spin-orbit interaction, and in some cases it may

--- Page 27 ---

12 INTRODUCTION TO
exceed the electrostatic interaction with other electrons on the central
ion responsible for Z/$-coupling. This ligand interaction is an additional
complication in the already complex problem of a many-electron atom.
In the 'crystal field' approach, the ligand ions are regarded as setting
up an additional electrostatic potential (the 'crystal potential'), which
reflects the symmetry of the complex and its immediate surroundings.
The magnetic electrons, localized on the central ion and moving in this
potential, experience a 'Stark splitting' of their orbital levels. The
lowest levels are just those in which these negatively charged electrons
are most successful in avoiding negatively charged ligand ions, thus
reducing the energy due to their mutual electrostatic repulsion. In a
more sophisticated approach the electrons are no longer regarded as
localized on the central ion but are shared with the ligand ions and are
spread out over the complex. They occupy molecular orbitals rather
than atomic orbitals and may take part in both cr- and 77-bonding,
different orbitals having different energies. This approach allows for a
certain amount of covalent bonding, in contrast to the purely ionic
approach of the crystal-field method.
Whichever theoretical approach is adopted the result is a splitting
of levels, leaving groups of rather small degeneracy. The degeneracy
within each group (and, to some extent, the relative splittings between
different groups) depends on the symmetry within the complex, and
can thus be predicted by group theory. In the case of local cubic
symmetry, groups of 1, 2, 3, or 4 degenerate levels are found, but in
cases of lower symmetry levels may often be only single, or degenerate
in pairs. An important over-riding theorem concerning the residual
degeneracy is due to Kramers; in a system containing an odd number
of electrons, at least twofold degeneracy must remain in the absence
of a magnetic field. The pairs of states ('Kramers doublets') involved
are time conjugate, one being obtained from the other by use of a
time-reversal operator whose square is —1; they can be split by a
magnetic perturbation (a time-odd operator), but not by an electro-
static perturbation, which is even under time reversal.
In electron paramagnetic resonance we are concerned with transitions
between levels split at most by a few cm."1. Hence we are immediately
interested only in groups of levels that are degenerate (or nearly so)
in zero magnetic field, and a convenient method is needed to represent
the behaviour of such a group of levels when a magnetic field is applied
to the system. A suitable method has been evolved which uses the
concept of an 'effective spin' S, which is a fictitious angular momentum

--- Page 28 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 13
such that the degeneracy of the group of levels involved is set equal to
(2$ + l). For example, an isolated Kramers doublet with just two levels
is assigned an effective spin § = -|. This concept of an 'effective spin'
is useful because it is possible to set up an 'effective spin Hamiltonian'
that gives a correct description of the behaviour of the group of levels
in terms as concise as those for a free atom or ion. In some cases a
theoretical justification of the effective spin Hamiltonian can be given;
if the local symmetry of the complex is known, the effective spin
Hamiltonian is expected to reflect this symmetry, thus imposing
restrictions on its form. If the observed spectrum does not conform
to the spin Hamiltonian that has been assumed, other forms can be
tried empirically until a fit is obtained.
The first term that we can expect to meet in the effective spin
Hamiltonian is that representing the electronic Zeeman interaction.
By analogy with eqn (1.40) we might expect this to be of the form
This has (28 + 1) states, which, again by analogy, we label by means
of a magnetic quantum number M representing the value of S . Then,
z
taking H to be along the 2-axis, the energy is
and the quantum of energy required for an allowed transition of the
type AJf = ±1 is
giving a resonance condition similar to (1.42). For a doublet state which
we label S = ^, the energy levels are as shown in Fig. 1.4: two levels,
diverging linearly with H, with slopes ±\g$H.
The form of eqn (1.43) presupposes that the Zeeman interaction
depends only on the angle between the effective spin vector S and
the magnetic field. In practice this is commonly found not to be the
case; the Zeeman interaction depends also on the angle that H makes
with certain axes defined by the local symmetry of the magnetic
complex. A more general form, which takes into account 'anisotropy
of this kind, is
which is a shorthand notation for

--- Page 29 ---

14 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.4. Energy levels for S = J; Zeeman effect in an applied field H, with allowed
transition at hv = gf$H.
In the majority of cases (the exceptions being complexes with rather
low symmetry) the quantities g = g , etc., and the cross terms can
xy yx
then be eliminated by a suitable choice for the x, y, z axes (known as
the 'principal axes'), yielding the simpler form
If the magnetic field H is applied in a direction with cosines (I, ra, n)
with respect to these principal axes, the energy levels are given by an
equation of the form (1.44), with a value of g given by the relation
With this value of g, the resonance condition is again given by eqn
(1.45). Equations (1.44), (1.45), and (1.49) can be verified by a straight-
forward diagonalization of the Hamiltonian (1.48), or by the equivalent
method (see § 3.2) of changing to a set of axes (x, y , z) for S where
e e e
the direction cosines of z are (lg lg, ^g \g, ngjg) with respect to the
e xx yy z
principal axes. The direction of z is not the same as that of H unless
e
H is along one of the principal axes, or there is no anisotropy. For
example, if the complex has cubic symmetry, it follows necessarily that
g = g = g so that the Zeeman interaction has the same
xx yy zz)
Hamiltonian as for a free magnetic dipole. In axial symmetry

--- Page 30 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 15
eqn (1.49) reduces to
where 6 is the angle between H and the z-axis.
We have seen in § 1.1 that the precession of the magnetic dipole
moment about the applied field H is in the right-handed sense if the
magnetogyric ratio y is negative; for an electronic magnetic moment,
from eqn (1.8), this occurs when g is positive. If a circularly polarized
oscillatory magnetic field is applied, it will be effective in interacting
with the precessing magnetic moment only if it rotates in synchronism
with it, and hence observation of which sense of rotation is effective
in causing magnetic resonance transitions will determine experimen-
tally the sign of g. For electrons in a free atom, this sign is always
positive (since we have already allowed for the negative charge of the
electron in eqn (1.8)), but this is not necessarily the case when we are
dealing with a magnetic ion in a solid. A simple case where the effective
value of g is negative is given in § 3.4: the weak-field Zeeman effect of
the F doublet belonging to a manifold with S = f in a cubic field.
7
When anisotropy is present the situation is more complicated, since
it is possible for g , g , g to have different signs. (We remark here that
xx yy zz
experience shows that in this case it is necessary to take the value of
g in eqn (1.49) as always positive, see § 3.2.) It is shown in § 3.2 that
the use of circularly polarized radiation still gives magnetic resonance
transitions of different intensity according to the sense of rotation, and
that observation of which sense gives the greater intensity can be used
to determine the sign of the product (g g g )' If we have axial
xx yy zz
symmetry (g = g = g ), this means that the sign of g = g\\ can
xx yy ± z
thus be established experimentally, but that of g is indeterminate.
±
An experimental determination of the sign of g for an isotropic
Kramers doublet (the ground state of NpF ) has been carried out by
6
Hutchison and Weinstock (1960). The general question of the sign and
other properties of the </-'tensor' is considered further in §§ 15.6-15.8.
We mention here also that for values of S = f and greater, other
types of Zeeman term linear in H may occur (see § 18.3 for a general
discussion; a simple example is given in § 3.4).
We shall not consider here the question of the intensity of magnetic
resonance transitions (for which see Chapter 2 and § 3.2), but mention
that in axial symmetry, when g = 0, the intensity is zero (i.e. the
±
transition is not allowed). For Kramers doublets this rule holds rigidly
apart from small higher-order Zeeman terms in H2 or H3 for which

--- Page 31 ---

16 INTRODUCTION TO
further terms in the spin Hamiltonian are required (see § 18.3). For
non-Kramers doublets distortions from axial symmetry due to crystal
defects or strains may produce a situation in which transitions are
allowed with the oscillatory magnetic field along the supposedly unique
symmetry axis (see § 1.5).
It is important to note that S is not necessarily the true angular
momentum of the system, in which case the quantity g does not give
the true magnetogyric ratio that would be measured in a classical
experiment of the Barnett or Einstein-de Haas type. For this reason
g is better called the 'spectroscopic splitting factor'. As already
remarked, although the individual quantities g , g , g , etc., are not
xx yy zz
necessarily all positive, we shall see in Chapter 3 that it is convenient
always to regard g as a positive quantity, since then the energy levels
always ascend in value with increasing values of M as far as the elec-
tronic Zeeman interaction is concerned. There is no loss of generality
in this; it means only that along a principal axis p, for which g^ is
negative, the positive sense of z is in the opposite sense to the applied
e
field H. In fact this is necessary in order to preserve a continuous
rotation of the axis z as H is rotated through a principal axis for which
e
g is negative (see Fig. 3.1).
pp
In this introductory chapter we shall seek primarily to present the
main features of the spin Hamiltonian in a plausible way, as extensions
of the spin Hamiltonian for a free atom. A simple example that
illustrates this empirical approach is given in § 1.8. The relation between
the spin Hamiltonian and the spectrum is discussed in detail in Chapter
3; a full theoretical discussion of the spin Hamiltonian, and its relation
to the fundamental theory of the paramagnetic complex, is given in
Chapters 14-21.
1.5. 'Initial splittings' or 'fine structure'
For a free atom or ion, with no hyperfine structure, the 2J + 1 levels
are degenerate in zero magnetic field, and the states transform into
one another under all spatial rotations as the system has full rotational
symmetry. For an ion in a solid (with no hyperfine structure) the
symmetry conditions may be more restricted. The concept of the
effective spin S is then valid (in its narrowest terms) when we are
dealing with a set of 2$ + l states that transform into one another
under the symmetry operations appropriate to the crystal lattice in
which the ion is placed. The 2S + I levels are then degenerate in zero

--- Page 32 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 17
magnetic field, and, except in the particular cases mentioned at the
end of the last paragraph, the Zeeman effect in an applied field is
represented by eqn (1.46),
This gives a set of equally spaced levels, and the allowed transitions
are between successive levels (kM = ±1), which differ in energy by
FIG. 1.5. Zeeman effect for triplet state S = 1, in the absence of any initial splitting of
the levels. The two allowed magnetic resonance transitions coincide at hv = gfiH.
so that the transitions coincide at
This holds true whatever the direction of H, which affects only the
value of g. The situation is illustrated in Fig. 1.5 for 8 = I; an example
is the Ni2+ ion, 3d8, in a ligand field of exact octahedral symmetry (for
which the (/-factor is necessarily isotropic, since g — g = g ).
xx yy zz
If we do not have exact octahedral (cubic) symmetry, the three
levels may not be degenerate in zero magnetic field. This may easily
3

--- Page 33 ---

18 INTRODUCTION TO
be understood by reference to a special case of S = I : a mythical ion
with one electron in an atomic p-state, and no electron spin. The orbital
level 1 = 1 then embraces three states, which may be written in the
form
as far as angular variation of the wave-functions is concerned. In a
ligand field of cubic symmetry the directions x, y, z are equivalent,
and all three states have the same energy in the absence of any external
field. However, if the ligand field has only axial (or threefold, or four-
fold) symmetry about the z-axis, only the x, y axes are equivalent.
It follows that the \(x //•)}, \(y/r)) states have the same energy, but this
is not necessarily the same as that of the |(z/r)) state. In a ligand field
of still lower (e.g. twofold) symmetry, none of the three axes is
equivalent, and all states have different energies.
In the case of a spin or effective spin of S = 1, the difference of
energy between the S — ±1 states and the S = 0 state in the case
z z
of axial, threefold, or fourfold symmetry about the z-axis may be
represented by the addition of a term DS^ to the effective spin
Hamiltonian. It is generally preferable to write this in a form that
includes an additive constant so as to leave the centre of gravity of the
levels unchanged. On including the Zeeman interaction, we have then
The energy levels of this Hamiltonian for § = 1, when the magnetic
field is applied along the z-axis, are
These are shown in Fig. 1.6, together with the allowed transitions
(AJfcT = ±1), which occur at hv = \(D±g pH)\.
g z
When H is not along the z-axis, the energy levels do not in general
vary linearly with H and the position is more complicated. The reason
for this is that in zero field the magnetic moment precesses about the
unique axis (the z-axis), but in a very strong magnetic field (gfiH ^> D)
it changes to a precession about H. In a first approximation the energy
levels then diverge linearly with H, and the states may be approxi-
mately characterized as | +1), |0), | — 1} corresponding to their compo-
nents of angular momentum about an axis that is identical with H if
there is no anisotropy in the (/-factor. In this approximation the levels

--- Page 34 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 19
FIG. 1.6. Energy levels and allowed transitions for the Hamiltonian (1.50) with S = 1
and H along the z-axis, in reduced energy coordinates. The transitions are drawn for a
constant frequency and variable H, such that hv = f £>.
are (if a is isotropic, and H is at an angle 6 with the z-axis)
where the next terms are of order D*l(gfiH). The allowed transitions
are (again in first approximation)

--- Page 35 ---

20 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.7. Energy levels and allowed transitions for the Hamiltonian (1.50), with/S — 1
and H perpendicular to the z-axis, in reduced energy coordinates. As in Fig. 1.6, the
transitions are drawn for a constant frequency and variable H, such that hv = f D. The
states are characterized by the nomenclature |+>, |0), | — >; in strong magnetic fields
(g /3H:^>D) they become approximately |-fl>, |0>, | —1>. The transition |+> <-> | — >
±
is then weaker than the other two by a factor of order (D/g^ffH)2.

--- Page 36 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 21
together with a weakly allowed transition, whose intensity is smaller
by a factor of order (DlgfiH)*,
For obvious reasons this is often referred to as a AJf = 2 transition,
but this is a misleading characterization, since the levels really corre-
spond to states that are linear combinations of the three basic states
|+1), |0), |— 1). In intermediate field strengths (gfiH ~ D) the states
are mixed in significant proportions and W varies non-linearly with H,
FIG. 1.8. Energy levels and allowed transitions for the Hamiltonian (1.50) with S = I
and H along the z-axis, in reduced energy coordinates. The figure differs from Fig. 1.6
in that the transitions are drawn for hv = 0-7D; both correspond to hv = \D—gf$H\,
z z
with gfiH respectively smaller and larger than D in the two cases. Each transition
z z
corresponds to |0> <-> | —1>; the transition | +1) <-> |0> is not energetically possible when
hv < D, and H is along the z-axis.
If D is negative the figure is similar but inverted, with the labels | +1), | —1> inter-
changed.
corresponding to a more complicated motion of the magnetic moment
under the conflicting influences of the two terms in the spin Hamiltonian
(1.50). The variation of the levels when H is normal to the z-axis is
shown in Fig. 1.7.
Figures 1.6 and 1.7 have each been drawn showing the allowed transi-
tions for hv > D. The corresponding transitions observed when
hv < D are shown (for H along the z-axis) in Fig. 1.8; when H is
perpendicular to this axis it is clear from Fig. 1.7 that only one transi-
tion, | +} <-> |0), will be observed when hv < D.

--- Page 37 ---

22 INTRODUCTION TO
The diagrams, Figs. 1.6-1.8, have been drawn to correspond to
working at constant frequency and variable magnetic field, which is
generally the most convenient experimental arrangement. It is
obviously then appropriate to make H the dependent variable, and the
strong field equations (1.53), where g is isotropic, can be written
or
FIG. 1.9. Angular variation at constant frequency and variable H of the two strongly
allowed transitions for S = I when H makes an angle 6 with the z -axis and the spin
Hamiltonian is
(a) g isotropic; the splitting varies as (3 cos20 — 1) in first approximation (D <^gf}H).
(b) g axially anisotropic (|gr | > g ).
(( L
(c) g axially anisotropic (jgr,|j < g ).
±
Increasing field is towards the right; the broken lines show the variation in the position
of the (coincident) transitions if D were zero.
where the omitted terms are of order (D2lhv) or (Djg^)2IH , and
0
H = hv/g{3, while (D/gp) is a measure of D expressed in terms of
Q
field strength. Clearly the value of H gives the value of g, while the
0
separation between the two transitions (see Fig. 1.9(a)) gives that of
(Z>/<7/?). A check that the angular variation is 3 cos20 —1 can be used
to confirm that we have the correct form of the Hamiltonian, while
the fact that H is independent of 6 shows that g is isotropic; the two
0
transitions cross at 6 = 54° 44'. These conclusions are of course
exactly true only in the limit (hv/D) —>* oo, but the displacements in
the transitions of order D2/hv are small so long as hv > D.

--- Page 38 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 23
If g is anisotropic (g = g^\g = g = g ), then when H is at an
zz xx yy ±
angle 6 to the z-axis, the value of g is given by
and the transitions in strong fields come at
so that the cross-over point is displaced to a different value of 6, and the
mid-point of the two transitions (H in this approximation) is now also
Q
a function of the angle 6. The two cases of g\\ > g and g\\ < g are
L L
sketched in Figs. 1.9(b) and (c).
Although it is generally experimentally convenient to work at a
constant frequency, the strong field measurements also give much more
information than a frequency-sweep system in zero magnetic field. In
the present example, the latter would enable the value of \D\ to be
found from the frequency at which maximum absorption is observed
(though comparison of intensities at different frequencies needs careful
instrumentation). In contrast, measurements at high fields make it
possible in addition
(a) to determine the orientation of the unique axis (the z-axis), if
not known;
(b) to determine the principal values of the (/-tensor;
(c) to check the assumption of axial symmetry.
Similar advantages obtain through working in high fields in more
complicated cases, as outlined below; the sign of D can also be found
from observations of relative intensity at temperatures where kT ~hv,
as described in §§ 3.3, 3.6.
If D^>g/3H, the singlet and doublet are so well separated that
resonance transitions between them cannot be made unless Jiv ~ D.
When hv < D, we have only a 'weak field' Zeeman effect, which gives
a first-order splitting of the doublet levels when H is along the z-axis
but only a second-order splitting when H is normal to it. The isolated
doublet can then be regarded as a 'non-Kramers' doublet for which
S = J, whose first-order Zeeman effect is represented by the new spin
Hamiltonian (with S — |)
where the effective value of g\\ is now twice that appropriate to the
spin Hamiltonian with S = 1, while g = 0. No transition within the
±
doublet is allowed by this Hamiltonian.

--- Page 39 ---

24 INTRODUCTION TO
If a small rhombic distortion is present the two states in (1.57) may
be admixed and a slight initial splitting of the two levels is caused
(see §3.5). For states of the form |+), | — } given by eqn (3.27a),
between which S has a finite matrix element, resonance transitions
z
are allowed for an oscillatory magnetic field along the z-axis. Thus a
small distortion from axial symmetry will split the doublet slightly
and give allowed transitions with this unusual orientation of the
oscillatory field. A modified spin Hamiltonian with S — ^ which allows
for this is
If the distortion from axial symmetry is due to local defects or strains
the parameters A^, A will have a random distribution of values that
y
is often assumed to be Gaussian (for a fuller discussion, see § 18.5).
We shall not at this stage discuss in detail the many types of 'initial
splittings' that can occur in practice. Their presence may be detected
through the observation of transitions occurring at different values of
the magnetic field, instead of all being superimposed at hv = gfiH.
With sufficient precautions to ensure that no transitions escape detec-
tion, the number of resonance lines (= 2S in strong fields) may be used
to check the value of S, or to determine it if not previously known. For
values of S — f or more, the transitions even in strong fields are unequal
in intensity, that for M <=> M — 1 being proportional to
This corresponds to the projection of the magnetic moment on the
direction of the oscillatory magnetic field being larger for small values
of \M| than for higher values of \M\ (see § 3.3). This variation of
intensity makes it readily possible to distinguish 'fine structure' due
to such initial splittings from hyperfine structure (see below), where
the lines corresponding to different nuclear orientations have the same
intensity at temperatures where kT > hyperfine energy.
In conclusion, we remark that the fine structure terms in the effective
spin Hamiltonian must reflect the symmetry of the lattice point on
which the paramagnetic ion is placed. In cubic symmetry, for example,
there may be terms for 8 = 2 or more of the type
This will give a fine structure in the spectrum of the type shown in
Fig. 3.3(a) for 8 = f in strong magnetic fields; the structure is similar
at all orientations of the magnetic field, but the line separations vary

--- Page 40 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 25
as (Z4+m4+w4 — f), which is typical of cubic symmetry, (l,m,n)
being the direction cosines of H with respect to the fourfold cubic
axes. This variation corresponds to the cubic harmonic
the apparently more complicated constant term in the spin Hamiltonian
(1.59) is due to the fact that allowance must be made for the non-
commuting properties of the components of S, a complication that does
not arise with the components of r.
Similarly the fine structure term discussed earlier in this section
arises from the spherical harmonic
whose analogue in the spin Hamiltonian is
It corresponds to a quadrupolar distortion in the magnetization density
on the ion, while terms of the fourth degree (such as the cubic term
above) correspond to hexa-decapole distortions.
1.6. Magnetic hyperfine structure
For a free atom or ion in LS-coupling, the magnetic hyperfine struc-
ture term has the simple form (1.21)
The interaction that this represents may be regarded either as that
between the nuclear magnetic dipole moment and the magnetic field
at the nucleus due to the electronic magnetization, or conversely,
that of the electronic magnetization with the magnetic field due to
the nuclear magnetic moment. In the solid state we have seen that
the interaction between the electronic magnetization and an external
magnetic field H may vary with the orientation of H with respect to
the principal axes of the ligand field, and we may expect the same to
be true for its interaction with the nuclear magnetic field. Thus instead
of a simple direct analogue to (1.21)
we may anticipate a more complicated type of interaction analogous
to that for the Zeeman interaction (1.46), (1.47). Both experimentally
and theoretically we find that in the vast majority of cases the correct

--- Page 41 ---

26 INTRODUCTION TO
term is of the form
which is shorthand for
By a suitable choice of axes that, when the hyperfine structure is
due to the nucleus of the paramagnetic ion itself and not to the nucleus
of a ligand ion, nearly always means the principal axes of the (/-tensor,
this can be reduced to the form
In a first approximation in a strong external magnetic field (A < gfiH)
the magnetic hyperfine energy is
where M is the electronic magnetic quantum number and m the nuclear
magnetic quantum number, and A is given by the relation
where (I, m, n) are the direction cosines of H with respect to the
principal axes (x, y, z). In the case of axial symmetry (g = g = g ,
xx yy L
g = 0n; A = A = A \ A = A\\) this takes the form
zz xx yy L zz
where 6 is the angle between H and the unique axis (the z-axis). These
equations can be verified by perturbation theory, or by the equivalent
method (see § 3.8) in which we change to a set of 'electronic' axes
(#> 2/> ze) as mentioned in § 1.4 and also to a set of 'nuclear' axes
e e
(#> 2/n> zn) in which the direction cosines of the z -axis are
n n
which corresponds to the direction of the steady component of the
electronic magnetic field at the nucleus. This direction is not the same
as that of H nor that of z unless H coincides with one of the principal
e
axes of the (/-tensor and hence also (on our assumption) of the A -tensor,
except when there is no anisotropy. As before, if the complex has cubic
symmetry so that g = g = g and also A = A = A , we have
xx yy zz xx yy zz
no need for the complexities of a tensor type interaction and the
magnetic hyperfine interaction (apart from occasional extra terms) is

--- Page 42 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 27
the same (eqn (1.60)) as we would have expected by simple analogy
with a free ion.
Although we shall primarily discuss in this section the simple case
of strong external magnetic field (A < gfiH) it may be helpful at this
point to draw an energy level diagram without this restriction. For
simplicity we take the case of S = \, I = 1 with no anisotropy, for
FIG. 1.10. Energy levels and allowed transitions for S = J, / = 1 for the Hamiltonian
(with no anisotropy)
The strong AM = ±1, Am = 0 transitions are indicated by continuous vertical lines;
the weak AM = ±1, Am = ^fl transitions by broken vertical lines. The diagram is
drawn for constant frequency and variable magnetic field. The arrow marked OR
indicates the working region for the Gorter-Rose method of nuclear polarization
(see §1.12).
which the spin Hamiltonian is similar to that for a free ion
The last term is the nuclear Zeeman interaction, which is usually small
and will be neglected for the time being. The levels are then shown as
a function of H in Fig. 1.10. In zero magnetic field the six levels split
into a quadruplet corresponding to a total angular momentum F — f

--- Page 43 ---

28 INTRODUCTION TO
and a doublet F = |. In strong fields the levels diverge linearly and
in first approximation are given by
where the electronic magnetic quantum number M = + | or — J and
the nuclear magnetic quantum number ra=+l, Oor—1. In inter-
mediate fields (A ~ gfiH) the behaviour is more complicated. If the
magnetic hyperfine structure term is anisotropic, F is no longer a good
quantum number and the levels in zero field are more split up (in the
case under consideration, they split into three doublets). However, in
the special case of axial symmetry with H along the unique axis, the
quantity (Jf+ra), which is equivalent to the weak-field quantum
number m for a free ion, is still a good quantum number (see § 3.9).
F
When anisotropy is present (including anisotropy in the (/-factor), we
may expect the general behaviour of the energy levels to be yet more
complicated; but in strong magnetic fields (A<^gfiH) eqn (1.68) is still
valid in a first approximation, with g given by (1.49) or (1.49a) and A
by (1.65) or (1.66). In this approximation, the energy levels diverge
linearly with H but with separations that depend on the orientation
of the magnetic field.
We now consider the possible transitions, which are of three types.
(a) Transitions in which AJf = ±1, Am = 0
In a strong external field H(A<^gf)H) these are the main allowed
transitions, corresponding to a simple magnetic resonance of the elec-
tronic magnetization without change in the orientation of the nuclear
magnet. They are indicated in Fig. 1.10 by continuous vertical lines
for a system where H is varied and the frequency of resonance is
constant. In the approximation of eqn (1.68) these transitions are
equally spaced at
The three transitions corresponding to m = +1,0, and —1 are equally
intense at all ordinary temperatures (kT >-4), since the three (or,
more generally, 2/ + 1) nuclear orientations are equally probable. As
pointed out in § 1.2, this approximation is equivalent to the electronic
magnetic resonance taking place in a field (H+H ), where # = (Am/gft)
n n
is the steady component of the nuclear field in the direction of H;
when anisotropy is present, the size of H depends on the orientation
n
of H, as shown, for example, in Fig. 1.11.

--- Page 44 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 29
FIG. 1.11. Plot of the quantities g2 and #4(A#n)2 against cos20 for a highly anisotropic
Co2+ ion with nearly axial symmetry, confirming the expected linear variation with
cos20. For gz this follows from eqn (1.49a). The quantity AH is the interval in field
n
between successive hyperfine lines; i.e. from (1-69) A = gf}&H and hence (1-66) gives
n
In a second approximation equation (1.69) would contain terms in
m2 of order (A2lhv), corresponding to a slight curvature of the energy
levels which is more marked in intermediate fields. These terms give
rise to a slightly unequal spacing in the hyperfine structure (cf. Fig.
1.12); in nearly all cases (see § 3.8, and Figs. 3.9, 3.11) the spacing is
slightly larger towards the high-field end of a group of hyperfine lines,
when observed at constant frequency. When § = 1 or more, the
average interval between hyperfine lines differs between different
electronic transitions (see Fig. 3.9) because of similar second-order
effects; this can provide some information about the sign of the hyper-
fine interaction if that of the initial splitting terms is known (see § 3.8).
Although the quantities A , A , A may not all have the same sign, it
xx yy zz
is simplest to assume that the quantity A in eqn (1.65) is always
positive in sign, like that of g. The order of the levels is then known,

--- Page 45 ---

30 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.12. Magnetic hyperfine structure in the magnetic resonance spectrum of Nd3+(4/3)
in lanthanum ethylsulphate. The two groups of 8 (= 2/-f-l) lines establish that the
nuclear spins of the odd isotopes 143Nd, 145Nd are each / = \. The relative abundances
of the two isotopes are 12 and 8 per cent respectively, so that the stronger hfs lines,
(intensity /^|-(12 per cent) = 1J per cent of the main line ('off scale') due to the even
isotopes), belong to 143Nd. The slight asymmetry and unequal separation are due to
second-order effects (Bleaney and Scovil 1950).
those with positive values of M lying above those with negative values;
and those with positive values of m lie above those with negative
values for positive values of M, and vice versa for negative values of
m (as in Fig. 1.10), provided that |A| > |flTjj8H|.
(b) Transitions in which AJkf = ±1, Am = ±1
These transitions, which involve a change in the orientation of the
nuclear magnetic moment as well as the electronic magnetic moment,
are weakly allowed, their intensity being smaller than that of the
Am = 0 transitions considered above by a factor of order (Afhv)2.
When g, A are both isotropic, or if both are axially symmetric and H
is along the unique axis, such transitions are allowed only when
AJif = ±1, Am = =pl (that is, when A(Jf +m) = 0). The transitions
shown by broken vertical lines in Fig. 1.10 are of this type. For S = J,
all Am = ±1 transitions lie nearly midway between the Am = 0
transitions, being slightly displaced by second-order effects of order
(A2/hv) and also by the nuclear Zeeman energy r^g ^H. When the
x
only weak transitions allowed are of the type A(Jf+m) = 0, they re-
quire an oscillatory magnetic field parallel to the steady magnetic
field, whereas AJf = ±1, Am = 0 and AJf = 0, Am = ±1 tran-
sitions require an oscillatory magnetic field normal to the steady
field. When anisotropy is present, such polarization rules are not exact
except in special cases (see § 3.9).

--- Page 46 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 31
(c) Transitions of the type AJf = 0, Am = ±1
In very strong external fields (A<^gfiH) these are purely nuclear
transitions, but in intermediate fields they may have some weak
electronic intensity of order (A /gfiH)2 relative to the Am — 0 transitions.
In the approximation of eqn (1.68) they require a quantum
but they will be displaced by higher-order effects of order (A2/gf3H).
In general, the frequencies required are much less than those for
transitions of the type AJf = ±1, thus making the intensity so low
that these transitions are virtually unobservable directly. They are
important because they give much fuller and more accurate information
about the hyperfine structure than the previous transitions (a) and (b),
and can be observed indirectly by means of the Electron-Nuclear
Double Resonance technique (Endor), which is discussed below in
§ 1.13 and more fully in Chapter 4.
This discussion of magnetic hyperfine structure has been confined
to the simplest terms. As in the case of the electronic Zeeman interac-
tion, when S = f or more, extra terms linear in / may occasionally
be required (see § 18.3). The extent to which the quantity A can be
regarded as a simple tensor is discussed in §§ 15.6—15.8. It should be
noted also that a 'pseudo-nuclear Zeeman interaction', comparable
with or larger than the true nuclear Zeeman interaction, may occur (see
below, §§ 1.8 and 3.7), and the last term in (1.70) is not exactly g^H
when anisotropy is present.
1.7. Hyperfine structure including nuclear electric quadrupole
interaction
In § 1.2 we considered briefly the form of the nuclear electric quadru-
pole interaction for a free atom or ion with J = 1, / = 1, and we now
use this example to introduce this interaction for an ion in the solid
state.
Suppose such an ion is subjected to a ligand field of axial symmetry
which gives rise to an 'initial splitting' of the form D{J2 — ^J(J+l)},
Z
with a negative value of D. Then the state J — 0 (where the z-axis
z
is now that associated with D) will lie above the J = ±1 states by
z
an amount \D\ in energy, which we assume to be much larger than the
electronic Zeeman or nuclear hyperfine interactions. The latter two
states comprise an isolated ground doublet (though not a Kramers
doublet) of the type we meet in electron paramagnetic resonance. For

--- Page 47 ---

32 INTRODUCTION TO
each state of this ground doublet the quantity 3J2—J(J + l) nas the
z
value +1, so that in first approximation the nuclear electric quadrupole
interaction (1.32) will have the form
where
We note also that for the singlet state J = 0 the value of 3J^— J(J+1)
z
is —2, so that it will have a nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
of the form (1.71), but with a value of P\\ of opposite sign and twice as
large as that in (1.72). If D were positive, this would be the ground
state, but as no electron magnetic resonance signal can be observed
from an electronic singlet state we shall not consider it further, beyond
remarking that for it the value of P\\ can be found by nuclear magnetic
resonance or nuclear electric quadrupole resonance.
The example we have just used to illustrate the nature of the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction was a non-Kramers doublet; a similar
example for a Kramers doublet is given in § 1.8. In each case the
interaction is of the form P\\{I*—^I(/ + !)}, which is appropriate to the
case of axial symmetry. With this term, the spin Hamiltonian becomes
When H is at an angle 6 to the z-axis, and gfiH is much greater than
any other term in (1.73), the energy levels in first approximation are
given by
where g, A are given by eqns (1.49a), (1.66) and
The strongly allowed transitions are given by the rule AJf = ±1,
Am = 0. for which
the same as eqn (1.69). Thus in first approximation, the strongly
allowed transitions are not changed by the presence of a term such as
(1.71). However, except when H is along the symmetry axis, the
nuclear electric quadrupole interaction gives rise to terms off-diagonal
in /, whose effects cannot be neglected unless (PIA) < 1. They result

--- Page 48 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 33
in transitions of the type AJf = ±1, Am — ±1, ±2 becoming weakly
allowed; their relative intensity is ~(P/A)2 when P < A, comparable
with the Am = 0 transitions when P ~ A (see §3.9). Transitions
of this type make it possible to determine both P\\ and g from the
z
electron magnetic resonance spectrum, though much greater accuracy
can be obtained using Endor (see § 1.13 and Chapter 4).
For brevity we shall not discuss here a number of small but important
second-order effects in hyperfine structure. These are illustrated in the
following section, together with other features of the spin Hamiltonian
already mentioned, by means of a simple example. To retain simplicity
in this example we shall again assume axial symmetry, so that the
formulae derived will not be in their most general form. We shall also
neglect any hyperfine interactions involving higher nuclear moments
than quadrupole, whether these arise from genuine nuclear moments
of such order, or through residual effects of lower order interactions.
1.8. A simple example
We have now presented the main features of the effective spin
Hamiltonian, with some simple illustrative examples. At this point it
may be helpful to take one single example, and use it to illustrate these
features in a way that may serve as a summary of the points already
covered, as well as introducing some of the second-order effects men-
tioned at the end of the last section.
For this example we take a 4/1 ion such as Ce3+, whose ground state
is 2Fs . We shall assume that it is split by a ligand field of axial symmetry,
but that this splitting is small compared with the energy of the first
excited state 2Fr, which for Ce3+ lies at about 2200 cm"1. This means
that we work entirely within the ground manifold J = f, and neglect
admixtures of J — \ and of higher excited states. A ligand field of
axial symmetry can be represented by a spin Hamiltonian (cf. Fig. 1.13)
higher degree terms in J z. (1.75)
Since this contains only J and powers of J (restricted to even powers;
z z
see Chapter 16), and no terms such as <7 , the sixfold J — f manifold
±
splits into three doublets, characterized by
We shall not assume that any given doublet is the ground state, but
take the energies as W , W , W respectively. The differences between
x Y z
4

--- Page 49 ---

34 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.13. Energy levels for J = f in a ligand field of axial symmetry. Diagrams (a), (b)
correspond respectively to the ligand field operators
(a) £ °{3J*-J(J + 1)}
2
(b) J5J{35J*-30J(J + 1)J2+25J2-6J(J + 1) + 3J2(J + 1)2}
which are analogous to axial potential terms of the second, r2Fjj, and fourth degree,
r4F°, respectively. Any linear combination of (a), (b), irrespective of the signs and
magnitudes of B%, B^ would give the results quoted in §1.8, provided that the separations
of the three doublets are large compared with the Zeeman and hyperfine interactions,
(c) gives the observed splittings for the ground state 2F^ of 4/1, Ce3+ in CeCl.
3
these energies are small compared with that of the / = f state, but
large compared with any of the interactions considered below.
(a) The electronic Zeeman interaction
The Zeeman energy in an external field H is given by the matrix
elements of the operator
Within each doublet, these are

--- Page 50 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 35
These can be compared with those of an effective spin Hamiltonian
with § = J for each doublet
for which we have
from which we see that the values of g\\, g for each doublet are
±
The last doublet gives a resonance with a rather anisotropic gr-factor,
but no transitions are allowed within the first two doublets, unless
higher-order Zeeman effects are included. For instance, if H is along
the #-axis, (1.40) will have the off-diagonal terms
which admix some of the J '= ±i states into the J = ±f states.
z z
The doublet states Y then become approximately
and further application of the same operator between these admixed
states gives a matrix element between Y+ and Y~~ of magnitude
showing that there is a third-order Zeeman effect when H is normal
to the z-axis. This gives a weakly allowed transition within the Y
doublet, with an effective value of g of
L

--- Page 51 ---

36 INTRODUCTION TO
The value of g for the Z doublet is similarly modified, becoming
±
We have here neglected matrix elements between the X and the Y
states, but these elements together with those just considered give a
fifth-order Zeeman splitting for the doublet X.
(b) The magnetic hyper fine interaction
In the same approximation where we can neglect matrix elements
between states belonging to J = f and J = \ the magnetic hyperfine
operator is
whose matrix elements with each double can be relared to those of
a term in the effective spin Hamiltonian with
It is clear that the matrix elements needed are exactly the same as
those for the Zeeman interaction, so that we have the following table:
The fact that
or, for rhombic symmetry
holds generally for systems where we can neglect matrix elements
between manifolds of different J.
(c) The nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
We have not so far quoted in full the nuclear electric quadrupole
operator (given in eqn (1.108a)), and for our present example with axial
symmetry we need only, in first approximation, the part given by eqn
(1.32). The reason for this is that all matrix elements of the full operator
vanish within each doublet X, Y, Z except those of 3J!? — J(J + 1).

--- Page 52 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 37
These are
Hence for each doublet the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction has
the form
where
(d) The pseudo-nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
In some cases off-diagonal elements of the hyperfine operator may
produce extra terms that cannot be neglected. From the magnetic
hyperfine operator we have, for example, a term
where y, z are states belonging to different electronic doublets. We
evaluate this term for the doublet Z±(J = ±i), for which the only
Z
matrix elements are clearly those with the doublet Y±(J = ±f). We
Z
have then
whic gives
and
Sinces
wile
we have contributions of two types, one of which has the same sign for
each component of the doublet while the other has opposite signs.
For the first of these we can write

--- Page 53 ---

38 INTRODUCTION TO
which, apart from a term in /(/ + !) that moves all levels up or down
together, represents an additional term of the same form as the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction of magnitude
The other contribution, linear in I and of opposite sign for the two
z
components of the electronic doublet, represents an addition of the
same form as the magnetic hyperfine interaction of magnitude
where the extra factor 2 appears because we relate it to an operator
A J. || $ /3 whose values are ±£A-4||/ for the two components of the
z a
electronic doublet.
The magnitude of these additional terms needs to be evaluated in
interpreting precise hyperfine measurements to find nuclear moments;
note also in comparing values for two isotopes that such terms com-
plicate the analysis, in that the ratio of the magnetic hyperfine interac-
tions is not equal to the ratio of the nuclear magnetic moments (apart
from any real hyperfine anomaly), and similarly the ratio of the
nuclear electric quadrupole interactions will not equal the ratio of the
nuclear electric quadrupole moments, because of the additional terms
which vary as A*j.
(e) Pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect
In addition to terms quadratic in the hyperfine structure, which are
usually rather small compared with the first-order hyperfine interac-
tions, there are cross terms involving products of electronic and hyper-
fine terms. One such term involves the electronic Zeeman interaction
and the magnetic hyperfine interaction, and has the general form
For the doublet Z±(J — ij) the matrix elements are again those with
z
the doublet Y±, and can be evaluated as before. We obtain
This represents a term whose form is that of an anisotropic nuclear
Zeeman effect

--- Page 54 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 39
which is present in addition to the true nuclear Zeeman interaction
—<//j8(H . I). If we incorporate the latter into the more general expres-
sion — jS(H . g(/) . I) we have in the present case
Since g is about TWO of <Jj> the 'pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect' may
z
easily outweigh the true nuclear Zeeman effect if the separation of the
electronic doublets Z and Y is not too large.
1.9. Transition group ions and ligand fields
We have so far considered electron paramagnetic resonance in non-
conducting solids in an almost purely phenomenological way. In
the later sections of our introductory survey we attempt to clothe
the bones of our skeleton by outlining the scientific areas in which the
subject has made a significant contribution.
Magnetic resonance is observable only in a substance that contains
a sufficient number of permanent magnetic dipoles; if these are elec-
tronic in origin then resonance is detectable with as few as 1011 dipoles,
and in special cases, with even fewer (see § 2.10). Apart from transition
group ions in paramagnetic salts, electronic dipoles in these low concen-
trations may arise in a number of ways, of which we quote a few
examples.
(a) Point defects in natural crystals (such as nitrogen atoms in
diamond) or in synthetic crystals (aluminium in quartz, Si0 ).
2
(b) Localized donor and acceptor states produced by doping of
semiconductors (e.g. phosphorus in silicon).
(c) Point defects produced by electromagnetic or particle irradiation,
or chemical treatment such as additive colouring; these may be
neutral atoms (e.g. H in CaF ; Ag in KC1), an electron occupying
2
a negative ion vacancy (^-centres), a positive ion vacancy with
an electron missing from an adjacent ion (Fi-centres), and
similar defects more complicated in nature.
(d) Stable free radicals, such as diphenyl-trinitro phenyl hydrazyl
('(/-marker'), a few gaseous stable molecules such as 0 , NO, N0 ,
2 2
and many unstable free radicals ranging from short transient
species in chemical reactions to long-lived varieties such as the
excited spin-triplet state in naphthalene (Hutchison and Mangum
1958).
(e) Conduction electrons in metals and semiconductors.

--- Page 55 ---

40 INTRODUCTION TO
A prominent feature of nearly all these cases is that we are dealing
with single electrons with just one unpaired spin and almost no orbital
momentum. The observed gr-factor is very close to the free-spin value
of 2-0023, but in precise measurements some information can be
obtained from a small departure from the free-spin value, which may
also reveal some anisotropy. In a few cases considerable molecular
information is obtained from the spin-spin splitting of the S = 1
triplet, such as in 0 or anthracene. In general, much more important
2
information is obtained from hyperfine structure, if present. For atoms
in 2$i states (H in CaF , Ag in KC1) the magnetic hyperfine constant
2
2
may be quite close to the free atom values (Hall and Schumacher 1962),
with a small hyperfine structure due to interaction with nuclear
moments on adjacent nuclei (Delbecq, Hayes, O'Brien, and Yuster
1963; Bessent, Hayes, and Hodby 1967). On the other hand, interaction
with nuclear moments of relatively distant atoms may reveal consider-
able spreading of the wave-function of the magnetic electron, as for
phosphorus in silicon (Feher 1959). In some cases the hyperfine structure
has provided essential information on the nature of the impurity
(N in diamond, Al in quartz; see Bleaney and Owen 1965) or the
location of the magnetic electron.
The position is very different with ions of the 'transition groups'
that form the principal classes of normally paramagnetic compounds.
Instead of single electron spins, we are now concerned with a partly-
filled electron shell, containing in most cases a number of electrons
with both orbital and spin angular momentum. Associated with these
large amounts of angular momentum are large permanent magnetic
dipole moments, making their compounds strongly magnetic. At high
temperatures such compounds are paramagnetic, but when the
temperature is lowered sufficiently they may enter an ordered magnetic
state, either ferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic, or antiferromagnetic, with
simple or complicated ordered spin arrangements. Classically they
have been extensively investigated by bulk magnetic and thermal
measurements, and more recently (particularly in the ordered state)
by means of neutron diffraction. Judiciously chosen compounds have
made it possible to attain temperatures as low as a few millidegrees
absolute by the method of magnetic cooling; in this region their
hyperfine and nuclear properties have been analyzed by the techniques
of nuclear alignment and orientation.
Following the theoretical derivation of Curie's law (and the modified
Curie-Weiss law), and the explanation on quantum theory of the

--- Page 56 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 41
origin of permanent atomic magnetic dipole moments, interest in
paramagnetism has been sustained by the fascinating variety of
behaviour observed in transition group salts. The primary cause of
this is the interaction between the magnetic electrons and the sur-
rounding (diamagnetic) ligand ions, which gives rise to complex
splittings of the energy levels of the free ion. In some salts this results
in departures from Curie's law owing to the presence of low-lying
excited states, usually accompanied by high anisotropy in the magnetic
susceptibility and by very short spin-lattice relaxation times. In other
salts (particularly those with half-filled electron shells), all excited
states lie high in energy (well above room temperature); the suscep-
tibility may then follow Curie's law quite accurately down to below
1°K, there is little anisotropy, and spin-lattice relaxation times are
comparatively long.
A further complication is the presence of spin-spin interaction.
This may be purely magnetic in origin, arising from the interaction
of one magnetic dipole with the local magnetic field of its neighbouring
dipoles. In the paramagnetic state this local field varies from site to site,
shifting the resonance in a random way and thus broadening it, with
an additional effect if the ions are similar so that the precessing
components of their dipole moments are in resonance. Purely magnetic
broadening of this type may result in line widths of 102 to 103 G; in
some salts this may be augmented by interactions due to electric
moments associated with the highly anisotropic electric charge distri-
butions of the magnetic electrons. In more concentrated salts exchange
interactions may dominate other forms of spin-spin interaction. These
complications (in themselves a field of study) obscure the behaviour
of the single magnetic ion in its ligand field. To observe this, 'dilute'
salts are grown, in which a small concentration of the magnetic ion
under investigation is incorporated in an isomorphous diamagnetic
compound. Such dilute salts (e.g. MgO containing Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+,
etc.; lanthanum or yttrium ethylsulphate containing traces of other
lanthanide ions) have been widely studied by magnetic resonance, so
that the results may be compared with ligand field theory. A brief
sketch of this is given below, with much more elaborate discussions in
later chapters.
The ligand field is an additional interaction in the already complicated
problem of a free many-electron ion. A perturbation approach is neces-
sary in which terms must be considered in order of diminishing impor-
tance (i.e. diminishing interaction energy), and the ligand interaction

--- Page 57 ---

42 INTRODUCTION TO
must be introduced at the appropriate point relative to the sequence
of interactions internal to the paramagnetic ion. In order of diminish-
ing interaction energy, these are, briefly:
(a) Interaction of an electron with the Coulomb field of the nucleus,
modified by the repulsive field of the other electrons,
With a suitably averaged electronic field with central symmetry, this
Hamiltonian results in the electronic levels being grouped into con-
figurations; an example is 3d3, a (ground) configuration lying some
105 cm"1 below the first excited configuration, 3d24$. The residual
mutual electrostatic repulsion of the electrons, not represented by a
central field, gives rise to LS-coupling with energy splittings of order
104 cm"1 between terms of different L, S built from the same configura-
tion; for example the ground term of 3d3 is (by Hund's rules) 4-F, with
S = f and L = 3, some 104 cm-1 below the 4P (S = f, L = 1) term
belonging to the same (3d3) configuration (see Fig. 1.14).
(b) The spin-orbit coupling
which in L$-coupling becomes
For ground terms obeying Hund's rules (i.e. terms with maximum
spin 8), X = ±(£/2/S) with the upper and lower signs appropriate to
electron shells less or more than half-filled respectively. This splits a
given term into a multiplet of levels with different values of J. The
components of the multiplet are split by ~102 cm"1 for 3d electrons
(see Fig. 1.14), and by larger amounts for ions with larger atomic
numbers.
(c) The spin-spin interaction, magnetic in origin, for which one
possible form is
This plays a small but not altogether insignificant role in some magnetic
problems (its interaction energy is usually <1 cm."1); in L$-coupling
it may be written in the form

--- Page 58 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 43
FIG. 1.14. Quartet energy levels of the free triply charged chromium ion, Cr3+, 3c?3.
These are formed from the three electrons in the 3c? shell: the splitting between the *F
and 4P terms is due to electrostatic repulsion between the electrons; the splittings
between levels of different J within each term are due to spin-orbit coupling.
Doublet terms formed from 3d3 lie in the energy range 14000-37000 cm"1. The next
lowest levels are those belonging to the configuration 3c?24s, and lie above 100000 cm"1.
where p is a constant (see § 16.5). The spin-spin interaction represents
the variation in the mutual magnetic dipole interaction energy with
the direction of magnetization that may occur when the magnetization
density is not spherically symmetric.
We turn now to consideration of the ligand field interaction. Its
importance relative to the interactions just enumerated is different
for the various transition groups, but they may conveniently be
grouped as follows.
(i) 4/and, to a rather lesser extent, 5/electrons are, crudely speaking,
not Valence' electrons but 'inner' electrons, and their interaction with
the ligand field is ^102 cm."1, which is smaller than the spin-orbit
coupling. In first approximation the effect of this 'weak ligand field'
is partly to raise the (2J+1) degeneracy of each level of the spin-orbit
multiplet of given J (cf. Fig. 1.13). Exceptions arise for complex ions
of the 5/group such as [U0 ]2+, etc., where the 5/electrons are involved
2
in bond formation in the linear 0-U-O complex and the remaining
(magnetic) electrons must be considered individually.

--- Page 59 ---

44 INTRODUCTION TO
(ii) 3d electrons are valence electrons and the ligand interaction
produces splittings of order 104 cm"1, comparable with the .L$-coupling
energy. In the 'intermediate ligand field' approximation the ligand
field is treated as interacting with the orbital momentum only, lifting
the (2L + 1) degeneracy of the lowest L, S state (cf. Fig. 1.15). Since
the ligand interaction is comparable with the iS-coupling energy,
admixtures of excited L, S states may be needed in the ground state
to give a better approximation. Interaction with the spin states occurs
through the mechanism of the spin-orbit coupling.
FIG. 1.15. Cubic crystal potential splittings of the orbital ground states in LS-
coupling of partly filled d-shells. Octahedral coordination is assumed; the splittings are
inverted for tetrahedral or 8-fold coordination. Typical values of the cubic field parameter
Dq are given in Table 7.3, and examples of the overall splittings (in aqueous solution)
are for the 3d group:
The diagrams are drawn roughly to this scale. As the nuclear charge increases the d-
electrons are drawn closer to the nucleus of the central ion and the influence of the ligand
ions decreases.

--- Page 60 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 45
(iii) 4d, 5d electrons (and 3d electrons in some compounds such as
the complex cyanides) are valence electrons for which the ligand
interaction is much stronger than the i$-coupling. In this 'strong
ligand field' limit, single electron states must be used, strongly split
by the ligand field, the electrostatic and spin-orbit couplings within
the atom being included subsequently or simultaneously.
In both groups (ii) and (iii) the ligand complexes have for the most
part predominantly cubic symmetry, and it is the ligand interaction of
cubic symmetry that is strong (^104 cm"1 or more). The residual
parts of the ligand interaction, representing departures from exact
cubic symmetry, are smaller in magnitude (^102 to 103 cm."1), and
their effects must often be considered at the same time as the spin-
orbit interaction. In group (i) many salts have predominantly axial
symmetry (three, four or sixfold), to which the 'simple example' of
§ 1.8 might be regarded as a zeroth-order approximation.
The simplest method of treating the ligand field is to consider it as
a purely electrostatic interaction. The ligands are regarded as charged
ions located on given lattice points, which give rise to a 'crystalline
potential' F that reflects the local symmetry of the ionic environment.
This results in level splittings for the magnetic electrons, corresponding
to a 'Stark' effect with a rather complex electric potential. In this
formalism three approaches arise (I, II, III, below), corresponding to
the three extremes set out in the previous paragraph ; a more sophisti-
cated approach is outlined in (IV).
(I) Weak ligand field (crystal potential < spin-orbit coupling)
If the splittings are small compared with the spin-orbit coupling
we can work in terms of J with, if necessary, corrections for coupling
to states of different J (usually the first excited state, «7±1, will
suffice). If then an external field H is applied, the diagonal electronic
Zeeman interaction is of the form
and the corresponding magnetic hyperfine operator is
These are the approximations used in the treatment of the 'simple
example' of § 1.8.
An expression for gj has already been given (eqn (1.12)) but we have
not so far related the magnetic hyperfine constant Aj to the basic

--- Page 61 ---

46 INTRODUCTION TO
properties of the electron-nuclear system. Its value is
where we have used the nomenclature (^///) so that the nuclear
moment can be expressed either in terms of the nuclear magneton
(eqn (1.19)) or the Bohr magneton (eqn (1.20)). The quantity <J|| N \\J)
is listed for the ground states of 4/, 5/ ions in Table 20 and (r~3) is
the mean inverse third power of the distance of the electron from
the nucleus.
In many cases we must add to (1.106) a 'contact5 or 'core polarization'
term (see eqn (1.114) below) which, in terms of J, may be written
where (gj — 1) is the factor that allows for the projection of S upon J
(see § 5.4).
For convenience we give here also the full form of the nuclear electric
quadrupole operator. This is
but this form (commonly used in work on free atoms) is often less
convenient for our purposes than the alternative
of which the first term in square brackets is just the diagonal part
quoted in eqn (1.32). The empirical constant b is related to the electron-
nuclear properties by the equation
where Q is the electric quadrupole moment of the nucleus, (fq3) is an
electronic average similar to (r~z) above (see the discussion in § 17.7),
and (J|| a || J) is a number listed in Table 20.

--- Page 62 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 47
(II) Intermediate ligand field (spin-orbit coupling < crystal potential
splitting < LS-coupling)
In this situation we may work in terms of L, S with, if necessary,
corrections for coupling to excited states of different L, S. Within a
state of given L, S the diagonal Zeeman interaction is
The magnetic hyperfine operator is more complicated, and must be
broken down into its component parts. The orbital motion of the
electrons gives rise to a magnetic interaction with the nuclear dipole
moment
The interaction between the nuclear dipole moment and the electronic
spin separates into two parts; for the spin magnetization 'outside'
the nucleus we have
where, for electrons of orbital momentum I, f (see § 17.4), is given by
The quantity (1.112) is zero if the spin density outside the nucleus
has spherical symmetry (so also is (1.111), since such symmetry is
found only for L = 0). If there is a finite spherically symmetric spin
density at the nucleus we have also a term
where (r~3> is a measure of the spin density at (in contact with) the
nucleus. This 'contact' interaction is due to unpaired ^-electron spin
density, which arises from polarization of the filled electron shells
through exchange interaction with the partly filled shells (the so-called
ccore polarization' effect). There may also be a relativistic contribution
(for further discussion see §§ 17.5-17.7).
For a state of given L, 8 the nuclear electric quadrupole operator is
given by expressions analogous to (1.108), (1.108a), provided that J
is everywhere replaced by L. The parameter b is then given by the
relation
where (L\\ a \\L) is a number listed in Table 19, and which is also
simply related to f (see § 17.4).

--- Page 63 ---

48 INTRODUCTION TO
The quantities (r^3), (r~*) are identical for hydrogenic wave-func-
tions, but in real atoms may differ by small amounts (see § 17.7).
The differences are usually ignored in solid-state electron paramagnetic
resonance experiments, if only for lack of experimental evidence as
to the magnitude, if any, of the difference. The same is true for the
quantity (r~3), though this may differ considerably from the two
previous quantities because of electric shielding effects (see § 17.7).
There may also be a contribution to the nuclear electric quadrupole
interaction from the electric field gradient produced by the ligand ions.
In most cases the overall effect can be expressed in the operator form
of which (1.89) is a special form appropriate to axial symmetry.
In cubic symmetry the ligand ions make no contribution; for an
electronic doublet (S = J) eqn (1.116) reduces to a constant (or to
zero if P +P +P = 0), since P = P = P \ but if 8 = 1 or more
xx yy zz xx yy zz
there may be a nuclear electric quadrupole interaction similar to (but
not necessarily identical with) that for a free ion (see §§ 17.1, 18.4, 18.6).
(Ill) Strong ligand field (LS-coupling < crystal potential)
In the limit of very strong ligand field interaction, giving splittings
large compared with those due to LS-coupling, our formulae must be
expressed in terms of single electron states. For example, the Zeeman
interaction becomes
where the sum is over all electrons in partly-filled shells.
We shall not repeat the formulae for the hyperfine operators since
these are analogous to those already given. As in the Zeeman interac-
tion, instead of L, S we have l., s with a sum over all electrons. The
t t
value of | in the formula corresponding to (1.112) is simply
as can be found from (1.113) by setting L = I, S = J. A similar replace-
ment of J by 1 in (1.108a), with a sum over all electrons, gives the
nuclear electric quadrupole operator, with
where (l\\ a \\l) is given in Table 18.

--- Page 64 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 49
(IV) The paramagnetic complex as a whole
The crystalline potential approach to the ligand field problem
outlined in the last three sections is fairly successful in interpreting
the observed level splittings. However these are often dictated by
the local symmetry at the paramagnetic ion, and empirical values of
the parameters are deduced to fit the splittings. Attempts to calculate
the crystalline parameters from electrostatic models have met with
poor success. Furthermore, in such a model we would expect to use
the free ion values of parameters such as the spin-orbit coupling and
(r~3), etc., but it has long been known (Owen 1955) that reduced values
are required to fit the experimental results.
Instead of an approach in which the magnetic electrons are regarded
as localized on the central ion, and move in an electrostatic potential
field due to the ligand ions, it is necessary to allow for electron transfer
between the central ion and the ligand ions. In other words, a purely
ionic approach is replaced by one in which the complex consisting
of the central ion and the ligand ions is treated as a whole. In the
'configuration interaction' approach the electron transfer is included
by adding to the original ionic configuration an admixture of another
configuration with different charge states. For example, in the octa-
hedral complex [NiF ]4~ the situation may be represented symbolically
6
by the linear combination
where a is a small admixture parameter. In the alternative 'molecular
orbital' approach the wave-function of each electron is taken to be a
linear combination of atomic orbitals belonging to the central ion and
the ligand ions. For example, in [NiF ]4~ one might represent a 2p
6
electron belonging originally to a fluorine ion by the wave-function
where a' is another admixture parameter such that a'2 is roughly the
probability of finding the fluorine 2p electron transferred to a 3d
orbit on the nickel ion.
The Configuration interaction' and 'molecular orbital' approaches
are equivalent if (as is seldom the case) no approximations are made
in either treatment. The molecular orbital approach is most often
adopted (for a review, see Owen and Thornley, 1966). The calculation
starts from single electron states, making it rather complex for ions
with several magnetic electrons. The Zeeman and other interactions
5

--- Page 65 ---

50 INTRODUCTION TO
must be evaluated for the molecular orbitals; the main effects may be
summarized as follows.
(a) The effective orbital magnetic moment is reduced, so that the
Zeeman interaction becomes
where the parameter k is less than unity and may be anisotropic
except for complexes with cubic symmetry.
(b) The spin-orbit coupling constant £ is effectively reduced.
(c) Values of <r~3} for hyperfine interaction with the nucleus of the
central ion are effectively reduced.
(d) A cligand hyperfine structure', often rather complex if a number
of ligand nuclei are involved, appears in addition to the central
ion hyperfine structure (if any). The hyperfine splittings in the
ligand hyperfine structure may be compared with analogous
splittings for free ligand ions (measured, or estimated theoreti-
cally) to find the size of the admixtures of ligand wave-functions.
Effects (a), (b), (c) are generally revealed only by a comparison of
theory and experiment, frequently involving a knowledge of the
positions of the excited states gained from optical spectroscopy (Owen
1955, Owen and Stevens 1953, Stevens 1953a). Even so, such effects
FIG. 1.16. Hyperfine structure in Na (Ir, Pt)Cl, 6HO with H parallel to thea? -axis.
2 6 2
The arrows indicate the expected positions of the four hfs lines due to the nuclei (/ = f)
of the central Ir ions. Each of these four lines is further split into a hfs due to the nuclei
of the six ligand chlorine ions (which also have nuclear spin = f). For the (IrCl) complex
6
one would expect a maximum of 7 X 4 = 28 hyperfine lines, but many of these coincide,
simplifying the observed structure, (a) observed (b) calculated best fit. (After Griffiths
and Owen 1954.)

--- Page 66 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 51
cannot always be ascribed completely to covalent binding, since there
may be contributions from the Jahn-Teller effect (Chapter 21), and
to a much lesser extent from the general spectrum of lattice vibrations
through interactions between the magnetic ion and the phonons (an
example ascribed to this effect is Ce3+; see § 5.6). The effect (d), on
the other hand, is directly visible in the paramagnetic resonance
spectrum, as shown in Fig. 1.16.
Summary
We may sum up the position as follows. In the d-groups the strong
cubic ligand field 'quenches' the orbital momentum very effectively
when it leaves an orbital singlet as the ground state, and the magnetic
effects are due almost entirely to the spin degeneracy remaining in
this state. When an orbital triplet is lowest, the orbital momentum
is only partly quenched, and plays a considerable (though reduced)
part in determining the magnetic properties, but the orbital doublet
states that are lowest for d4, d9 in Fig. 1.15 have rather unusual 'non-
magnetic' properties. In the 4/, 5/ groups quenching of the orbital
momentum is only a minor effect, and the resultant ground states
often carry large amounts of both orbital and spin momentum, giving
rise to abnormally large effective (/-values and magnetic hyperfine
structures. In the very strong ligand field compounds (mostly 4d, 5d,
and a few 3d) of octahedral symmetry the single electron ^-states split
as for d1 in Fig. 1.15, but the splitting is so large that in the majority
of chemically stable compounds magnetic electrons enter only the
lower threefold orbital states, which can accommodate up to six
electrons. Thus these form a magnetic sub-shell, which is closed at d6,
as in K Co(CN) , which has only a weak temperature-independent
3 6
paramagnetism; (in an alternative approach, the remaining two
orbital states have been used in forming cr-bonds with the ligands and
are thus not available for magnetic electrons).
At this stage we shall not elaborate further the complex subject of
paramagnetic ions in ligand fields. The theory is discussed much more
fully in Chapters 16-21; the position in the various transition groups
is surveyed in Chapters 5-8, where it is shown how the levels split for
each ion, and details are given of the observed paramagnetic resonance
spectra. At the same time it will be seen how very successful the effec-
tive spin Hamiltonian has been in describing the behaviour of each
set of a rather few levels, isolated from other sets by the ligand field
and the spin-orbit coupling, as far as magnetic resonance is concerned

--- Page 67 ---

52 INTRODUCTION TO
at centimetre and millimetre wavelengths. When a number of such
groups must be treated together, as in infrared and optical spectroscopy
of the solid-state paramagnetic compounds, the effective spin Hamil-
tonian can be used only in a rather limited way, for example, to describe
the spin resonance spectrum of a small group of excited states detected
by optical methods.
1.10. Spin-spin interaction
So far we have discussed the magnetic resonance behaviour of a
paramagnetic ion either isolated or subjected to a ligand field due to
the matrix of (diamagnetic) ions in which it is embedded in a crystal
lattice. We have not considered interactions between neighbouring
paramagnetic ions; these are known generically as 'spin-spin' inter-
actions, and arise in a variety of ways.
Conceptually, the simplest of these interactions (and the only one
readily amenable to calculation) is magnetic dipole interaction, arising
from the influence of the magnetic field of one paramagnetic ion on the
dipole moments of neighbouring paramagnetic ions. The average
distance between such ions in a normally paramagnetic salt such as the
double sulphates of the iron group (the alums or the tutton salts) is
about 0-6 to 0-7 nm. If each ion carries a moment of one Bohr magneton
(corresponding to S = J and g = 2), the magnetic field that it produces
at a neighbouring ion is roughly f}/rz ^ 50 G. If there are a number
of paramagnetic neighbours, whose fields at a given site add randomly
and whose moments may be as much as 5/J or 7 ft, the net local field may
be 102 to 103 G. The actual local field at any given site will depend on
the arrangement of the neighbours and the directions of their dipole
moments (cf. Fig. 1.17); the latter gives a randomness to the local field
in the paramagnetic state in both size and direction, a randomness that
vanishes if the magnetic system enters an ordered state.
If an external magnetic field acts on the paramagnetic compound, the
local field at each ion must be added vectorially to it. If the local field is
small compared with the external field (which might be some kilo-
gauss), only the component of the former parallel to the latter is
important. The size of this component varies from site to site, giving a
random displacement to the resonance frequency of each ion which is
similar in its effect to that due to inhomogeneity in the external field.
For this reason this effect is known as 'inhomogeneous broadening';
the resonance frequency of each ion is displaced, but the lifetime of the
ion in a given quantum state is not reduced (cf. the Doppler effect for

--- Page 68 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 53
FIG. 1.17. The steady component of the local field (Hj )- set up at site * by the steady
oc;
component ((JL,-) of the magnetic dipole moment [A, at site j. The ^-component of (Hi )j-
2 oc
at site i varies as (3 cos20 —1) if the paramagnetic properties of ion j are isotropic.
The presence of a strong external field H along the z-axis is assumed.
the molecules of a gas). If the paramagnetic ions are identical, so that
they precess at the same frequency in the external magnetic field, there
is an additional resonance interaction. The precessing components of
one magnetic dipole set up an oscillatory field at another dipole which
is just at the right frequency to cause magnetic resonance transitions,
and vice versa. The mutual interaction produces resonance transitions
that are equivalent to the exchange of quanta between neighbouring
ions (in a strong external field this keeps the energy of the system
constant). This extra interaction for identical spins gives an additional
broadening (which may be of order 50 per cent in magnitude); it also
shortens the lifetime of the individual ion in a given quantum state,
and the broadening is no longer completely 'inhomogeneous'.
This finite lifetime in a given quantum state is frequently related to a
'spin-spin relaxation time' r ; in classical terms r is a measure of
2 2
the average duration in time of a wave train emitted or absorbed by an
ion in the process of paramagnetic resonance. Clearly r is infinite as
2
far as a purely inhomogeneous broadening process is concerned, and it
bears no simple relation to the observed line width. If we denote by
2A# the width of the line at half the maximum intensity (cf. Fig. 1.18),
we have from eqn (1.45),

--- Page 69 ---

54 INTRODUCTION TO
which we can relate to a parameter
If we define a homogeneously broadened line as one whose width is
entirely due to processes that shorten and control the lifetime of the
quantum states between which transitions are taking place, then for it
' = . If the line width is due to spin-spin interaction, this relation
T2 T2
does not generally hold, and in many cases r may be very much longer
2
than Tg. For a line whose width is mainly due to inhomogeneous
broadening the concept of a 'spin packet' is often used (cf. Fig. 1.18);
FIG. 1.18. A 'spin packet' in an inhomogeneously broadened line. The overall line shape
is simply the envelope of the multitude of spin packets, with a line width parameter A#
(width at half maximum intensity = 2A#) which is not related to any relaxation time.
An individual 'spin packet' with resonant frequency hv = g/3H, where H is the net
field acting on all spins in the packet, has a line width SH such that gfldH ~ (^/r),
2
where r is the true relaxation time associated with spin-spin interaction, assuming this
2
is shorter than the spin-lattice relaxation time T±.
the width of a spin packet is not quantitatively defined, but is pre-
sumably given by eqns (1.121), (1.122) provided that, instead of r', we
2
use the real value of r or of any other time constant associated with a
2
genuine relaxation process, so that the 'spin packet5 is homogeneously
broadened.
A line width of 102 to 103 G in an electron magnetic resonance is a
serious handicap to the resolution, since many fine or hyperfine split-
tings are much smaller. When isomorphous diamagnetic salts exist, these
can be used to 'dilute' the paramagnetic salt by growing a single crystal
of the diamagnetic salt 'doped' with a low concentration of para-
magnetic ions. With sufficiently low concentrations, broadening due to
spin-spin interactions with other paramagnetic ions can be reduced to a
point at which it is less than that due to nuclear magnetic dipole

--- Page 70 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 55
moments that are not removed in the process of dilution. For example,
in hydrated salts of the 3d or 4/ group, where the paramagnetic ion is
immediately surrounded by six or nine water molecules at a distance
of about 0-2 nm, the residual width due to the nuclear moments of the
twelve or eighteen protons in the waters of crystallization is in the
region of 10 to 15 G. This can be further reduced by deuteration
(growing the crystals from heavy-water solution) by a factor of about
3, corresponding to the smaller nuclear magnetic moment of the
deuteron. In crystals where the abundance of nuclear moments is low
or zero, such as MgO or diamond, line widths of a fraction of a gauss can
be obtained.
In addition to magnetic dipole interaction between paramagnetic ions,
there may also be interactions associated with electrical moments. In
ions that have orbital momentum, the distribution of electric charge in
the magnetic sub-states will be anisotropic, and sometimes very
anisotropic. The charge distribution may possess an electric quadrupole
or higher moment ; in rare cases, at sites that do not have full inversion
symmetry, the ion may possess an electric dipole moment. Such
moments will interact with the electrostatic potential components
associated with similar moments on adjacent ions, but the magnitude
of the interaction is difficult to estimate because of uncertainties in the
size of the electric moments, which depend on the radial wave-functions
of the magnetic electrons, and in shielding (or anti-shielding) effects due
to intervening ions. If the ground states of the ions are Kramers
doublets, and no excited states are populated, the electrostatic inter-
action gives no first order spin-spin interaction because the two states
of the doublet are related by time reversal and possess the same charge
distribution in each state, so that no change in the electrostatic inter-
action arises from reversal of the magnetic dipole moment. In some
other cases the electrostatic interaction may outweigh the magnetic
interaction (see § 9.4).
The shape of a line broadened by spin-spin interaction cannot be
readily computed ; an assumption frequently made is that the shape is
that of a Gaussian distribution of the type
where f(H) is the intensity at a point H, H the centre of the resonance
Q
line being scanned in field, and {//*) is the mean 'second moment' of the
line (see § 9.7). In some cases the assumption of a Gaussian shape gives

--- Page 71 ---

56 INTRODUCTION TO
a good fit (cf. Fig. 9.8). In others, when the number of nearest-neighbour
ions is small (e.g. two collinear equidistant neighbours, as in the tutton
salts of the iron group or the rare-earth ethylsulphates), the line width
can vary sharply with the direction of the external field and the shape
may be quite different from Gaussian (Figs. 1.19, 1.20); it may even
show resolved structure (Fig. 9.9). This is a reminder that a line
inhomogeneously broadened by spin-spin interaction is really an
overlapping conglomerate of many relatively narrow lines (or 'spin
packets') displaced from the central frequency by the interaction.
If semi-dilute crystals are used, in which the concentration of
FIG. 1.19. Polar diagram of {(H*)}% in the ac-plane for a copper tutton salt (copper
ammonium selenate). The two nearest neighbours of a Cu2+ ion at the centre are two
equidistant Cu2+ ions at a distance 0-61 nm along the c-axis. The broken curve shows a
line width varying mainly as |(3 cos20 —1)|, where 6 is the angle which the external
magnetic field makes with the c-axis; this is the expected variation, if the interaction is
magnetic dipolar and primarily with the two nearest Cu2+ ions along the c-axis. The
continuous curve is drawn through the experimental points; the observed value of
{{.H2)}i is larger near the K± axis (a principal susceptibility axis), partly because of
unresolved hyperfine structure whose splitting is larger near K± than near K , and, to a
2
lesser extent, because the electronic (/-values vary in a similar way (Bleaney, Penrose,
and Plumpton 1949).

--- Page 72 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 57
FIG. 1.20. Observed line shape along the crystallographic c-axis for (a) copper ammonium
sulphate, (b) copper caesium sulphate. These are both tutton salts of similar structure.
The flat-topped shape of (b) is probably due mainly to magnetic dipolar interaction; in
(a) there is a considerable narrowing effect attributed to exchange interaction.
Evidence from specific heat measurements confirms that exchange interaction is small
for copper caesium sulphate, but considerably larger for copper ammonium sulphate
(Benzie, Cooke, and Whitley 1955). (After Bleaney, Penrose, and Plumpton 1949.)
paramagnetic ions is sufficient to give a fair probability (say, a few per
cent) of pairs of ions occupying adjacent sites, the spectra of such pairs
(and 'triples') can be analyzed and information extracted concerning
the magnitude and nature of the spin-spin interaction (see §§ 9.5, 9.6).
In many paramagnetic compounds in which the separation of the
magnetic ions is less than about 0-5 nm, exchange interaction between
neighbours exceeds the purely dipole interaction. The effects produced
by exchange interaction are complex, but a brief summary of the
principal features is as follows.
(a) Isotropic exchange interaction, represented by a term in the spin
Hamiltonian of the form
modifies the line shape in the following way. If the spins are identical,
the value of the second moment (Jff?) is unchanged, but the line is
narrowed in the centre and extended in the wings (cf. Fig. 1.21). The
width at half maximum intensity is reduced (the phenomenon is

--- Page 73 ---

58 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.21. Absorption curve for CuSO, 5HO at a wavelength of 1-23 cm (about
4 2
24000 MHz), in a direction where the two Cu2+ ions are magnetically equivalent. The line
width parameter AU at half intensity is only about 25 G, roughly one-tenth of the value
expected from magnetic dipolar spin-spin interaction. This 'exchange narrowing' also
gives a line close in shape to Lorentzian (see eqn (1.125)). In other directions, where the
two Cu2+ ions are not magnetically equivalent, the line width is much greater, and two
separate resonances can be resolved at millimetre wavelengths (Bagguley and Griffiths
1950).
therefore known as 'exchange narrowing'), and the shape approximates
to a Lorentzian
where AH is defined as in Pig. 1.18, rather than to a gaussian shape.
The narrowing process resembles that found in nuclear magnetic reso-
nance in a liquid: through exchange interaction with other neighbours,

--- Page 74 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 59
any given neighbouring dipole is changing its orientation at a
rate of order (^/h), so that its local field fluctuates at a similar rate.
This local field is then less effective in broadening the resonance line,
because (owing to the gyroscopic qualities of the spins) only local
fields that remain substantially constant over a period, not just long
compared with the Larmor precession period, but long compared with
the duration r of the wave train, are effective in shifting the resonance
2
frequency of any given spin.
If the spectrum of an isolated ion shows structure due to 'initial
splittings' or hyperfine interaction, it cannot be counted as fully
identical even with a similar neighbour, and exchange interaction
comparable in size with the splitting terms producing the structure may
give rise to broadening rather than to narrowing. If the exchange
interaction dominates the splitting terms, its tendency is to give a single
line at the average Zeeman frequency in which the structure is not
resolved. In the limit of very high exchange interaction, appreciable
narrowing of the line in the centre (and extension in the wings) may
occur. Similarly, if exchange interaction links two ions with different
(/-values g g^ only a single resonance line at the mean (/-value
iy
^(9i+9s) mav be observed if the exchange energy / > \(g—g^H\^ the
i
difference in the Zeeman energies; in this situation two lines can still
be resolved if H is increased (by working at higher frequencies) so as
to reverse the inequality.
(b) Anisotropic exchange, represented by a spin Hamiltonian of the
form
which is shorthand for a tensor type interaction similar to that in eqns
(1.47) or (1.62), generally arises if the magnetic ions have anisotropic
(/-tensors, even if the exchange interaction between the true spins (not
the effective spins) of the ions is itself isotropic (cf. § 9.3). Since the form
of the interaction is then basically similar to that for magnetic dipole
interaction, we may expect anisotropic exchange interaction also to
give rise to broadening of the resonance line.
In concluding this section on spin-spin interaction we make two
comments.
(i) It is a temperature independent interaction, giving a line-broaden-
ing that is in itself independent of temperature when (g^H/kT)<^ 1.
There is a small shift in the centre of the line which increases as
gfiH/kT increases, because orientation of neighbouring dipoles parallel

--- Page 75 ---

60 INTRODUCTION TO
to the external field is statistically more probable than anti-parallel
orientation. When (gj3H/kT) > 1, all dipoles are oriented parallel to the
external field and the resonance lines become sharp, and appreciably
shifted (see § 9.11). Broadening due to spin-spin interaction can also be
markedly reduced at high temperatures if it is due predominantly to
interaction with a different paramagnetic species that has a very short
spin-lattice relaxation time (cf. Fig. 9.11).
(ii) The electromagnetic interactions between spins may be regarded
as due to the exchange of Virtual photons'. The spins are also coupled
to the phonon bath (see following section), and forms of spin-spin
interaction may arise through the exchange of Virtual phonons'.
1.11. Spin-lattice interaction
Application of an oscillatory magnetic field of the correct frequency
produces transitions between the levels shown in Fig. 1.4 both in the
up and the down directions. The up transition corresponds to the
absorption of a quantum of energy from the radiation field; in a down
transition, energy is radiated back into the radiation field. Since
spontaneous emission is negligible at radio-frequencies, we are con-
cerned almost entirely with induced emission and absorption, which are
coherent in phase with the radiation field. The net absorption is due to
the excess in the number of up transitions over the down transitions;
since each process is equally probable, the excess is proportional to the
difference between the numbers of ions in the lower and upper states.
If w is the rate at which electronic transitions are induced per ion by
e
the applied oscillatory field, the power absorbed by the spin system will
be
where hv is the quantum involved and n , n are the instantaneous
a b
populations of the lower and upper states. Since transitions are induced
in the up direction at a rate w n , and in the down direction at a rate
e a
w n , more up transitions are induced than down transitions if n > n ,
G b a b
and the population difference (n — n ) will decline continuously. A
a b
similar process would occur if we started from the unusual position of
n < n , except that power would then be emitted by the spin system
a b
instead of being absorbed. In either case the populations would
ultimately become equal, the spin temperature T defined by
B9

--- Page 76 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 61
becoming infinite. The definition of the spin temperature for a two-
level system follows naturally from Boltzmann statistics, since hv is the
difference in energy between the two states.
In a state of thermodynamic equilibrium we would expect that the
two states would have populations, denoted by N , N , such that
a b
where T is the ambient temperature; the condition of equilibrium is
0
just T = T . In order to attain thermal equilibrium there must be
B Q
some interaction between the spin system and the thermal fluctuations
that define the temperature of the matrix in which the spin system is
embedded. As the populations n , n can only be altered by transitions
a b
between the two levels, such transitions must be induced by the thermal
fluctuations; that is, by the molecular motion within the matrix, gas,
liquid, or solid. In the last case the molecular motion consists of the
lattice vibrations, which may or may not be localized, together with (in
a conducting solid) the kinematic effects associated with movement of
the conduction electrons (and, more rarely, of charged ions).
For a simple two-level spin system the appropriate rate equation for
the processes producing thermal equilibrium is
where r is a parameter known as the 'spin-lattice' relaxation time.
1
From the form of the equation it is clear that the equilibrium situation
is one in which (n — n ) = (N —N ), and the rate of approach to this
a b a b
situation is proportional to the departure of the instantaneous popula-
tion difference from the equilibrium value. The solution is
showing that we have an exponential return to the equilibrium situation
from an initial value of (n — n ) at t = 0, with time constant r .
a b 0 ±
If a man-made oscillatory field producing resonance transitions is
also present, we have — (dn jdt) = (dn ldt) — w (n —n ) so that, for it,
a b e a b
and on combining this with (1.130) we have

--- Page 77 ---

62 INTRODUCTION TO
Hence the steady-state solution, putting d(n — n )/dt = 0, is
a b
showing that the population difference is either slightly or greatly
disturbed from the thermal equilibrium value according as (2^-^) is
small or large compared with unity. With the powerful electromagnetic
fields generated by electronic oscillators the quantity (2wr ) may
e 1
easily be quite large, in which case (n — n ) falls markedly below
a b
(N —N ). The net magnetization is proportional to (n — n ), and falls
a b a b
correspondingly; this phenomenon is known as 'power saturation' oi
the magnetic resonance signal. Under conditions such that Tiv < kT ,
Q
kT we may approximate the exponentials in (1.128), (1.129) to give
s
so that
The phenomenon of power saturation corresponds to a rise in spin
temperature to the point where the power absorbed from the radiation
field by the spin system is just balanced by the power fed out to the
thermal bath via the spin-lattice relaxation mechanism. From (1.127),
(1.134) the actual power absorbed is
which tends to an upper limit dependent only on r as w increases.
l e
We discuss now the nature of the interaction that determines the
value of T . The only direct interaction of the spin system is through
X
magnetic resonance transitions induced by an oscillatory magnetic
field, and for relaxation effects this means with the thermal electro-
magnetic radiation bath. The energy density in this bath is

--- Page 78 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 63
and at the frequencies and temperatures involved this is much too
small to produce relaxation times of the right order. On the other hand,
the energy density in the lattice vibrations (the 'phonon radiation
bath') is greater by a factor of roughly (c/v)3, and since the velocity of
sound v in a solid is in the region of 3 X 103 ms"1, the phonon energy
density is greater by a factor of about 1015. This may easily outweigh
the fact that the interaction between spins and phonons involves
mechanisms that are inherently weaker than the simple magnetic
resonance interaction between spins and photons. The first discussion of
such mechanisms by Waller (1932) was based on modulation of the
spin-spin interaction by the phonons, which induces oscillatory com-
ponents in the distances between paramagnetic ions (which we have
hitherto regarded as embedded in a fixed lattice). Waller distinguished
two processes in such interactions.
(a) Direct process. A phonon of the same energy (Ha>) as the spin
quantum required for a resonance transition is absorbed by the spin
system, resulting in an 'up' transition in Fig. 1.4; or a phonon is
emitted, accompanied by a 'down' transition within the spin system.
(b) Raman process. A phonon of any frequency (co/27r) may interact
p
with a spin, causing a transition (up or down) within the spin system,
the phonon being scattered with a different frequency (co/277)=Fv
p
respectively, where v is the magnetic resonance frequency. From the
analogy with the corresponding phenonemon for electromagnetic
radiation, this is known as a 'Raman process'.
The direct and Raman processes are illustrated schematically in Fig.
1.22. If we regard the direct process as a first order (one phonon)
process, then in comparison the Raman process is a second order (two
phonon) process with a correspondingly smaller coupling of the phonons
to the spin system. Nevertheless it may play the major role in causing
spin-lattice relaxation, as can be understood from the following
discussion. As an example we take a copper tutton salt in a magnetic
resonance experiment at 1010 Hz (3 cm wavelength), for which the line
width is about 102 G (Aco = 2 x 109 s"1), maintained at 4°K. The number
of phonons at this frequency within this band-width (given approxi-
mately by (1.138) with v instead of c in the denominator) per cm3 of
material is about 1015. (By way of comparison we note that the number
of spins is 3 X 1021, while the number of photons is less than 1.) Only these
phonons, which are at the same frequency as the resonance frequency,
are on 'speaking terms' with the spins and can take part in the direct
process for relaxation. On the other hand, the peak in the energy density

--- Page 79 ---

64 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.22. Schematic illustration of the direct process (a), (b) and the Raman process
(c), (d) in spin-lattice relaxation, (a) a phonon of frequency (co/27r) = v, the magnetic
resonance frequency, is absorbed by a spin which makes a transition to the upper state,
(b) a spin makes a transition to the lower state, emitting a phonon at the resonant
frequency, (c) a phonon of frequency (co/27r) is scattered as a phonon of frequency
p
(co/277)+v, accompanied by a 'down' transition of the spin, (d) a phonon of frequency
p
(o)/27r) is scattered as a phonon of frequency (co/27r)— v, accompanied by an 'up'
p p
transition of the spin.
curve for the phonons (cf. Fig. 10.3) occurs at about 3kT , which for
0
the above example is nearly thirty times greater than the quantum Tiv
for magnetic resonance. Thus the number of phonons that can take
part in the direct process is only an extremely small fraction of the total
number. Since any phonon can participate in the Raman process, the
whole phonon spectrum can contribute to relaxation within the spin
system by this process, thus greatly enhancing its importance.
Obviously this is true only when (hvlkT ) < 1 (it is about 0-1 in the
0
above example), and at lower temperatures where the overall number
of phonons has fallen sufficiently to remove the overwhelming effect of
their preponderance in number, the direct process will become the more
important of the two.
The theory of Waller, based on modulation of the magnetic dipolar
spin-spin interaction, led to relaxation times appreciably longer than
those observed experimentally. A more potent mechanism and one
which, unlike that of Waller, is independent of the degree of concentra-
tion of the magnetic ions, is modulation of the ligand field by the lattice

--- Page 80 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 65
vibrations. This produces primarily a fluctuating electric field, which
modulates the orbital motion of the magnetic electrons. There is no
direct interaction with the electron spins, but they feel the effect of the
modulation of the orbital motion through the spin-orbit coupling, in the
same way as they feel the effects of the static ligand field. The resultant
spin-lattice relaxation times are therefore greatly dependent on the
extent to which the orbital moment is absent in the free ion, or quenched
by the static ligand field. As a rough rule long spin-lattice relaxation
times are to be expected when the (/-value is close to the free spin value
2-0023, and short relaxation times when g departs markedly from this
value. Examples of the former type are isolated spins attached to
defects, and transition group ions that have half-filled shells, whose
ground states are $-states; on the other hand, short relaxation times
are found for all ions of the 4/, 5/ groups (except those with the half-
filled shell/7), and those ions of the d-groups for which the ligand field
leaves orbitally degenerate ground states (cf. Fig. 1.15).
The foundations of the quantitative formulation of the theory of
spin-lattice relaxation through modulation of the ligand field were laid
by Kronig (1939) and Van Vleck (1940), and have been extended by
many others, notably Orbach (1961). There are many complications
to be considered, but here we confine ourselves to the temperature
dependence. In the majority of cases this can be written in the form
where the various terms arise from different processes that contribute
simultaneously (but in widely varying degree) to the relaxation rate,
that is, to (1/Tj). Briefly these processes are as follows.
(a) Direct process, involving phonons of the same energy as the
magnetic resonance quantum hv, which gives the first term in (1.139).
The two limiting cases are
(i) (hvlkT ) < 1, for which £ coth(/&v/2&T) _*- (kT^hv), which is the
0 0
average number of quanta per phonon mode in the 'classical'
high temperature limit;
(ii) (hvjkT ) > 1, for which coth(/w/2&7 ) —>• 1, giving a constant
0 0
spin-lattice relaxation time determined by the rate of spon-
taneous emission of phonons from the upper state when phonons
of energy hv are no longer thermally excited.
(b) Raman process, a two-phonon process in which all phonons can
take part, giving the strongly temperature dependent second term.
6

--- Page 81 ---

66 INTRODUCTION TO
Typical values of the exponent n are:
non-Kramers doublet, n = 1;
Kramers doublet, n = 9;
multiplet with small splitting, n = 5.
(c) Orbach process, giving the third term. This involves absorption
of a phonon by a direct process to excite the spin system to a much
higher level (see Fig. 1.23), at an energy A above the ground doublet,
FIG. 1.23. A schematic illustration of the Orbach process. The paramagnetic ion has a
ground doublet, with levels (a), (b) at energies 0, hv, together with an excited state (c)
at a much greater energy A. Phonons at frequencies A, A— hv are absorbed or emitted by
direct processes, causing transitions (a) <-> (c) and (6) <-> (c) respectively. The net result
is to establish thermal equilibrium between the ground levels (a), (6). The rate is con-
trolled by the number of phonons available at frequencies near A//&, which must therefore
be an allowed phonon frequency.
followed by the emission of another phonon of slightly different energy
so that the magnetic ion is indirectly transferred from one level to the
other of the ground doublet. This process is also strongly temperature-
dependent, being determined by the number of phonons of energy A
available to excite the ion to the upper state at A. When A > kT ,
0
the last term in eqn (1.139) approximates to c exp(—A/kT ).
0
Because of the high temperature dependence, values of r for the same
x
salt vary rapidly and over a wide range, making experimental confirma-
tion of the theory difficult. Figure 1.24 shows an elegant set of experi-
mental values, fitted by a combination of direct and Raman terms,
determined by observation of the transient recovery of the magnetic
resonance signal after saturation by a high-power pulse; Fig. 1.25

--- Page 82 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 67
FIG. 1.24. Experimental measurements of spin-lattice relaxation time for Nd3+ in
yttrium ethylsulphate. The results are fitted with a combination of direct and Raman
terms
and show no significant dependence on the concentration of neodymium ions. The
measurements were made by observation of the transient recovery in the magnetic
resonance signal following saturation by a high power r.f. pulse. The steady magnetic
field (H = 3390 G) is normal to the crystal axis, and the resonant frequency is
9-40 GHz (after Larson and Jeffries 1966a).
shows the first experimental confirmation of the exponential depen-
dence characteristic of the Orbach process, determined by the classical
method of measurement of the magnetic susceptibility at audio
frequencies. Further experimental results are given in Chapter 10.
In this section we have discussed hitherto the rate at which the spin
system relaxes to the phonons, with the implicit assumption that the

--- Page 83 ---

68 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.25. Spin-lattice relaxation times for the ground doublet of cerium magnesium
nitrate. The straight line represents the exponential temperature dependence
typical of an Orbach process involving phonon excitation of the spin system to another
crystal field level at 34°K. The measurements were made by determining the magnetic
susceptibility in the audio-frequency range at frequencies of order C^Trr^"1 (after Finn,
Orbach, and Wolf 1961).
phonons are always in thermal equilibrium with a bath at temperature
T . However we have already seen that in the direct process the number
0
of phonons on cspeaking terms' with the spins is small compared with
the number of spins. Thus, unless these phonons can rapidly transfer
energy to other phonons or to a surrounding bath of high heat capacity,
the energy they receive from the spin system via the direct process will

--- Page 84 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 69
quickly heat the resonant phonons to a temperature close to that of
the spin system. This is followed by a regime in which the combined
(spin+phonon) system relaxes to the bath with a time constant r
b
which is much longer than that for the phonons alone, owing to the
high heat capacity of the spin system. This phenomenon is known as
the 'phonon bottle-neck' and was first discussed by Van Vleck (1941a,b);
it is represented by a block diagram in Fig. 1.26.
FIG. 1.26. The flow of heat from the spin system to the resonant phonons, and on to the
thermal bath. If the heat capacity of the resonant phonon system is very small compared
with that of the spin system, the initial process is a rapid heating of the phonons to a
temperature close to that of the spin system. This is followed by a much slower process
in which the combined systems (spins + phonons) relax to the bath with a characteristic
time constant r , which becomes the effective relaxation time constant for the
b
spin system.
If the ratio (heat capacity of spin system/heat capacity of resonant
phonon system) is denoted by 6, a quantity that may be as high as 104
(see § 10.2), then the effective time constant for the initial (spin to
phonon) transfer is of order (r /6), which is very much shorter than
ld
r , the ordinary spin-lattice relaxation time for the direct process. On
ld
the other hand, the effective relaxation time r for the combined
b
(spin+phonon) to bath transfer is of order &r , where r is the normal
ph ph
relaxation time for transfer to the bath from the phonons alone.
Because of the large value of 6, it is the quantity r that is observed to
b
control the rate of change of the spin temperature, after the initial
rapid heating of the phonon system in a time ~(r /6). This results in a
ld
different temperature dependence for the apparent relaxation time, as
demonstrated by Scott and Jeffries (1962). It may also become depend-
ent on sample size, being shorter for a fine powder with a shorter
value of r owing to the more intimate contact between the phonon
ph
system and the surrounding bath.
Under these conditions where b is very large, the resonant phonons
will be heated almost to the same temperature as the spins following a
saturating magnetic resonance pulse, and the temperature of the two
systems then falls together towards the bath temperature. However it
is possible instead to invert the populations in the spin system, i.e. to

--- Page 85 ---

70 INTRODUCTION TO
make n > n , giving effectively a 'negative temperature' for T (cf.
b a B
eqn (1.128)). This is not possible for the phonon system, since the
equally spaced quantum levels of a simple harmonic oscillator continue
to infinity in energy. The transient decay of the negative temperature
T of the spin system must therefore be different from that for a
8
positive value of T , as demonstrated by Brya and Wagner (1965).
B
Immediately after an inverted population is established (e.g. by the
method of adiabatic rapid passage; see § 2.5), phonons will be emitted
from the spin system mainly by spontaneous emission if Tiv > kT .
0
These heat the resonant phonons, thus increasing their radiation
FIG. 1.27. The 'phonon avalanche' effect. After an inverted population (n > n) has
b a
been established in the spin system, the population difference decays only slowly in the
region A J5 mainly through spontaneous emission of phonons if hv ^> kT . The resonant
0
phonons become heated, increasing the phonon radiation density and the chance of
stimulated emission of more phonons, giving the 'phonon avalanche' in the region BC.
After the population has ceased to be inverted, the temperatures of spin and resonant
phonon systems decay together in the region CD towards the thermal equilibrium value
at a rate determined by the phonon-bath relaxation times r^.
density which in turn increases the rate of emission of further phonons
by the process of induced emission. The results are cumulative,
producing a cphonon avalanche' that is particularly dramatic if
initially n > n . In the avalanche the population of the upper spin
b a
level falls rapidly until it drops below that of the lower level, then
reaching a positive value of T at which transient thermal equi-
s
librium with the resonant phonons can be attained. The subsequent
decay is governed by the value of r , as illustrated in Fig. 1.27.
b
The hot phonons generated through a phonon avalanche have been

--- Page 86 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 71
directly detected by Shiren (1966). The phonon bottle-neck and
avalanche effects are further discussed in § 10.6.
Although we have used the concept of spin temperature, defined for
a simple two-level system by eqn (1.128), this is justified only if the
spins are in thermal equilibrium amongst themselves. For spins with
the same resonant frequency, such equilibrium is established through
the mutual spin flips due to spin-spin interaction outlined in § 1.10; if
equilibrium is disturbed, it is re-established in a time of order r . The
2
FIG. 1.28. Two overlapping lines, centered on fields H and H'. In strong fields mutual
0 0
spin-flips between two systems can occur through spin-spin interaction only in the region
of overlap, where spin packets belonging to the two systems coincide in energy.
concept of a spin temperature is then valid if r < r the spin-lattice
2 l5
relaxation time, as is often the case. Similarly, if the spin temperature
in one region only of a crystal is raised above the average value, energy
will be transferred gradually through the spin-spin interaction to spins
in other regions; this process is known as 'spin diffusion', and represents
a flow of heat through the spin system which adds (on the macroscopic
scale) to the thermal conductivity of the crystal. If we have two spin
systems with different resonant frequencies, there is no obvious reason
for their spin temperatures T , T' to be the same unless they are both in
8 &
thermal equilibrium with a bath (e.g. at temperature T ). The reason
0
for this is that energy must be conserved in a spin-spin relaxation
process, and this is not possible for two spins with different resonant
frequencies. However this neglects the fact that the resonance lines
have a finite width; if the tails of the two lines overlap, as in Fig. 1.28,
mutual spin flips can take place (with conservation of energy) in the
region of overlap. This process is known as ccross relaxation', and since
spin-spin relaxation times are often much shorter than spin-lattice
relaxation times, this may be a more effective process in removing

--- Page 87 ---

72 INTRODUCTION TO
energy from a 'hot' spin system by transferring it to another 'cold'
spin system than direct transfer to the lattice.
If both resonance lines are homogeneously broadened, with over-
lapping tails, spin-flips in the overlap region will aifect all the spins.
If the lines are inhomogeneously broadened, only those spin packets in
the overlap region will be able to take part in cross-relaxation. However
each spin-packet has a finite width associated with its real value of r ,
2
and will be able to make spin-flips with neighbouring (and overlapping)
FIG. 1.29. 'Burning a hole in a line'. If the line is inhomogeneously broadened, and a
strong saturating power is applied at a frequency such that hv = gf$H, only the spin
packets resonant at this frequency are saturated, while others are not. In consequence
these spin packets give a smaller contribution to the line relative to the remaining
packets, 'burning a hole' in the line as shown. This effect is not possible for a homo-
geneously broadened line, in which all spins absorb power from the applied saturating
power.
spin-packets, thus transferring energy gradually throughout the
inhomogeneously broadened lines. This is another aspect of cross
relaxation, which is connected with the rather dramatically named
process of 'burning a hole in a line'. If the line is inhomogeneously
broadened, and microwave power is supplied at a single frequency
sufficient to cause power saturation, only those spin packets at the
resonant frequency will be saturated, so that a 'hole' appears in the
resonance curve, as in Fig. 1.29. The saturation effect then spreads
through the remainder of the line by cross-relaxation between adjacent
spin packets, the degree to which it spreads being determined by the
competition between such cross relaxation processes and other processes
such as spin-lattice relaxation. On the other hand, in a homogeneously
broadened line all spins are affected immediately by the saturating
microwave power and the intensity falls throughout the line, no
hole .being produced.

--- Page 88 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 73
We conclude this section on spin-lattice relaxation by mentioning
(and not discussing elsewhere) the solid-state maser. As pointed out
initially, it follows from eqn (1.127) that a spin system with an inverted
population (n > n ) will emit instead of absorbing energy in a magnetic
b a
resonance experiment. The net induced emission transfers energy from
the spin system to the electromagnetic field, and may thus be used to
FIG. 1.30. The principle of the three level maser. In (i), (iii) the lengths of the three
horizontal lines represent the populations of the levels in thermal equilibrium; in (ii)
strong pumping equalizes the populations of levels (a) and (c), causing that of (a) to fall
below that of (b). A signal causing transitions between (a) and (b) can then be amplified.
The alternative situation, when (b'} is nearer in energy to (c) than (a), is shown in (iii),
(iv); in this case signal amplification is obtained through transitions between (c) and (b').
The figure is drawn to scale for (A/A;T) = 1, (A^fcTo) = 0-2, (Aj/&T) = 0-8.
2 0 0
amplify a signal at the resonant frequency. The noise power inherent
in the system is (in a band-width df)
and if the working substance is at helium temperatures, the equivalent
noise temperature can be very low provided that the effective spin
temperature is numerically small, even when negative. A negative
temperature can be achieved in a two-level system by adiabatic rapid
passage (§ 2.5), but this is necessarily a transient method. Steady-state
working can be achieved with a spin system containing at least three
levels (Bloembergen 1956), as illustrated in Fig. 1.30. The energy levels
are at 0, A (or A^) and A , with populations proportional to 1,
x 2
exp( — Aj/fcTo)- or exp(— A(lkT ) and exp(—A /&F ) respectively. If
0 2 0

--- Page 89 ---

74 INTRODUCTION TO
strong saturating microwave power is applied at frequency i> = A/&,
p 2
the population difference between levels (a) and (c) will be diminished,
and in the limit of infinite pump power the populations of the two levels
will be equalized, if we neglect the possibility of relaxation transitions
to and from level (b). This situation is shown in Fig. 1.30 (ii), where it is
clear that the population of level (b) exceeds that of level (a), as a result
of pumping out of (a) into (c). If a signal at frequency v = A/fe is
a x
applied, it can be amplified through stimulated emission of photons
corresponding to transitions between (b) and (a). In Fig. 1.30 (iv) the
corresponding situation is shown for the case where the intermediate
level is at A^, nearer to (c) than to (a). In this case the pumping action
between (a) and (c) produces an excess population in (c) over (b'), and
amplification is possible at a signal frequency v' = (A —A^)/A.
s 2
1.12. Dynamic nuclear orientation
We now outline some interesting nuclear effects that can be produced
using electron paramagnetic resonance, through the hyperfine inter-
action between the magnetic electrons and the nuclear spins.
At ordinary temperatures all nuclear sub-states I are substantially
z
equally occupied, corresponding to random orientation of the nuclear
spins. At sufficiently low temperatures, if kT can be made of the same
order as the splitting of the nuclear levels, significant departures from
equal occupation and random orientation can occur. These are measured
by the following two quantities.
(a) Nuclear polarization is the first quantity, for which ideally all
nuclear spins are in the substates I = +1 (or all in I = —I), so that
z z
all point in the same direction. The degree of polarization is defined
by the magnitude of the quantity
which reaches unity in the ideal case and is zero for random orientation.
In a static magnetic field H the nuclear Zeeman interaction gives
a level separation gj^H; for protons this is about 400 MHz in a field of
100 kG, which is equal to kT only when T ~ 0-02°K. Thus significant
nuclear polarization demands these somewhat extreme conditions
(Simon 1939), and not surprisingly the method is commonly known as
the 'brute force' method. It corresponds to reaching saturation in the
nuclear paramagnetic susceptibility curve, similar to that common in
electronic paramagnetism, but since for electrons g <^ 103 g the
lt
latter can be readily attained in a field of 10 kG at a temperature of 1°K.

--- Page 90 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 75
A less exacting method was proposed by Gorter (1948) and by Rose
(1949), in which a relatively small field is applied to polarize the
magnetic electrons in a paramagnetic substance, the nuclei then being
polarized through the magnetic hyperfine interaction. In Fig. 1.10 we
see that in the region indicated by the arrow marked GR, all the levels
are separated by amounts ~A, where A is the magnetic hyperfine
constant. This region is reached in fields where gfiH ~ A, and H must
therefore be comparable with H in eqn (1.28), i.e. 102 to 103 G. Then
n
at temperatures where A ~ JcT (i.e. T ~ 10~2 to 10"1 °K), appreciable
nuclear polarization will be set up through preferential population of the
lowest hyperfine level. Such temperatures can be reached by partial
adiabatic demagnetization from 1°K using values of (HjT) <—> 104
to 105 G per °K. This clever trick thus makes use of the fact that H , the
e
electronic magnetic field at the nucleus (see eqn (1.28)), is of order 105
to 106 G, but is obviously limited to the nuclei of paramagnetic ions.
(b) Nuclear quadrupolarization is the second quantity, in which the
nuclei are preferentially aligned (parallel or antiparallel) along an axis,
or in the plane normal to this axis. Ideally all nuclei should be in the
sub-states \I \ = /, or in \I \ = 0 or \ (according as / is integral or
Z Z
half-integral). The degree of quadrupolarization is defined by the
magnitude of the quantity
which reaches +1 for \I \ = I and is negative if \I \ = 0 or J. Clearly
Z Z
polarization implies quadrupolarization, but not vice versa. A direct
method of quadrupolarization was suggested by Pound (1949), based
on cooling a substance with a large nuclear electric quadrupole inter-
action
down to temperatures such that kT ^ P\\ (see Fig. 1.31).
This method has been used to produce appreciable nuclear quadru-
polarization for uranium nuclei in Rb(U0 )(N0 ) (see § 6.5)which has
2 3 3
a singlet electronic ground state. In normal paramagnetic substances
with degenerate electronic ground states the nuclear electric quadrupole
interaction is generally small compared with the magnetic hyperfine
interaction. When the latter is anisotropic, as is frequently the case, it
can be used to produce nuclear quadrupolarization by adiabatic
demagnetization to zero magnetic field (Bleaney 1951a). From Fig. 1.10
it is clear that when there is no anisotropy there can be no nuclear

--- Page 91 ---

76 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.31. Energy level diagram for a nuclear electric quadrupole splitting
for a nucleus with / = f. The numbers in parentheses and lengths of horizontal line
represent the populations (normalized to unity) of each level at a temperature such that
kT = 3P || (equal to half the overall splitting), indicated by the vertical line in the centre.
(a) Pii positive; (b) PM negative.
polarization or quadrupolarization in zero magnetic field, since all
substates m for each given value of F are degenerate and equally
F
occupied; this result follows more generally from the fact that there is
nothing to define a preferred axis in space. On the other hand, when the
magnetic hyperfine interaction is anisotropic and, for example, of the
form (with A\\ ^ A )
L
there is a preferred axis. F is not a good quantum number (see § 3.9)>
though m = M +m is when the magnetic quantum numbers are
F
referred to the z-axis. The splitting pattern in zero field is altered; states
of different values of m have different energies (cf. Fig. 3.12), so that
F
those lowest in energy are preferentially populated, giving the possibility
of a nuclear quadrupolarization. The limiting cases of anisotropy, one
with A = 0 and the other with A\\ = 0, are illustrated in Fig. 1.32,
±
and it is clear that they lead to opposite signs for the nuclear quadru-
polarization. The first successful nuclear alignment experiments were
carried out using this method (Daniels, Grace, and Robinson 1951), in
which preferential emission of y-rays was observed normal to the
z-axis from 60Co nuclei. Since parity is conserved in such a process, the

--- Page 92 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 77
FIG. 1.32. Energy levels in zero magnetic field for 8 = i, 1=1, for the extremes
(a) A^ = Pii =0, (b) ^L M = P|| =0. Cobalt ammonium sulphate approximates to (a),
and, for comparison, the nuclear levels of 59Co in a diamagnetic cobalt compound in a
field of 100 kG are shown to scale in (c). The vertical lines in (a) and (b) represent JcT
for the lowest temperatures which could be reached by demagnetization from 1°K,
assuming that this is limited only by the hyperfine splittings. The vertical line in (c)
represents kT for T = 0-01°K. Most states in (b) are admixtures of two values of
m = m ±%. In the actual experiment (see Bleaney, Daniels et al. (1954)) a diluted
F
copper tutton salt containing a small quantity of Co2f was used in order to attain the
lowest possible temperature (after Bleaney 19516).
angular distribution depends on the nuclear quadrupolarization and
analogous higher even-order quantities. In ^-emission, parity is not
conserved, and the angular distribution depends on the nuclear
polarization and higher-order quantities, both odd and even. Thus in
the celebrated experiment of Wu et al. (1957), which showed that
j8-rays are preferentially emitted in one direction rather than in the
reverse direction, an external magnetic field was applied as in the
Gorter-Rose method in order to produce a nuclear polarization.

--- Page 93 ---

78 INTRODUCTION TO
The experiments just described are all essentially static methods, in
which any external field applied is a steady one. Magnetic resonance is
not involved, except that discovery of the highly anisotropic nature of
the hyperfine interaction suggested the first successful method, and
detailed measurements indicated which salt to use. We consider below
methods of 'dynamic nuclear polarization', in which magnetic resonance
is directly involved, but first discuss the question of relaxation times.
These are in fact an important parameter in the static experiments,
since in the methods of 'brute force' and Pound only nuclear levels are
involved, and thermal contact with the nuclear system is only
established extremely slowly. In the other two methods using complete
or partial demagnetization of a paramagnetic salt, the electronic and
nuclear levels are so completely mixed by the hyperfine interaction
that equilibrium is virtually immediate; the process involves only a
change in the way in which the entropy (a constant in the adiabatic
demagnetization process) is divided between the electronic and nuclear
systems, at temperatures where the entropy of the lattice is in
comparison negligible.
For simplicity we restrict the discussion to an example with axially
symmetric magnetic hyperfine interaction as in eqn (1.85) with a strong
magnetic field along the 2-axis, so that the spin Hamiltonian is
where we have re-written the A term using raising and lowering spin
L
operators. For the case of S = \, I = 1 the energy levels are shown
schematically in Fig. 1.33, together with the approximate values of the
populations (unnormalized) when hv/kT & g \\flHJkT = d < 1. We
e
have assumed that A\\/JcT is so small that we can neglect the population
differences due to the hyperfine splittings, and retain only those due to
the electronic splitting. The important relaxation processes are those
associated with electronic transitions, and in order of importance (i.e.
order of rapidity) they follow the order of intensity set out in (a), (b),
(c) of § 1.6. The spin-lattice relaxation rate for the AJf = ±1, Am = 0
transitions is just l/r^ for the AJf = ±1, Am = ±1 transitions the
rate is much slower, approximately (^.j_/^^)2(l/T ), but for the spin
1
Hamiltonian of (1.143) only the
transitions (corresponding to 'flip-flop5 transitions) are partially
allowed, and have relaxation rates of this order. This is because the spin

--- Page 94 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 79
FIG. 1.33. The energy levels for the spin Hamiltonian (1.143) for 8 = J, I = 1 in strong
magnetic field H. Main relaxation paths are shown by broken lines (Am = 0), and
z
subsidiary relaxation paths (less rapid by factors of order (A^/hv)") by dotted lines
(A(M-j-m) = 0). Much slower relaxation paths are omitted. The relative populations
of each state in thermal equilibrium are given in the approximation where (A ii/JcT) is
negligible and
Hamiltonian contains terms of the form S I__, S_I but not of the form
+ +
S I or S_I_. The remaining transitions are associated with much
+ +
slower relaxation rates, which we neglect. The main 'relaxation paths'
are indicated in Fig. 1.33, and maintain the population differences
shown (in the above approximation), with no net nuclear polarization
or quadrupolarization.
When an oscillatory magnetic field is applied at a magnetic resonance
frequency, sufficiently strong to cause transitions at a rate much greater
than (1/Ti), saturation sets in, and the population of the two levels
involved tends to become equalized. We simplify the algebra by
assuming they become exactly equal. The relaxation processes then act
to maintain population differences of order <5 between other states with
e
different values of M by means of the relaxation paths that are not in
direct competition with the magnetic resonance transition. The resulting
populations of the various states (under steady-state conditions) are
shown in Fig. 1.34, where the magnetic resonance transition being
saturated (that for which m = +1) is shown by a continuous line and
the relaxation paths by broken lines. If we compare the populations of
the various nuclear states it is clear that the population of the m = +1

--- Page 95 ---

80 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.34. Similar to Fig. 1.33, except that strong saturating magnetic resonance
power is applied to the Am = 0 line (+J, +1)*~>( —J> +!)> which equalizes the
populations of these two states. The populations of the other states are maintained by
relaxation paths so that the upper states, apart from (+i» +1), are always less in
population than the lower states by an amount d. The result is a nuclear polarization
e
Pj = -f(5/6, and a nuclear quadrupolarization P = +<5/6.
e 2 e
states has been enhanced in comparison with that of the m — 0 or — 1
states. Thus a nuclear polarization has been set up, for which
P! = (I )/I = +<3/6, while the nuclear quadrupolarization (see eqn
Z e
(1.142)) isP = + (5/6, also.
2 e
The results of saturating any of the other dm = 0 transitions can
readily be found (see Fig. 1.35). If the transition between the m = — 1
states is saturated, the value of P is the same as above, but P = — <5/6.
1 2 e
If the transition between the m = 0 states is saturated, one obtains
twice as much polarization, P = d /3, but P = 0. If all three of the
x e 2
dm = 0 transitions represented by vertical lines are saturated, the net
polarization is P = 2<5/3, but the quadrupolarization P = 0. These
l e 2
last results are the same as found by taking the sum of the values of P
l
or P obtained by saturating individual dm = 0 lines, but this simple
2
rule holds only for <5 < 1.
e
In this method of 'dynamic nuclear polarization5, first analyzed by
Abragam (1955), no nuclear polarization or quadrupolarization is set
up except through the relaxation processes, which must therefore be
allowed time to act. The controlling relaxation rate is that for the
A(Jf+m) = 0 transitions (represented by sloping broken lines), which
is of jorder (4i/Av)?.(.l/Ti), and in somQ c^se.s,,may be quite long. This

--- Page 96 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 81
FIG. 1.35. Similar to Fig. 1.34, except that strong saturating electron resonance power
is used to equalize the populations of two different hypernne states. The populations of
the other states are maintained by the relaxation paths shown, (a) Saturation of the
m = 0 hyperfine line, giving nuclear polarization P = +<5/3, nuclear quadrupolariza-
1 e
tion P = 0. (b) Saturation of the m = — 1 hyperfine line, giving
2
Whichever hypernne line is saturated (see also Fig. 1.34), the nuclear polarization P
1
has the same sign because of the asymmetry in the direction of the sloping relaxation
paths.
difficulty is avoided by an important modification due to Jeffries
(1957), in which one of the A(Jf +m) transitions is saturated instead of
one of the Am = 0 transitions. This is represented schematically in
Fig. 1.36, in which the ( + J, 0) <-> ( — J, +1) transition is saturated.
The rapid relaxation paths are indicated by broken vertical lines, and
there is one much slower relaxation path indicated by a sloping dotted
line (other relaxation paths are again neglected). At a time r after the
saturating power is switched on, the populations are shown in Fig.
1.36(a) for < r < (hv/A^r^ and in Fig. 1.36(b) for r > (hv/A^r^
TI
In the former case only the vertical relaxation paths have had time to
operate, whereas in the latter the sloping relaxation path has also
become fully effective. The resulting polarization parameters are
7

--- Page 97 ---

82 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.36. Similar to the last two figures, except that a A(M+m) = 0 line,
(+i» 0) <-> ( —J, +1) is saturated, equalizing the populations of these two states. The
populations given in (a) assume that the sloping relaxation path (dotted line) is in-
operative; those in (b) assume that this relaxation path is playing its full role. The nuclear
parameters are (a) P = — <5/6, P = —d/2; (b) P = — (5/3, P = -<5/3.
x e 2 e 1 e 2 e
If the other transition, ( + J, — 1) <-»( — £, 0) is saturated, the values of
P! are the same, while those of P are reversed. A notable advantage of
2
this method is that one can detect quickly when the right frequency is
being applied to saturate one of the A(Jf +m) = 0 transitions by
observing the anisotropy in the ^-ray emission (or /?-ray, but this is
generally experimentally more complicated) so that the transitions
detected are those of the radio-active isotope itself. With short-lived
isotopes, quantities far below those necessary to give a paramagnetic
resonance signal directly detected can be used, and the value of the
hyperfine splitting for the radio-active isotope is found from the
positions of the resonance lines thus detected. In principle, this is
possible also by saturating the Am = 0 transitions, but long relaxation
times may make this difficult in practice. The nuclear spin can also be
determined in either case, since the number of A(J^f+m) = 0 transi-
tions (for 8 = |) is just 21, while the number of Am = 0 transitions is
21 + 1 (but note that no nuclear quadrupolarization is obtained by
saturating the m = 0 transition); see, for example, Abraham, Kedzie,
and Jeffries (1960).
In cases where relaxation times are unusually long, the technique of
adiabatic rapid passage (see § 2.5) can be used to produce nuclear

--- Page 98 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 83
orientation or alignment (Feher 1956a), which endures until thermal
equilibrium is re-established through relaxation effects. The method is
illustrated in Fig. 1.37, where relaxation processes are assumed to be
negligible and the relaxation paths have been omitted. The effect of
adiabatic rapid passage is to invert the populations of a pair of states
when the system is swept over the resonance transition between them.
If first, an electronic rapid passage experiment is carried out for the
FIG. 1.37. Population inversion in pairs of states following adiabatic rapid passage over
the transition between them. Relaxation mechanisms are omitted, since inversion of
the population is independent of relaxation effects, though it lasts only for a time of the
order of the relaxation time, (a) Populations after adiabatic rapid passage over the
m = -\-\ M — +J-*—* — J transition, followed by (b) adiabatic rapid passage over
9
the M = +J, m = +1 +—»• 0 transition, (a) results in no nuclear alignment, but after (b)
the nuclear polarization parameters are P = — <5/6, P = — <5/2.
{ e 2 e
Am = 0 line m = + 1? the populations of the two states M = ±J>
m = 1 are inverted, as shown in Fig. 1.37(a). It is obvious from the
populations given in this diagram that no nuclear alignment is thus
achieved. If now a nuclear rapid passage experiment is carried out for
the transition ( + i, +1) <->• ( + J, 0), the populations become as shown
in Fig. 1.37(b). Both a nuclear polarization, P = — <5/6, and a
x e
quadrupolarization P = — d/2 are created. If a third adiabatic rapid
2 e
passage experiment is carried out over the next nuclear transition
( + 2> 0)<-» ( + J, — 1), the nuclear parameters become P •=• — <5/3,
1 e
P = 0, so that the polarization has been doubled but the quadru-
2
polarization reduced to zero. Feher and Gere (1956) demonstrated the
success of such an experiment for phosphorus nuclei in silicon by
observing the strength of the various resonance transitions after

--- Page 99 ---

84 INTRODUCTION TO
adiabatic rapid passage; Pipkin and Culvahouse (1957) observed the
alignment of the radioactive isotope 76As in silicon through the
anisotropy in its y-ray emission.
The methods of dynamic nuclear orientation outlined hitherto have
assumed a well-resolved hyperfine structure, typically that due to the
interaction between the magnetic electrons and the nucleus of the
paramagnetic ion itself. We end this section by discussing briefly
the dynamic orientation of nuclei of other (diamagnetic) ions through
their interaction (mainly magnetic dipolar in nature) with a few para-
magnetic ions present in low concentration, which can be subjected to
electron paramagnetic resonance fields at power saturation levels. This
subject is of importance, since it gives a means of producing highly
polarized nuclear targets (usually of protons) for particle scattering
experiments, without the extreme conditions required for a static
method such as the 'brute force' method. The method was proposed and
demonstrated in a solid by Abragam and Proctor (1958), and is often
known as the 'effet solide' or 'solid effect', though it was simultaneously
observed in a liquid (Erb, Motchane, and Uebersfeld 1958).
If the interaction between a neighbouring nuclear spin j and a
paramagnetic ion i is just due to their two magnetic dipole moments,
it is essentially similar to that illustrated in Fig. 1.17. We do not,
however, need to assume that it is dipolar in character, but write the
interaction in the form (S^. ^ . I-), which is a shorthand notation
ti 5
similar to (1.62) or (1.126) involving all possible products of the com-
ponents of Si and I,,. In particular, it contains products of the form
S l. as well as S I the former being more significant for the 'effet
iz ± i± j±9
solide'.
On including the nuclear Zeeman term, the spin Hamiltonian is
where, for simplicity, we assume that g is isotropic. If we can neglect
the third term in comparison with the second (and, a fortiori, in
comparison with the first), the energy levels in a strong field H are as
shown in Fig. 1.38 for the case § = I — ^. The importance of the
third term in (1.144) arises from the presence of products such as
S I , which admix states m = ± \ belonging to the same value of M,
Z ±
with amplitudes ~(«/^/<7/jftff). This makes possible partially allowed
transitions of the form A M = +1, Am = + lorAJf = — 1, Am = —1
(cflip-flip' transitions) as well as AJf = ±1, Am = =pl (eflip-flop'
transitions), with intensity ~(^" lg^H)2 relative to the Am = 0
iJ I

--- Page 100 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 85
FIG. 1.38. The energy levels for the system S = I = J corresponding to the spin
Hamiltonian (1.144) with the third term neglected. The main relaxation paths are
represented by the vertical broken lines, and less important paths by the sloping dotted
lines; other relaxation paths are omitted. The level populations are shown for three cases:
(a) thermal equilibrium; nuclear polarization P = 0 as shown, but actually
1
P — (gjf$HI%lcT} if the population differences due to the nuclear Zeeman term are
1
included; (b) saturation of the (+J, — J) <-> (— J, +J) satellite, giving P = — <5/2;
l e
(c) saturation of the (+i> +i) *-» (—i> — i) satellite, giving P = +<5e/2, where
x
transitions. If cjiftB. is greater than the line width, these are observed as
satellite lines at hv = (g ±g)(}H on either side of the main line (Am = 0)
z
at hv = gfiH, as shown in Fig. 1.39. The products § I , which also
± ±
occur, only produce admixtures of amplitude ~(«/'^/(7/?.fl'), and are
relatively less important. The important relaxation paths follow the
allowed and partially allowed transitions, with similar relative
importance.
These paths, together with the relative populations, are shown in
Fig. 1.38(a), where we have neglected population differences of order
<5n = (gjfiHjkT) arising from the nuclear Zeeman interaction. If either
of the allowed transitions Am = 0 is saturated, no change in the nuclear
polarization is induced, except through the residual relaxation paths
that may produce changes of either sign, depending on which of the
sloping relaxation paths is the more important (and this may differ for
the various neighbouring nuclei). If the satellite transition

--- Page 101 ---

86 INTRODUCTION TO
FIG. 1.39. Illustrating the electron paramagnetic resonance absorption and nuclear
polarization for a system with is = I = J, and the spin Hamiltonian (1.144). Constant
frequency is assumed, with scanning of the magnetic field, so that the satellite on the
high field side is the ( + J» +i) *"*• (—i> — i) transition, and that on the low field side is
is saturated, the populations become as shown in Fig. 1.38(b), with a
net nuclear polarization P = — (5/2; if the other satellite
± e
is saturated, the populations given in Fig. 1.38(c) show that the net
nuclear polarization P = +<5/2 (see Fig. 1.39). Thus by saturating
± e
either satellite, nuclear polarizations of either sign can be produced
which are enhanced over the value P = dJ2 appropriate to conditions
1
of thermal equilibrium by factors of order (<5/(5) = (gjgj). If <5 is not
e n e
small compared with unity, the electronic polarization becomes
tanh((5/2) = tanh(/M>/2&T), and this is the limiting value of the nuclear
e
polarization which can be reached under ideal conditions. Obviously
for J = J, the question of nuclear quadrupolarization does not arise.
The various methods of dynamic nuclear orientation discussed above
essentially enhance nuclear polarizations from the thermal equilibrium
value of order <5 = (g^HIkT) to polarizations or quadrupolarizations
n z
of order d = (gfiHfkT), though these limits may not be reached
e
because of competition from other relaxation processes which we have
neglected in order to bring out the basic mechanisms on which the
enhancement depends. The subject will not be discussed further, in view

--- Page 102 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 87
of the comprehensive reviews by Jeffries (1963) and Abragam and
Borgini (1964), which also include the method of Overhauser (1953)
for metals, the first method of enhancement proposed using electron
paramagnetic resonance.
1.13. Endor
In the method of nuclear orientation of Feher (1956a) discussed in
the last section, both electronic paramagnetic resonance and nuclear
magnetic resonance (at a hyperfine frequency) are involved, using the
technique of adiabatic rapid passage. In this section we outline an
allied extension of electron paramagnetic resonance, also due to Feher
(1956&), which has proved of outstanding importance. This is known
generally by the convenient name of Endor, an acronym for Electron-
Nuclear DOuble Resonance. In essence it makes possible the detection
of nuclear magnetic resonance through its effect on the electronic
magnetic resonance signal, thus making use of the high sensitivity
associated with the latter. The nuclear magnetic resonance occurs at a
hyperfine frequency, and is insufficient in intensity for direct detection.
The Endor method thus offers a direct measurement of the hyperfine
frequencies, with (as we shall see) much higher precision than can be
obtained from a simple electronic magnetic resonance experiment.
We consider a system with S = J, I = 1, for which the level popula-
tions in thermal equilibrium (neglecting all differences except those
between levels whose energy differs by an electronic quantum
hv = g/3H) are shown in Fig. 1.33. If low-level electron paramagnetic
resonance power is applied to any of the Am — 0 transitions (or
A(Jf+m) = 0 transitions), the level populations are not appreciably
disturbed and the signal intensity is determined primarily by the
difference in population between the lower and upper levels involved
in the transition, such as that between the ( + J, +1) and ( — J, +1)
levels. If at the same time we apply nuclear magnetic resonance power,
for example, to the transition ( + J, +!)<-> ( + £, 0), the nuclear signal
will have in comparison an extremely low intensity, partly because the
quanta absorbed or emitted are so much smaller than in the electronic
transition, and partly because the rate of absorption and emission is so
much smaller. The n.m.r. signal cannot therefore be directly detected.
Even if we supply sufficient power at this nuclear frequency to reach
saturation, the most we can do is to equalize the populations of the
( + 2> +!)> ( + 4>0) levels, and since otherwise they differ only by
<5 = (hv jkT), a quantity neglected in Fig. 1.33, the biggest fractional
n n

--- Page 103 ---

88 INTRODUCTION TO
effect we can produce on the intensity of the electronic signal will be of
order (d /d).
n e
The situation becomes significantly different if strong electron
resonance power is applied, sufficient, for example, to saturate the
( + i, + !)<-»( —£, +1) transition and equalize the populations of these
two levels, as shown in Fig. 1.34. The populations of the remaining
levels attain the values given in this figure through relaxation effects
by the paths shown. In these circumstances, the populations of the two
levels involved in the nuclear transition ( + £, +1) <-» ( +J, 0) differ by
an amount of order d instead of d . The nuclear signal at this frequency
e n
will therefore be enhanced by a factor of order (<5/<5), though this is
e n
still generally insufficient to make it directly detectable in a dilute
magnetic system. If, however, sufficient power can be applied at the
nuclear frequency to saturate this transition, the population of the
( + i, +1) level will be reduced towards equality with the ( + £, 0)
transition, thus affecting the intensity of the electronic signal corre-
sponding to transitions between the ( + J, +1) and ( —J, +1) levels.
We have thus achieved the desired effect, of being able to detect when
the right frequency is applied to cause a nuclear transition, through its
effect on the intensity of the much stronger electronic resonance signal.
A full analysis of the Endor process, including a calculation of the
signal intensity, is very complex, depending on the relative importance
of the transitions induced through the relaxation paths (including those
omitted from Fig. 1.34) and through the applied saturating magnetic
resonance power. We shall here carry the analysis only one stage
further, making the simplifying assumptions that both the electronic
and nuclear transitions are fully saturated, and retaining only the
more important relaxation paths. This situation is illustrated in Fig.
1.40, which is similar to Fig. 1.34 except that a nuclear transition is
saturated as well as an electronic transition. This means that all three
levels involved in these two transitions are equalized in population; the
remaining three levels attain steady-state populations relative to the
first three via relaxation paths that connect them immediately or
ultimately to the |+J, 0) state. Comparison of Figs. 1.34 and 1.40
shows that the populations of the two states | + J, +1} and | — J, +1),
between which the electronic transitions are taking place, have altered
by an amount ^(5 - We cannot simply use this to find out how much
e
the electronic resonance signal is altered, since in the limiting case of
complete saturation that we have assumed for simplicity, this signal
would apparently be zero because of the equal populations of the two

--- Page 104 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 89
FIG. 1.40. Level populations in a system with S = £, / = 1 while saturating power is
applied both to the electronic transition ( + J, +!)<->( — J, +1) and to the nuclear
transition (+J, +1) <-» (+i, 0), thus equalizing the populations of three levels. This
makes the populations of the m = +1 levels (1— (5/3) instead of the value (l+(5/3)
e e
which they have if only the m = + 1 electronic resonance is saturated (see Fig. 1.34).
The change in population shows that the intensity of the electronic resonance is changed
by the application of power at the nuclear (hyperfine) frequency. The other nuclear
transitions can be observed similarly if the other electronic transitions are saturated, as
in Fig. 1.35.
states |+i +1) and |-J, +1) in both Fig. 1.34 and Fig. 1.40. In
practice it would neither be desirable nor readily possible to attain
complete saturation, and a power level would be used which appreciably
reduces the difference in population of these two states, while still
allowing a reasonably strong electron resonance signal; this signal
would still be significantly altered in magnitude when sufficient power
is applied to the nuclear transition.
This problem is discussed further in § 4.6. We can, however, readily
see from a comparison of Figs. 1.34 and 1.40 that the nuclear power
must be strong enough to induce transitions between the | +.-J, +1) and
|+i, 0) states at a rate comparable with, or faster than, thermalizing
transitions through the relaxation path between the |—|, +1) and
| +£, 0) levels. Hence the nuclear power must compete, not just with the
nuclear relaxation time for AJf = 0 transitions, but with the electronic
relaxation rate at least for the A(Jf +m) = 0 transitions, which is of
order (AJhv)^!/^) for the spin Hamiltonian (1.143) (see § 1.12).
In a steady-state Endor experiment the actual signal intensity
depends on the effects of all the relaxation paths competing with the

--- Page 105 ---

90 INTRODUCTION TO
saturating power, and the ultimate steady state is of course only
reached in a time at least of order of the longest relevant relaxation
time. An experiment carried out in a much shorter time must necessarily
produce only transient effects, though if all relaxation times are long
such effects may endure for correspondingly long times. The Endor
process is much easier to analyze if relaxation effects can be neglected,
as in the closely allied nuclear polarization experiment of Feher
(1956a) described in § 1.12 and illustrated in Fig. 1.37. This made use
of the technique of adiabatic rapid passage, but similar effects are
obtained by applying a short saturating pulse. Figure 1.41 illustrates
FIG. 1.41. Level populations in a system with S = J, I = I after saturating power is
applied to the (+ J, 0) <-» (— J, 0) transition but before relaxation processes have reacted
to the disturbance. A population difference of order |(5/2| is created between any two
e
adjacent nuclear levels, between which AM = 0, Am = ± 1 transitions can be induced
at a nuclear (hyperfine) frequency.
the level populations obtained by saturating the ( + J, 0)<-> ( — J, 0)
transition for the system S = |, / = 1, before relaxation effects have
had time to react to the disturbance from thermal equilibrium; the
populations of the two m = 0 levels are equalized, while those of the
other four levels are unaltered. There is now a population difference of
order \d/2\ between all adjacent nuclear levels, so that by saturating
e
any of the nuclear transitions AJf = 0, Am = ±1 the populations of
at least three levels including the two m = 0 levels will be changed.
This alters the intensity of the electronic paramagnetic resonance

--- Page 106 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 91
absorption for the ( + J, 0)<-> ( — J, 0) transition, by means of which
the nuclear transitions can be detected. Thus Endor methods are
available both for materials with very long relaxation times and for
those with comparatively short relaxation times within the limitation
cited at the end of the previous paragraph.
The information content of the Endor signals is illustrated by taking
the simple diagonal Hamiltonian
for the case § = J, / = 1. In a simple electron paramagnetic resonance
experiment, the transition ( + J, m) <->( — £, m) requires a quantum
from which we can find g^ and A\\, but not P\\ or g. The accuracy is
z
limited by the line width, and by the fact that A \\ is determined just
from the spacing between the hyperfine lines and hence from the
differences in the values of H (at constant frequency) for the different
z
values of m. In the Endor method we detect transitions such as
(M, m) <-> (M, m — 1), which requires a nuclear quantum
The four such transitions in the 5 = £, / = 1 system are all of the type
(with different combinations of signs)
from which the three quantities A\\ P\\, g can be extracted with at
9 I
least one check on the validity of the spin Hamiltonian and the precision
of the measurements. Additional checks are obtained by working at
different field strengths; this can be done at the same electronic
frequency, simply by saturating either of the electronic m = ±1
hyperfine lines instead of the m — 0 line.
In addition to providing values of the hyperfine constants and of g
x
(or, more correctly, of g(I\ which includes the 'pseudo-nuclear Zeeman
interaction'—see§ 1.8), Endor also determines them with a precision
immensely greater than can be obtained in a pure electron paramagnetic
resonance experiment, provided that the lines are inhomogeneously
broadened. If the line width in such an experiment is, say, 3 G, thi
corresponds to a frequency width in the electron paramagnetic
resonance spectrum of 10 MHz; if the separation of the hyperfine lines
is 300 G (r^lOOO MHz), and the centre of each line can be determined
with a precision of -^ of the line width, the resultant error in the

--- Page 107 ---

92 INTRODUCTION TO
hyperfine constant will be ~1 MHz, or 0-1 per cent. In contrast, the
nuclear Zeeman interaction at H — 3000 G (even for a rather large
nuclear moment such as those of XH or 19F), is of order 10 MHz, and
for most nuclei it is considerably smaller. Thus the precision possible
in determining g must be quite low, quite apart from the fact the
f
nuclear Zeeman interaction does not shift the Am = 0 lines, and can
be observed only through Am ^ 0 lines that are normally partially
forbidden. However, if the effective line width for a nuclear transition
is also only 3 G, corresponding to a frequency width of /—'10 kHz for
such a transition, we can hope by using Endor to measure g with a
I
precision of order 0-1 per cent, and the hyperfine constant to a precision
of 0-001 per cent, or better. In the latter case the high precision results
from the fact that the nuclear magnetic resonance transition is taking
place, not just in the external field H, but also in the electronic magnetic
field H (see § 1.2), which is commonly in the range 105-106 G.
e
This high precision is obtained only when the electron paramagnetic
resonance line is inhomogeneously broadened, so that we are concerned
at any one time only with a spin packet whose inherent line width is of
order 10 to 100 kHz, corresponding to a value of r of order 10~5 to
2
10~6 s. Obviously r must also be at least as long as this in order that the
±
spin packet be not broadened by spin-lattice relaxation, but long
values of r are needed in any case in order to allow saturation of the
±
electron paramagnetic resonance line (or of the spin packet), see § 2.8;
and, more seriously, to make it possible for the nuclear magnetic
resonance transition rate to compete with relaxation effects (see above).
If the electron magnetic resonance line is homogeneously broadened,
the hyperfine levels will have frequency widths similar to those
observed in the electron resonance line, and an Endor experiment is
generally impossible.
A fuller discussion of Endor is given in Chapter 4.
1.14. Experimental aspects
Experimental techniques of electron paramagnetic resonance will
not be discussed in this book, except for an assessment of the limiting
spectrometer sensitivity (see § 2.10). Most experiments are carried out
at centimetre or millimetre wavelengths, partly for the historical
reason that oscillators and detectors have been available; clearly many
important experiments need and are carried out at still shorter wave-
lengths whenever feasible. In general, the intensity increases with
frequency; from eqn (1.127) the power absorbed by the spin system in a

--- Page 108 ---

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 93
transition between levels a and 6 is
and if (hv) < kT we have approximately (n — n ) — n (hvlJcT), so that
a b a
dW/dt increases with the square of the frequency since w has no
e
inherent frequency dependence. The factors arising from spectrometer
sensitivity which influence the choice of frequency are also discussed in
§ 2.10. However the wavelength region 30 mm to 3 mm (10 to 100 GHz
is very convenient experimentally, for a number of reasons :
(a) Many initial splittings lie in this range;
(b) line widths in concentrated paramagnetic salts lie in the range
0.1 to 10 GHz
(c) cavity resonators and wave-guide components are of convenient
size for crystals of 1 to 10 mm linear dimensions;
(d) magnetic fields up to 20 kG are readily achieved with iron-cored
electromagnets.
Amongst the advantages of electron paramagnetic resonance are the
following:
(i) high sensitivity—only a small concentration of paramagnetic
species is required to give a good signal (see § 2.10); in fact the
use of highly dilute samples is often essential in order to
realize the following advantages;
(ii) detailed and accurate information is obtained about the nature
of the paramagnetic species (hyperfine structure is often a salient
clue in identification) and its immediate surroundings, which
affect the anisotropy and fine and hyperfine splittings, and may
provide a ligand hyperfine structure; an exception arises in
structureless lines at the free spin value g = 2-0023 due to
defects or free radicals, though the intensity still provides a
useful method of estimating concentrations;
(iii) high precision is possible in measurement of the spin Hamiltonian
parameters, especially for the hyperfine parameters if Endor is
possible;
(iv) spin-spin interactions between neighbouring paramagnetic ions
can be estimated from line widths, and determined more
precisely from the spectra of interacting pairs of ions in semi-
dilute salts;
(v) spin-lattice relaxation times can be estimated from excess line
widths, saturation effects, and transient recovery signals
following saturation.

--- Page 109 ---

94 ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE
Some disadvantages are:
(i) resonance may only be observable at low temperatures because
of fast spin-lattice relaxation;
(ii) resonance is usually limited to the ground state or levels within
a few cm"1 of the ground state, unless special techniques such as
optical pumping can be used;
(iii) resonance is not always allowed within the ground state or low-
lying excited states;
(iv) (from the analytical point of view) good single crystals are
generally required, except in cases of no anisotropy.

--- Page 110 ---

PART II
GENERAL SURVEY
2
THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
2.1. Use of rotating coordinates
IT was shown in § 1.1 that when an atom with angular momentum
G and magnetic moment fx = yG is placed in a magnetic field H, the
equation of motion is
and the solution is one in which both G and \L precess about H with
angular velocity to^ — —yH. The question arises, what will the motion
appear to be to an observer in a rotating coordinate system, the axis of
rotation being taken to lie along the field H? If this system is rotating
with angular velocity to relative to a system stationary in the laboratory,
then the rate of variation of a vector quantity such as G in the labora-
tory system (which we denote by dG/d£) is related to its rate of varia-
tion in the rotating system (which we denote by DG/DZ) through the
equation
This may be combined with the equation of motion (2.1) to obtain the
equation of motion in the rotating system, which is then
This equation is similar to the original eqn (2.1) except that
instead of H we have (H + to/y). Thus the motion relative to the
rotating system will again be a precession, but with angular velocity
As would be expected, the apparent precession velocity is equal to the
difference between to , the angular velocity observed in the stationary
L
system, and co, the velocity of the rotating coordinate system relative

--- Page 111 ---

96 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
to the fixed one. This is equivalent to saying that in the rotating system
there is an effective magnetic field parallel to the z-axis
where H* = — to/y. Clearly, if we choose co to be equal to co^, the
precession vanishes and both G and (JL are at rest in the rotating
system, corresponding to the effective field H' being zero.
2.2. Magnetic resonance
This result enables us to derive simply the motion of an atom under
the combined action of a steady field H, which we suppose to lie
FIG. 2.1. Effective fields in the rotating coordinate system.
along the z-axis of a Cartesian coordinate system, and a field Hj
rotating with angular velocity u> about the z-axis. It is clear that if we
change to a coordinate system that also rotates about the z-axis with
angular velocity co, then the field H will be represented in this system
x
by a constant vector H normal to the z-axis, as in Fig. 2.1. At the same
x
time the constant field H must be replaced by the effective field
H' = H + to/y, which (see eqn (2.4b)) may conveniently be written as
H' = H—H*, where H* = —o>/y. The couple acting on the magnetic
moment, referred to the rotating system, is now

--- Page 112 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 97
where H is the resultant of H' and H added vectorially as shown in
eff 1?
Fig. 2.1. This equation of motion is again the same as the original eqn
(2.1). Hence referred to the rotating system, G and jx will undergo
a precession about H with angular velocity — yH .
eff eff
We consider first the particular case where co = co^, so that H' = 0
and H = H and assume that the rotating field Hj is switched on
eff 1?
suddenly at time t = 0, when the magnetic moment fx is aligned along
H. The motion of the magnetic moment is then a precession about H
x
with angular velocity — yH and every half- cycle of this motion it
ls
changes from being parallel to H to being anti-parallel and back again.
In the rotating system this rotation takes place in the plane normal to
Hj. In general H^ <^ H, so that the precession about U occurs at a
1
much lower velocity than that at which H^ rotates in the laboratory
system. Thus, in the latter system, the motion of G and jx consists of a
rapid rotation about H at an angle a to H which varies slowly from 0 to
TT and back again.
When the frequency of rotation of H is not equal to the natural
x
precession frequency co the magnetic moment jx precesses (in the
i9
rotating coordinate frame) about the field H . This field makes an
eff
angle 6 with H, where
and from simple geometrical considerations the value of the angle a
at time t (assuming a = 0 at t — 0) is found to be
where
The maximum value attained by a is clearly 20, and if H± < H (as is
normally the case) this value is large only when we are correspondingly
close to fulfilling the condition a> = W . This is clearly a resonance
L
effect, and the possibility of being able to change appreciably the
orientation of the magnetic moment (x with respect to the steady field
H by the application of a relatively small rotating field H constitutes
x
the phenomenon of 'magnetic resonance'. When a> = a> , the magnetic
L
moment (x, assumed to be initially parallel to H, can be completely
reversed by application of the rotating field H! ; in the ideal case this
will occur no matter how small the value of H though the rate of
1?
reversal is of course proportional to H .
x
8

--- Page 113 ---

98 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
Such a change in the orientation of the magnetic moment with
respect to H (i.e. a change in the value of a) leads to the possibility of
the detection of magnetic resonance in one of two ways. In the molecular
beam method of Rabi for free particles the re-orientation is detected by
the change in path of the molecule in an inhomogeneous field. For
matter in the aggregated state, magnetic resonance is usually detected
by an electromagnetic method. In a transient method energy must be
supplied to or taken from the system of dipoles in order respectively to
increase or decrease the average value of the angle <x. This represents an
interchange of stored energy with the source of electromagnetic radia-
tion. In a steady-state method, power must be supplied in order to
maintain the angle a at a value larger than the thermal equilibrium
value. This power can be detected either through the extra dissipation
it represents in the electromagnetic system, or through its appearance
as heat resulting in a rise in temperature in the aggregated state of
matter. A magnetic induction method has also been used (Bagguley
1955), in which the signal is induced by the oscillatory magnetic
moment of the system arising from the forced precession about H, the
oscillatory moment increasing as a increases towards 77/2. In spin-echo
methods, the observed signal is again induced by either a free or a
forced precession of the magnetic moment.
2.3. Quantum-mechanical analysis
The discussion hitherto has been on a classical basis, and an outline
of the quantum-mechanical approach will now be given.
When an atom with no nuclear hyperfine interaction is placed in a
steady magnetic field H (which we take to be parallel to the z-axis), the
interaction with its dipole moment is described by the Hamiltonian
This equation holds also for the case where J reduces simply to L or
S, and also for an atom with no electronic momentum but with nuclear
angular momentum if we replace J by I, provided that the appropriate
value of y is inserted in each case. Hence in this section we may regard
J as representing an angular momentum, either electronic or nuclear,
for an atom with no hyperfine interaction.
The only matrix element of J is
z
where M is the magnetic quantum number appropriate to J. Hence the

--- Page 114 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 99
energy in a stationary state is
as given by the classical theory.
If now an oscillatory magnetic field is applied in the plane normal to
H, with components H, H, there will be an additional perturbation
x y
described by the Hamiltonian
If the oscillatory field consists of a rotating field with components
H = HI cos cot, H ~ H sin cot, this can be written as
x y 1
where
Since the perturbation is an oscillatory one we use time-dependent
perturbation theory to evaluate its effect. If the overall wave-function
is written as a summation over all states \u }
n 9
where a is the amplitude and W the energy of the nth state, then the
n n
coefficients a obey the relation
n
where ^f is the matrix element of the perturbation between the
kn
states k and n,
In our case the only matrix elements that arise are those between states
M and M ±1, which are
which lead to the selection rule M <— » M ± 1 , or AJf — ± 1 . If we assum
that the system is initially in the state J — M , so that all the co-
z
efficients a are initially zero except a , which is unity, then since
n M

--- Page 115 ---

100 THE BESONANCE PHENOMENON
(WM±I~ W )/H = ^yH, for small values of the perturbation we have
M
approximately
This is readily integrated, and yields for the probability (aa*) of
M±l
finding the system in the states M ±1 after a time t
The transition probability per unit time w is given by the time
derivative d(aa*)/dt integrated over a distribution of Larmor frequen-
cies:
where it is assumed that f(co ) has a wide spectrum, but the only
L
significant contribution to the integral comes from the region where
CO & co. The quantity /( co ), known as the 'shape function', is normalize
L
by the condition
and describes the distribution of energy levels between which the
transition is taking place. For the case of J = ^, Rabi (1937) has shown
that an exact solution is
for the probability of finding the system in the state M = — \ at time
if it was in the state J!f=+Jat£ = 0. Since for J = \ the matri
elements of J are just unity, eqn (2.18) is similar to (2.17) except that
±
an additional term (yH-^2 is added to (yH + co)2.
It is clear from these equations that the probability of a transition is
large only if (yH + co) is close to zero. This corresponds to the resonance
condition deduced from the classical equations, but it is possible to

--- Page 116 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 101
make a much more detailed correlation between the classical and
quantum mechanical approaches, as has been shown, for example, by
Rabi, Ramsey, and Schwinger (1954). First, it will be shown that the
classical equation of motion (2.1) is valid also in quantum mechanics.
The rate of variation of a quantity such as G is given by
where ffl is the Hamiltonian which for our system is
Hence
which does not vanish because the components of G do not commute
with one another, though they do with H. The bracket on the right-hand
side thus has the #-component
by using the commutation relations for the components of G. The last
expression is just iH(G A H)^., so that we obtain again the eqn (2.1),
Thus we may expect that our classical analysis is valid also in quantum
mechanics, and a simple comparison can again be made for the case of
J =i
The wave-function for this case will, in general, be a linear combina-
tion of the wave-functions for the states \J ) = + J and — J, which can
Z
be written as just | + } and | — }. A suitable combination with normalized
coefficients is
for which the ^-component of the magnetic moment is
showing that our wave-function corresponds to the magnetic moment
lying at an angle a to the 2-axis. Thus the angle introduced to give
normalized coefficients in the wave-function can be associated with a
simple physical quantity.

--- Page 117 ---

102 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
If the system is in the | + > state at time t — 0, then a is initially zero,
and the probability of a transition to the | —} state at time t is given by
the square of the coefficient of the | —) state, i.e. by sin2^oc. From the
classical eqn (2.7) one finds
which on substitution from eqn (2.8) and use of the relation
is seen to be identical with the quantum-mechanical eqn (2.18).
2.4. Magnetic resonance in aggregated systems
It has now been shown that the classical equations of motion can be
justified on quantum mechanics, and that they provide an easy
physical approach to the phenomenon of magnetic resonance. This
approach is valid for a simple system, such as an atom with an electronic
but no nuclear magnetic moment, or vice versa, but not for a complex
system such as an atom with hyperfine structure. This restriction
follows from the use of the simple Hamiltonian of eqn (2.9) instead of
the complex one (eqn (1.67)). Even in the absence of hyperfine structure,
the simple Hamiltonian (2.9) may not be adequate when dealing wit
aggregated systems, for there may then be other interactions such as
quadrupole splittings in the nuclear case, or its equivalent in the
electronic case, the so-called fine structure terms (see §§ 3.3-3.6). The
classical approach is not then valid, but there are many cases when it is,
and it is particularly fruitful in providing a physical picture in many
situations in which it is only approximately valid. We shall therefore
investigate the solutions of the classical equation which describe the
motion of the magnetization in bulk matter.
In an aggregated system of permanent magnetic dipoles it is con-
venient to think in terms of the magnetization M, or the magnetic
moment of the whole system, rather than in terms of individual
dipoles. Now the magnetic moment of the whole system is simply the
vector resultant of the individual dipoles. Similarly, the angular
momentum, G, of the whole system is the vector resultant of the
individual momenta HJ. Since each individual dipole, jx, is parallel and
proportional to its own associated angular momentum vector
(jx = yHJ), then for a system of particles which all have identical
values of y we have

--- Page 118 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 103
and the system as a whole will obey the classical equation of motion
which, in order to deal in terms of M instead of G, can be multiplied
by y yielding
With suitable modifications, this equation is widely used to treat the
phenomenon of resonance in cooperative systems (ferro-, antiferro-, or
ferri-magnetic). We are concerned with paramagnetic systems where
the dipoles interact only weakly with one another; primarily this
means systems for which we can write
in the high temperature limit where (pH/kT) < 1. Essentially our
analysis will consist of finding solutions to eqn (2.21) which will yield
the conditions under which magnetic resonance can be observed. As
we should expect, this phenomenon is readily observable only when the
resonance condition to = —^H is fulfilled. We can, however, vary
either co, the angular velocity of the applied rotating field H or the
1?
steady field H, to reach resonance. In practice, it is nearly always
preferable experimentally to work at fixed frequency and vary the
steady field H. This is also the simpler case to analyze since we can
make use of rotating coordinate systems as has been done earlier in this
chapter. There will be some restriction on the rate at which H is varied,
however, as a rapidly changing field will have oscillatory components
that introduce transitions between the atomic energy levels. When the
field is changed slowly such transitions do not take place, and the
change is said to be 'adiabatic'. The condition that this should hold can
be found by means of the rotating coordinate system.
Instead of varying the magnitude of H, let us assume that H is
constant in magnitude but changing in direction; for simplicity we
assume that this change consists of a rotation about the #-axis, with
angular velocity to'. Then, if we change from the laboratory system to
one rotating with this velocity, H will be a constant vector in the
rotating system, but there will also be an apparent field H* = — co'/y
at right angles to H, as in Fig. 2.2. Then the effective field H in the
eff
rotating system will be the vector sum of H and H*. If the magnetiza-
tion was initially parallel to H, then it will start to precess about H
eff
and hence will not remain closely parallel to H unless the angle between

--- Page 119 ---

104 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
FIG. 2.2. Rotation of the field H about the #-axis with angular velocity 10'.
H and H in the rotating system is very small. This implies that
eff
#*<#, or
In other words, the Larmor precession frequency in the field H must be
very much higher than the frequency of rotation of the field H itself.
Then the precessional motion of the magnetization caused by the
rotation of H will cause it to deviate from being parallel to H only by a
very small angle, instead of the large angles possible when a rapidly
rotating field at the Larmor resonance frequency is applied. Since
characteristic electron resonance frequencies lie in the range 1010 to
1012 Hz, while modulation of the field H is seldom used at a frequency
much above 105 Hz, the adiabatic condition is easily fulfilled under
normal conditions.
2.5. Adiabatic rapid passage
We will now discuss a special solution of the equation of motion
(2.21) and its implications, before proceeding to the more general case.
As before, we assume that the system is subject to a steady magnetic
field directed along the z-axis, together with a field H processing with
±
angular velocity co in the ^-plane, so that it has components
H' = HI cos cot, H' = HI sin cot. A plausible solution might correspond
x y
to the magnetization processing about the z-axis at an angle 0, so that
it has components

--- Page 120 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 105
This corresponds to a steady-state solution, with forced precession at
the same angular velocity as that of the applied field. To find whether
this satisfies eqn (2.21) it is convenient to work in terms of the quantities
In terms of these components the equations of motion become
The first two equations in (2.26) (which are complex conjugates) can
be integrated at once if M is constant, as assumed in (2.25), and
z
substitution from (2.25) into the equation for Jf[ shows that the
z
solutions assumed for M , M_ do give J^ = 0. Hence the equation of
+ z
motion is satisfied by our solution, and integration gives
These are of the form (2.25) provided that we take
The nature of this solution can readily be seen by working in a
system of coordinates rotating about H with angular velocity co. In this
system H is a constant vector perpendicular to H, while parallel to H
x
the effective field component is H' = H+co/y = H—H*. The magnet-
ization vector M is also constant in this system, and from (2.28) we
see that it is parallel to H , the vector resultant of (H—H*) and H .
eff x
Let us assume that the steady-state solution (2.24) is attained under
the condition (H — H*) ;> H so that 6 is initially close to zero, and M
l9
is almost parallel to H. Then, if H is diminished slowly, the angle 6
increases and passes through Tr/2 at resonance when H = H*, attaining
the limiting value TT when H<^H* and again {Hil(H—H*)}-+0.
The magnetization M is now reversed in direction and is anti-parallel
to H, while at intermediate times when (H—H*) ~ H there is a large
l9
precessing magnetization in the #y-plane in the laboratory system. If
the specimen is inside a coil of area A which picks up a flux in the

--- Page 121 ---

106 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
7/-direction, a voltage will be induced in the coil of magnitude
This is largest when 6 = 77/2, corresponding to H being at the resonance
value H* = — co/y. Detection of this voltage gives a method of detect-
ing the magnetic resonance and is the essence of the method of nuclear
induction.
The solution obtained above was based on the assumption that H
was constant, but we have presumed that it still holds when H is varied
'slowly'. We note that M in our solution is always parallel to the
effective field H in the rotating coordinate system, and that variation
eff
of H corresponds to a rotation of H as well as a change in its magni-
eff
tude, its smallest value being just Hj. From the 'adiabatic condition'
discussed in § 2.4, we should expect that M will follow H at a small
eff
angle when H is rotated provided that the rate of rotation (dOjdt) is
eff
small compared with \yH^\. Since cot 6 = H'/H
19
The maximum value of H^H is unity, and hence the adiabatic
ett
condition is satisfied provided that
In words, this means that any change in H in a time of the order
(yjEfi)"1 must be small compared to H^ We can obtain some idea of the
magnitude of this restriction by taking H^ = 1 G. Then for protons,
for which y = 2-6 x 104 rad G"1, (y^i)"1 = 4 x 10~5 s, while for electron
spins it is 6 x 10~8 s. Thus H must be varied in such a way that a change
of 1 G must take place in a time long compared with either of these, a
condition that is readily fulfilled. In terms of the solution of eqns
(2.26), this corresponds to (dO/dt) being so small that it can be neglected
in the differentiation of eqns (2.25).
Since the equation of motion is linear in M, the magnetization does
not become infinite during forced resonance, as is commonly the case in
other systems without any damping. It means also that the size of M is
indeterminate, though if the system of magnetic dipoles is allowed
to come to thermal equilibrium at a constant field H by waiting a long
0

--- Page 122 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 107
time before commencing the sweep through resonance, then we should
expect M to have its equilibrium value
with £ given by eqn (2.22). Then M is initially parallel to H, and also
0
parallel to H' = H—H*, as assumed above in taking 0 —0 initially,
provided that H > H*. If, on the other hand, the system is allowed
0
to reach thermal equilibrium in a field H that is less than H*, then M
0
is initially anti-parallel to H' = H—H*, so that 0 = TT initially. Then
on sweeping through resonance M is again reversed, but the change in
0 is from TT to 2??, and the sign of the voltage picked up in the coil
(see eqn (2.29)) is the reverse of that in the former case. This is readily
seen from the diagrams showing the relative positions of the vectors in
the rotating coordinate system in Fig. 2.3.
FIG. 2.3. Motion of the magnetic vector in the rotating coordinate system during
adiabatic rapid passage.
In this discussion it has been necessary to determine M by reference
to the initial conditions, assuming the system was initially in thermal
equilibrium. Such equilibrium is attained by means of relaxation
processes, which occupy a finite time. It is clear that if the sweep
through resonance occupies a time long compared with the 'relaxation
time', reversal of the magnetization will not be attained because the
relaxation will tend to restore M to being parallel to H. Thus there is a
lower limit to the rate of sweep through resonance as well as the upper

--- Page 123 ---

108 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
limit given by the adiabatic condition (eqn (2.30)). When the rate lies
between these limits the sweep through resonance is called 'adiabatic
rapid passage' through resonance. When the relaxation time r is much
:
longer than (yH-^-1, [that is, (yH-^r-^ > 1], it is clearly possible to
satisfy both conditions. We note also that this gives a lower limit for
the size of H unlike the analysis of § 2.2 in which no damping forces
19
were present.
2.6. Relaxation effects
In view of the restriction that it has been necessary to introduce
concerning relaxation effects, it is clearly essential to consider these
in more detail before examining the case of slow passage through
resonance. This amounts to abandoning the assumption that all
changes in orientation or magnitude of the magnetization are due
entirely to the external magnetic fields applied.
There are three major internal interactions to be considered. The
first of these includes the ligand interaction, which may result simply
in a modified form of the Zeeman interaction but may also include
'fine structure' effects (see Chapter 3); it also includes hyperfine
interactions between the magnetic electrons and nuclear moments. If
these interactions are comparable with or greater than the electronic
Zeeman interaction energy, the macroscopic model is seldom applic-
able. If they are smaller than the electronic Zeeman energy, and only
those parts of the interaction Hamiltonian are retained which are
diagonal in the representation in which the electronic Zeeman energy
has been diagonalized, the macroscopic analysis often gives a useful
physical picture that forms a good approximation to the actual motion.
The second and third internal interactions are the effects of thermal
agitation and of interaction between the dipoles themselves. These are
usually much weaker than the Zeeman interaction with the external
fields, but are of importance because of their cumulative effects over
long periods of time. Both these effects represent random interactions
with the various atomic dipoles, and to this extent our model becomes
only 'semi-macroscopic' when they are introduced. However, there is a
fundamental difference in that only thermal perturbations can change
the energy of the total dipole system (the 'spin system' as it is generally
called, though this must be taken to include orbital dipoles in the
electronic case), whereas interactions within the spin system (i.e.
between the individual dipoles) leave this energy unchanged.
The major part of the energy of the spin system, is, under the

--- Page 124 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 109
restrictions retained above, the Zeeman energy in the steady field H,
which is just
assuming H to be in the ^-direction, as before. Major changes in the
energy are therefore due to changes in M for which thermal fluctua-
Z9
tions must be responsible. If at any time the magnetization component
M is not equal to its equilibrium value M = %JEL, it is not a bad
z 0
approximation to assume that it will approach this equilibrium value
exponentially according to the differential equation
T! is a characteristic time-constant, sometimes called the 'longitudinal'
relaxation time, since it governs the changes in M the component
Z9
parallel to the steady magnetic field, and sometimes the 'spin-lattice'
relaxation time, since it is connected with the exchange of energy
between the spin system and the lattice in which the dipoles are
embedded. We use r and (below) r instead of the more usual T T
x 2 19 2
as a more logical nomenclature which avoids confusion with the
temperature T.
We now consider the mutual interactions between the dipoles, which
are conveniently, if somewhat loosely, described by means of 'local
fields'. As above, we assume that the spin system is in an external
magnetic field parallel to the z-axis which is much larger than the
internal fields. Then the mutual interactions between the dipoles, or
spin-spin interactions, cannot affect the longitudinal component M of
z
the magnetization, but only the transverse components M, M.
x y
Since the interactions between the dipoles do not affect the total
energy of the system, in magnetic fields much larger than the local
fields they can have no effect on the component M of the magnetization,
z
but only on M, M. For simplicity of analysis it was assumed by Bloch
x y
that the effect of these mutual interactions could again be represented
by a relaxation time, so that M, M obey the differential equations
x y
r is generally known as the 'transverse' relaxation time, and the sense
2
in which the mutual interactions can be treated as giving rise to a
relaxation effect will be discussed later.
These relaxation effects may be introduced into the equations of
motion by combining eqns (2.26) with (2.31) and (2.32). Since M , M_
+

--- Page 125 ---

110 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
will obey equations similar to (2.32), we have
These equations were first given by Bloch (1946).
It is necessary to point out that while the rate eqn (2.31)
defining r has a wide range of validity, the eqns (2.32) that define r
x 2
are valid only for magnetic moments in fast relative motion with
respect to each other. They may describe correctly the behaviour of
the transverse magnetization of paramagnetic ions or free radicals in
liquid solution, or that of conduction electrons in metals and semi-
conductors, but in general they will be grossly incorrect in insulating
paramagnetic solids. A rate equation such as (2.32) implies that the
time dependence of the decaying amplitude of the transverse magnetiza-
tion is exponential. It can be shown under fairly general assumptions
that this decay function is the Fourier transform of the resonance line
shape observed with a vanishingly small r.f. field, since the Fourier
transform of a decaying exponential exp(— t/T) is proportional to the
2
Lorentzian function (where Aco = r^"1)
Thus the validity of eqns (2.32) would imply that resonance lines
always have a Lorentzian shape, which is contradicted by experiment
and not to be expected on theoretical grounds.
Whatever the line shape, one may of course somewhat loosely define
a time r' by the relation r' = (y AH)~l where A# is the line width,
z 2
but it is preferable to introduce first a distinction between homogeneous
and inhomogeneous broadening. We shall say that a line is inhomoge-
neously broadened if the line width is caused by a distribution across the
sample of the Larmor frequencies of the various magnetic moments.
The causes of such a distribution are manifold, ranging from a badly
inhomogeneous external field to local variation of the gyromagnetic
factor y arising from local imperfections in the crystalline environment
of the magnetic dipoles. Whatever the origin, such inhomogeneous
broadenings have one feature in common : the loss of phase coherence
caused by the fanning out in the equatorial plane of the individual
precessing dipoles is not an irreversible phenomenon — there are ways,

--- Page 126 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 111
known as spin echoes (see § 2.7), whereby phase coherence can be
restored.
The problem of phase coherence can be thought of in the following
way. In thermal equilibrium the only steady component of the
magnetization is M, since both M and M are zero on a time average,
z x y
though they may fluctuate about this value. This does not imply that
the individual dipoles are all necessarily parallel or anti-parallel to the
z-axis, but that their components normal to this axis are random and
average to zero. Suppose, however, that at some instance there exists a
finite value of the magnetization in the equatorial plane. In the
presence of a uniform field H this will precess about H with angular
velocity — yH, and since the individual dipoles all precess with this
velocity they remain in phase and the magnetization will retain its
initial magnitude. This will only be true if the field acting on each
dipole is exactly equal to H; if the applied field is inhomogeneous, the
individual dipoles will precess at different velocities. The mutual
interaction of the dipoles produces an effect similar to that of inhomo-
geneity in H, since the local field at individual dipoles then varies by
an amount, AH, of the order ///r3. This gives rise to a spread in the
precessional velocity of order \y\ AH, which will cause the dipoles to
get out of phase in a time of order
For nuclear moments of size 10~3/? at an average separation of 0-2
nm we have AH ~ 1 G, and r' ~ 10~4 s. For electronic moments in
z
a moderately dilute paramagnetic salt such as a double sulphate the
average distance between dipoles is about 0-6 nm, AH ~ 50 G and
By diluting the salt with an isomorphous diamagnetic salt the value of
AH can be reduced to a few gauss, or even less than 1 G if the salt
contains no nuclear dipole moments of appreciable size, and in this case
the value of r' may rise to about 10~7 s.
2
The effect of the mutual interactions cannot be represented entirely
as giving rise to inhomogeneity in H, since the precessing components
of the dipole field give rise to transitions (cspin flips') where one dipole
gains energy and another loses it by exchange of a quantum of energy.
This process is most effective when the dipoles precess at the same
frequency. In such a mutual flip the total value of M is conserved,
z
assuming that the external field is much larger than the local fields, so

--- Page 127 ---

112 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
that the total energy of the system remains unchanged. However there
is no such restriction on the total values of M or M , and the result of
x v
such spin flips is a gradual destruction of the phase coherence between
the components of the individual dipoles in the ^-plane, so that any
precessing magnetization in this plane will gradually decay to zero. In
so far as this decay takes place exponentially in time, it can be
represented by a transverse relaxation time in an equation such as
(2.32). Thus the spin-flip process introduces a 'genuine' transverse
relaxation time r . In undiluted salts, the spin-flip process between
2
identical spins increases the line width by a factor ~f (see § 9.7), so
that r is not much greater than r' . In diluted salts where the line
2 2
width is mainly due to nuclear moments in the host lattice, the true
value of r may be >—'10~5 s, corresponding to 'spin packet' widths of
2
order 104 Hz.
In non-conducting solids r is generally much longer than r for
x 2
nuclei, but this is not necessarily true for electronic dipoles that are in
much more intimate contact with the lattice through the action of
thermally modulated electric fields on the translational or orbital
motion of the electrons. At low temperatures where thermal fluctuations
die out Tj becomes large, but at room temperature it may be much
shorter for electrons than the value of r' given in eqn (2.36). This does
2
not mean that r becomes shorter than r , since thermal fluctuations
x 2
that affect M also affect M M and result in a r comparable with T^
z X9 y 2
When the whole of the line width is due to relaxation effects, the
resonance line is 'homogeneously broadened'.
We return now to the consideration of the phenomenon of adiabatic
rapid passage in the light of our remarks about relaxation effects.
The essential feature of the process is that in the rotating frame the
magnetization vector follows the effective field H , but since the
e£f
magnetization is simply the vector sum of the individual dipoles it
follows that they must all undergo a similar motion (this does not, of
course, imply that they are each parallel to H ). The presence of a
eff
local field AH that varies from point to point in the sample means that
the field seen by an individual dipole in the rotating frame is H + AH,
eff
and in view of the random nature of AH the dipoles will not all undergo
a similar motion unless AH < H always, which means AH < H .
ett ±
If AH were a purely longitudinal field, parallel to H, this restriction
would not apply since the effect of AH would then be merely to change
the value of Hf = H —H*, so that the individual dipoles pass through
the equatorial plane at different times, but all would end anti-parallel

--- Page 128 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 113
(or parallel) to the external field. If, however, AH has transverse
components with a frequency dependent spectrum so that there is a
genuine transverse relaxation time r , then it is necessary to pass
2
through resonance in a time short compared with r in order that the
2
transverse magnetization shall not decay appreciably during passage,
which must therefore be rapid. In fact spin-flip processes arise from
local transverse magnetic fields near the resonance frequency, which
appear as constant fields AH' in the rotating system to be added
vectorially to Hj. We therefore do require H± > Aff', or
for adiabatic rapid passage to be effective in reversing the magnetiza-
tion, and it is thus possible only in heavily diluted salts, where
r > 10~7 s, since at centimetre wavelengths oscillatory fields are not
2
normally greater than about 1 G, for which (lyffj)"1 is about 10~7 s.
Similar restrictions apply to T but as remarked earlier, if TJ is not
I?
greater than r it can be made so by working at lower temperatures, so
2
that the condition lyH-^r-^ > 1 is readily fulfilled. However, there
remains the requirement that the sweep through resonance must be
made in a time short compared with r and r , which is difficult to
± 2
fulfill unless both are rather long. In addition, any reversed magnetiza-
tion set up will persist only for a time ^^T. The conditions are, of
I
course, much more easily met in the case of nuclear dipoles.
2.7. Radio -frequency pulses and spin echoes
Reversal of the magnetization such as occurs in adiabatic rapid
passage can also be effected by the application of a short pulse of the
oscillatory field at the resonance frequency. The situation then is
similar to that of the free atom case discussed in § 2.2. Suppose the
system is initially in thermal equilibrium in a magnetic field H, and a
strong rotating field Hj at the exact resonance frequency is applied
suddenly for a time dt. Then the magnetization M is initially parallel
to H, and in the rotating coordinate system of Fig. 2.1 is normal to H
lB
In this system there is no other field, and in time dt, M will precess
about Hj through an angle \y\ H± dt. If dt is chosen so that \y\ H± dt = TT,
the magnetization will just reach the direction anti-parallel to H (a
'180 degree pulse'), while if dt is half as long, M is turned to a position
normal to H in the equatorial plane (a '90 degree pulse'). It is readily
x
seen that relaxation effects will only be negligible provided that
dt < r r ; thus the condition T r > (\y\ -Hi)"1 applies in this case
l9 2 I? 2
9

--- Page 129 ---

114 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
also. If the transverse relaxation time is expressed as a spread in field
AH = (\y\ Tg)"1, the second and more rigorous of these conditions is
readily seen to be H > AH. In the rotating coordinate system this
1
means that the effective ^-component of the field H— H*, which is not
zero for all parts of the sample if we regard AH as being equivalent to
an inhomogeneity in H, is small everywhere compared with Hj, so that
the precession of M is about an effective field (the vector resultant of
H—H* and H ) which does not deviate appreciably in direction and
x
magnitude from H^ This condition is more stringent than that required
for adiabatic rapid passage, where a static spread in field of AH
(cinhomogeneous broadening') only results in dipoles passing through
the equatorial plane at different instants of time.
Pulses of this kind are used in spin-echo techniques, originated by
Hahn (1950). After the magnetization has reached thermal equilibrium
in a field H, so that M, like H, lies along the z-axis, a '90 degree pulse5
is applied by means of an oscillatory field at the resonance frequency.
If, in the rotating coordinate system, H is taken to lie along the
x
#-axis, then after the pulse the magnetization vector M lies in the
equatorial plane, parallel to the ?/-axis if y is positive, and anti-parallel
to the i/-axis if y is negative. There is now no field in the rotating frame,
apart from a small spread in field due to the local field or other
inhomogeneity which has a steady component AH in the rotating frame
along the z-axis. The effect of this is to cause the dipoles to fan out in
the equatorial plane with angular velocity —y AH, with resulting
diminution in the net magnetization. If at a time r after the first pulse
is applied, a '180 degree pulse' of oscillatory field is turned on, the
result is to turn all the individual dipoles in the equatorial plane through
180° about H!. Thus a dipole that had deviated in time r by an angle
6' = — y AHr from the ?/-axis is turned to an angle
Under the action of the local field it will subsequently precess in the
equatorial plane with angular velocity — y AH, so that after a further
time r it will reach an angle (ir+y AHr) —y AHr = rr. Thus at time 2r
after the first pulse all dipoles are at the same angle, and a macroscopi
magnetization is reconstructed in the equatorial plane which is observed
as a pulse on the oscilloscope (see Fig. 2.4). The process can be repeated
by applying further 180° pulses at times 3r, 5r, etc., so that pulsed
signals appear at times 4r, 6r, etc. as well as 2r. The amplitude of
successive pulses decays because of relaxation effects, and the method

--- Page 130 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 115
FIG. 2.4. Typical spin echo sequence for electron spin resonance (after Kiel and Mims
1967). Two pulses of r.f. power are applied at an interval of 1-5 jus. The r.f. field at the
sample during each pulse is about 0-5 G; for g = 2, yH f& 1.07 rad s-1 so that yHjt t*t 2
1
for a pulse of duration 0-2 ^s. The spin echo is detected by a superheterodyne receiver.
Note that pulse lengths other than 90° followed by 180° (that described in the text) are
often used in practice. In the work of Kiel and Mims the spin echo method is used as a
sensitive detector in measurements of r .
x
gives therefore a measurement of the 'genuine' relaxation time r . It can
2
also be applied to the measurement of TI.
2.8. Solution of the macroscopic equations for slow passage
In the case of very slow passage through resonance, which is the case
commonly encountered in electronic magnetic resonance, another
limiting solution of the Bloch equations can easily be found. Essentially
we assume that passage is so slow that at all times steady-state condi-
tions prevail, and again look for a solution of eqns (2.33) where
]\/[ = 0, so that M is constant. Then the equations are readily inte-
z z
grable, giving the complex conjugate solutions
(2.37)
Substitution back into (2.33) gives the value of M:
z
whence
where, as before, the symbol co is used for the Larmor angular velocity
L
—yH. These equations show that because of the term {(co — co )r }2
L 2
M remains practically equal to M except at resonance, and even then
z 0

--- Page 131 ---

116 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
the departure is small unless y^H^r^r^ > 1. The whole solution corre-
sponds to the magnetization vector precessing about H with angular
velocity co, but tipped at an angle 6 to H such that
If, as in most experiments, H is varied slowly and co is kept constant, it
is convenient to express these quantities in terms of magnetic field.
Using H* = — (co/y) for the resonance field at frequency o>, and
= — (yr )~l, we have
2
while the equatorial component M sin 6 of the magnetization leads the
rotating field H± by an angle e such that
We have already seen that in a paramagnetic substance with electronic
dipoles Aff is fairly large (<~^102 G) unless the substance is heavily
diluted. Thus, for ordinary values of H tan 6 is very small even at
l9
resonance, for which tan 6 = (H^t^H), so that the angle 6 at which M
precesses round H is small. The value of e varies from 0 for H* < H,
through —77/2 for H* = H to — TT for H*^>H. This behaviour is
similar to that usually found for the phase angle in forced resonance,
and we can express the oscillatory part of the magnetization in terms of
a complex susceptibility % such that
Then, since
The real and imaginary parts of ^ = %' —^' can be expressed in terms
either of fields or of frequencies (writing Aco = r"1), giving in the
latter case (since yH = —CO)
L
Thus x' is zero at resonance, while at other frequencies it is positive or
negative (see Fig. 2.5) according to whether o> is greater or less than
L

--- Page 132 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 117
FIG. 2.5. Position of the equatorial component M sin 6 of the magnetization M, relative
to Hj in the rotating frame, on either side of resonance. When the natural resonance
frequency o) is numerically larger than the applied frequency o>, the phase angle e
L
given by
lies between 0 and — ?r/2; at resonance it is just equal to — ?7/2, and ^' = 0; as o> is
increased above o>, the angle e moves towards — TT. In terms of magnetic field, the same
L
pattern is followed, starting with H > H* and decreasing H through the resonance
value H*.
In eqn (2.42a), all angular velocities have the same sign (usually positive for electronic
dipoles) provided that U. rotates in the same sense as the natural sense of precession of
1
the atomic dipoles. If it rotates in the opposite sense, then the quantities co, CO add
L
numerically and the value of e is always close to zero. Note that M deviates in the
direction corresponding to an incipient precession about H
r
the applied eo. The imaginary part of the susceptibility is a maximum
at resonance, and provided that y^H^r^ < Aco, one has at resonance
showing that the imaginary part of the susceptibility is much greater
than the static susceptibility provided that the line width is small
compared with the resonance frequency, i.e. that the lines are fairly
sharp.
The condition that was introduced in deducing eqn (2.46) involves
the spin-lattice relaxation time T and is the same condition as is
I?
required to make the departure of M from M negligible even at
z Q
resonance. It is readily shown that at resonance
so that M can never be greater than M . It can, however, be significantly
0
smaller than M for large amplitudes of the rotating field H. This is
Q l
because the spin system is absorbing energy from the rotating field at
a rate
and this absorption of power raises the temperature of the spin
system to the point where (dW/dt) is equal to the rate at which energy

--- Page 133 ---

118 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
is transferred from the spin system to the lattice. Hence M falls below
the equilibrium value M , which is appropriate to the spin system
Q
being at the same temperature as the lattice, and the temperature rise
in the spin system with increasing H± will be greater, the longer T± and
T . If HI — 1 G, and y = 107 rad G"1, r = 10~9 s as for an ordinary
2 2
paramagnetic, then there will be no significant temperature rise in the
spin system unless r > 10~5 s, a value that is ordinarily attained only
x
at low temperatures.
This phenomenon is known as 'dynamic saturation'; in experiments
where resonance is detected by means of the energy absorbed from the
rotating field it limits the gain that can be achieved through increasing
HI. At resonance the size of the precessing component %"Hi of the
magnetization in the equatorial plane, which is 77/2 out of phase with
the rotating field, is given by
which passes through a maximum at \yH±\ = (T^T^-^. This maximum
arises because the angle 6 at which the vector M precesses about H
increases as H^ increases (eqn (2.40)), but the magnitude of the vector
shrinks as saturation sets in. The absorbed energy dW/dt given by
(2.48) can be written, using (2.49) and (2.38), as (at resonance)
where the quantity s = (M — M )IM is sometimes known as the
0 Z 0
'saturation parameter'. As H^ is increased without limit, the value of
dWjdt tends to the limiting value (M Hlr^), which is independent of
Q
HI and r . This limit occurs because the temperature of the spin
2
system rises and hence %" falls as H± increases, the temperature
adjusting itself to a value such that the rate at which heat is absorbed
is just equal to the rate at which it is transferred to the lattice; the
latter becomes the controlling factor.
In the simple treatment of §1.11 we saw that saturation sets in
when 2w r & I. We can compare this result with the treatment given
e l
in this section by using eqns (2.17a) and (2.34). For a system with
J = J the matrix element (Jf±l| J \M) = 1, and exactly at resonance
±
(ft> — CO) the value of the shape function is/(co) — r /7r. Hence
L 2

--- Page 134 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 119
which is just the quantity that occurs in the saturation parameter at
resonance (cf. eqn (2.50)).
It may also be helpful to give some numerical values. If we take
HI = 0-1 G as being typical of an electron resonance experiment in
which y = 107 rad G"1 with J = £, we find that saturation sets in when
y^H^r^r^ = 1012r r ^ 1. Thus in a concentrated salt for which
1 2
r = 10~9 s (Ajff & 100 G), saturation occurs only if r > 10~3 s. On
2 x
the other hand, in an inhomogeneously broadened dilute paramagnetic
for which r = 10~5 s in a spin packet, saturation requires only
2
TJ > 10~7 s; since r cannot be longer than r saturation would set
2 l5
in at r = TJ — 10~6 s. For a nuclear paramagnet y = 104 rad G"1,
2 n
and if we take H-^ = 1 G in this case, and AZT = (y r )~1 = 10 G
n 2
in a solid lattice, saturation occurs if r > 10~3 s.
x
2.9. Intensity and line width
The classical analysis using the macroscopic equations gives an
excellent approach to magnetic resonance, particularly because it
gives a simple physical picture. It is rather less applicable to electronic
paramagnetic than to nuclear paramagnetic substances because the
case where the only major interaction is that with the external applied
field H tends to be the exception rather than the rule. In a solid para-
magnetic the energy levels in zero magnetic field are commonly split
by crystal field effects as well as nuclear interactions, and even where
these are absent, the behaviour of the energy levels in an applied field
depends on the angle that this field makes with the crystal axes. In
these circumstances a quantum-mechanical approach is essential, and
the resonance spectrum can only be interpreted in terms of a 'spin
Hamiltonian' where the effects of interaction between the paramagnetic
ion and the crystal lattice are included. The relation between the
spectrum and this spin Hamiltonian is considered in the next chapter,
but it is appropriate to derive here a formula for the intensity of the
lines by quantum-mechanical methods. This approach is similar to that
given by Bloembergen, Purcell, and Pound (1948) for the nuclear case,
with a slight extension.
The number of transitions per second between levels of energy
W and Wj which are induced by an oscillatory field of amplitude H±
{
and angular frequency co is

--- Page 135 ---

120 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
This equation is similar to (2.17a) except that a more general expres-
sion, |/%|2, has been introduced for the square of the magnetic dipole
matrix element between the states i and j. The 'shape function'/(co) is a
function of the applied frequency co, the resonance frequency co, and
0
a parameter describing the line width; it is normalized as in eqn (2.17b).
The oscillating field induces transitions between states i and j with
equal probability in either direction, and in each transition the energy
change is Ha>. There will, in general, be an absorption of energy since
the state of lower energy normally has the greater population, and the
total number of transitions in either direction is proportional to the
population of the initial state. The net absorption of energy per second
(assuming no significant departure from thermal equilibrium) is
where N Nj are the populations of lower and upper states respectively.
i9
From eqn (2.51) we have then
For a simple ground doublet, the total number of ions is
and
In many experiments (Hco/kT) < 1 (it would be equal to unity for
radiation of wave number 1 cm"1 at a temperature of 1-43°K), so that
{1— exp(— HcojkT)} ^ Hco/JcT, and the power absorbed in a transition
between states i, j is
Circularly polarized radiation
Combining eqns (2.48) and (2.52c), we find for the imaginary part of
the susceptibility, when circularly polarized radiation is used,
This formula is a general one, and it may be compared with that
derived from the macroscopic equations on a classical basis for the case
of a rotating magnetic field. For this comparison we must assume that

--- Page 136 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 121
all the states have the same energy in zero magnetic field, so that for a
system with angular momentum J the partition function
may be approximated by Z = 2J + 1, and N = N/(2J + 1), where N
t
is the total number of spins. For a rotating field the matrix elements of
//^ are (yH) times those of \J \ between states M±l and M, as given in
±
eqns (2.15), and hence we have for the transition M <-» M — 1
The macroscopic equations are applicable to a substance where all the
transitions occur at the same frequency, since the energy levels are
separated by equal amounts yHH as given by eqn (2.11). Hence (2.54)
must be summed over all transitions; using the relation
and eqn (2.22), we have
With a suitable choice for/(co), to which we shall return later, this is
similar to eqns (2.45) derived from the macroscopic theory.
In practice it is seldom that a circularly polarized oscillatory field is
used in electronic magnetic resonance apart from exceptional cases
where the sign of the magnetogyric ratio y is of importance in deciding
the nature of the electronic ground state. We shall therefore consider
briefly the modification to the theory required for a linearly polarized
oscillatory field.
Linearly polarized oscillatory field
If the oscillatory magnetic field is of amplitude H± and is linearly
polarized along a direction whose direction cosines are (1 m %) with
19 1?
respect to the Cartesian axes x, y, z, the interaction with the magnetic
dipole moment may be written as
Then if fjt is the matrix element of the dipole moment
tj

--- Page 137 ---

122 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
between states i and j, the power absorbed (dW/dt) is given by eqn
(2.52a). As before, we shall assume that the steady magnetic field is
directed along the 2-axis, so that the transition probabilities involve
only the matrix elements of // , /j,_. The dipole moment operator for
+
the linear oscillatory field may be written as
and the square of the matrix element for the transition M <-> M — 1 is
It is clear that this will have its maximum value if ZJ+m^ = 1, that is,
if the oscillatory field is in the #?/-plane, normal to the direction of the
steady field. If this condition is satisfied, and we choose the direction
of the #-axis so that it coincides with that of H the oscillatory
l9
Hamiltonian reduces to
This differs from the equivalent eqn (2.13) for a rotating field in
two respects: the operators J , J_ are each multiplied both by exp(ico£)
+
and by exp( — ico£), so that transitions can be induced irrespective of the
sign of y, and the amplitude of the perturbation is only half as large as
for a rotating field. These differences correspond just to the fact that a
linearly polarized field H± cos cot can be decomposed into two circularly
polarized fields each of amplitude ^H^ but rotating in opposite sense
with the same numerical value of the angular velocity co. Of these two,
only the component that rotates in the same sense as that in which the
magnetization is precessing will be effective in inducing transitions.
Since the amplitude of this component is only half as great as before,
we would expect the induced precessing magnetization to be only half
as great, and the complex susceptibility likewise to be halved. This is
confirmed by carrying through the computation of %".
In the case of a linearly polarized field we have, instead of eqn (2.48),
so that from eqn (2.52c)
where Nj is the number of atoms in the lower of the two states between
which a transition is taking place. For the transition M <-> M — 1, on

--- Page 138 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 123
using eqns (2.57) or (2.58) and inserting the matrix element of //_ or
J_ from eqn (2.15), we have
For an electronic transition, the value of y is usually negative, so that
the lower state is M — 1, for which
For a simple ion, as considered earlier in this section, all the transitions
are superposed, and at high temperatures where Hco <^ kT, the exponen-
tial has a value close to unity and Z —>* 2J+1. Then, on summing over
all transitions, we have
which is just half as great as the corresponding expression (2.55) for the
case of a rotating field.
This expression for %" satisfies the Kramers-Kronig relations, one of
which reduces to
It is readily seen that this equation is satisfied through the normaliza-
tion of/(co) introduced by eqn (2.lib). In this connection it should be
noted that the macroscopic eqns (2.45) do not satisfy the Kramers-
Kronig relations except in the limit of small H± (see Portis 1953); this
arises from the presence of the term in H± in the denominator of eqns
(2.45). As already discussed in § 2.8, this term is connected with
saturation effects in which the temperature of the spin system rises
above that of the lattice because of the absorption of energy from the
oscillatory field; this makes the magnetization non-linear with applied
oscillatory field, contrary to one of the assumptions on which the
Kramers-Kronig relations are based. Saturation effects have, of
course, been neglected in the derivation of formulae for %" in the
present section (§2.9).
The question of an appropriate formula for the line shape in electron
paramagnetic resonance will not be discussed in detail here. The
problem of the line shape due to spin-spin interaction is considered in
Chapter 9, but when the line shape is determined by spin lattice
interaction (or 'collisions with phonons'), or another true relaxation

--- Page 139 ---

124 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
process, an appropriate formula for/(co) should be the collision broaden-
ing formula of Van Vleck and Weisskopf (1945),
Here the second term (which is absent from eqn (2.34), but which is
oo
needed to make J/(co) dco — 1 exactly) can be regarded as arising from
o
the presence of an oscillatory field component rotating in the opposite
sense to that required for resonance; correspondingly, the formula
allows for reversal of the applied magnetic field H (negative values of
CO), when linearly polarized oscillatory fields are used. It also gives a
L
suitable form for the line shape near H = 0 (compare Fig. 2.6), and in
FIG. 2.6. Line shape in Co(NH)(SO), 6HO at 90°K and v = 0-3 cm-1.
42 42 2
the limit of CO = 0 (or CO < Ao>, corresponding to H < A#), the
L L
combination of eqns (2.63) and (2.65) gives
the formula used in low-frequency measurements on paramagnetic
relaxation (see Gorter 1947).
In both eqns (2.65) and (2.66) the effects of saturation by a high-
intensity oscillatory magnetic field have been omitted (cf. Karplus and
Schwinger (1948) for the case of saturation in microwave gas
spectroscopy).

--- Page 140 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 125
2.10. Spectrometer sensitivity
We now consider in a simple way the practical aspects of the detection
of magnetic resonance in an electronic paramagnetic salt, including the
important question of spectrometer sensitivity. For simplicity we
restrict the discussion to linearly polarized oscillatory fields, since
these are almost invariably used in practice. If the paramagnetic
sample is subjected to such a linearly polarized magnetic field H cos co
±
the power absorbed by it is given by eqn (2.59),
where %" is the imaginary part of the complex susceptibility of the
sample. To make J?J as large as possible, the sample is placed in a tuned
circuit or resonant cavity, in which the power dissipated through
resistive and other non-magnetic losses may be written
where Q is the 'quality factor' of the unloaded cavity. The quantity V
Q
is the 'effective volume' of the cavity, defined by the fact that F(-HJ/87r)
is the total energy stored in the cavity, related to HI, the amplitude of
the oscillatory magnetic field at the sample. The important quantity
for the detection of magnetic resonance is the ratio of the power
absorbed by magnetic resonance in the sample to that otherwise
dissipated in the cavity. From the above equations this ratio is
fractional power loss in magnetic resonance
It is clear that this quantity can be maximized by making Q as large
0
as possible, and keeping the effective volume V as small as possible.
The latter is achieved partly by making the actual cavity volume as
small as possible, and partly by locating the sample at the position of
maximum H . As far as the geometry of the cavity is concerned, higher
1
values of (Q / V) are achieved by keeping the cavity small ; for example,
Q
a cavity one-half wavelength long is better than a cavity n/2 wave-
lengths long, since the small gain in Q in the larger cavity is much
0
outweighed by the increase in V. A smaller value of V can be obtained
by using a cavity filled with a low-loss dielectric of high permittivity,
but this usually has practical difficulties.
The size of the effect on the cavity at resonance can be estimated as
follows. At a frequency of 10 GHz (a wavelength of 3 cm), the values
for a typical cavity resonator are Q = 5000, V = 3 cm3. The power
0

--- Page 141 ---

126 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
absorbed in the crystal due to magnetic resonance will then equal that
dissipated in the cavity (i.e. the Q will be halved at resonance) by a
sample for which %" is about 5 X 10~5. This value can be related to the
static susceptibility by using eqn (2.63) and taking /(co) = (TT Aco)"1
from eqn (2.65) for a reasonably narrow line at resonance. This gives
For a reasonably dilute paramagnetic salt such as a tutton salt
(typical formula M2+K (S0 ) , 6H 0) the volume per gram-ion of
2 4 2 2
paramagnetic ion M2+ is close to 200 cm3. If the magnetic ions have
effective spin S = \ and g = 2, the line width A// is about 100
and the resonant field H at 10 GHz is a little over 3000 G. Thus
(co/Aco) = (HIAH) is roughly 30, and the gram-ionic susceptibility is
so that at room temperature (T = 300°K) we have
Hence the value of %" = 5x 10~5 required above to halve the cavity Q
needs about 3 X 10~3 gram-ion or 0-6 cm3 of salt at room temperature.
Such a sample clearly provides an effect that is very readily detectable
and increases inversely with the temperature of the sample. In fact
serious detuning of the cavity will occur owing to the anomalous
variation in #' through resonance, and a distorted shape of resonance
curve will result unless the cavity is continuously retuned.
Electromagnetic detection
A prime advantage of electron paramagnetic resonance is its ability
to detect effects caused by rather small quantities of magnetic ions, and
we now consider the ultimate sensitivity that can be achieved. This
does not depend on the details of the spectrometer, and we therefore
consider a simple lumped-parameter equivalent circuit. A power source
of voltage V with internal resistance B is coupled through a mutual
19 l9
inductance M to a tuned circuit of series resistance r, as in Fig. 2.7.
l
The power level in the tuned circuit is detected by an output coupling
of mutual inductance M to a voltage detector of input resistance R ,
2 2
the voltage across which is V . When magnetic resonance occurs in a
2
paramagnetic sample placed in the tuned circuit, the additional power
loss is represented by an extra resistance dr. Since we are interested in

--- Page 142 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 127
FIG. 2.7. Simple equivalent circuit for 'transmission' spectrometer. A voltage source F
lf
with internal resistance R is coupled through M to a tuned circuit in which the
19 l
magnetic resonance absorption contributes an extra resistance dr. The tuned circuit is
coupled through M to a detector of resistance R. When M M are adjusted to give the
2 z 19 2
maximum sensitivity (largest change in F for a given dr), the extra resistances coupled
2
into the tuned circuit through input and output are together just equal to r, so that the
loaded Q is just half the unloaded Q .
0
the ultimate sensitivity, we are concerned with values of dr < r, and
we can write, from eqn (2.68),
Our problem is to relate the change in V to dr, assuming that the source
2
voltage TI is constant. In fact we shall specify the source by its
'available power' P = F^/4.R , which is the maximum power it can
l 1
deliver into a load matched to its internal resistance R±. If we write
T! = eo2Jf J/jRp r = co2M*IR , where r r are the resistances coupled
2 2 l9 2
into the tuned circuit, then at resonance in the tuned circuit it is easily
shown that
and hence that
We wish to maximize 6V by adjusting the input and output couplings,
2
which is equivalent to finding the optimum values ofr r . These occur
ls 2
at TI = r = r/2, and the maximum value of 6V is then
z 2
This maximum occurs when the loaded Q of the cavity is just half the
unloaded Q , since it requires (r +r +r) = 2r. We can see how this
0 1 2
maximum arises by re-writing (2.72) in terms of the power P = Vl/R
2 2
reaching the detector. The value of yT is given by (2,71), so that
a

--- Page 143 ---

128 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
(2.72) becomes
which shows that the fractional voltage change (dVjV) at the detector
2 2
is just equal to the fractional change in the 'loaded Q\ which is
<5r/(ri+r2+f)- As we increase the coupling, V% rises and so initially does
dV, but ultimately the increase in V becomes less important than the
2 2
fall in the loaded Q because of the heavier coupling. By combining eqns
(2.70) and (2.73) we find that under optimum coupling conditions
If the detector has an equivalent noise temperature T and band-
N
width d/, the signal output will be equal to the noise output when
and if this is regarded as the minimum signal detectable, we find that
To gain an idea of the order of magnitude implied by this equation
we insert some numerical values. Taking (as before) Q = 5000,
0
F = 3 cm3, together with P = 40 mW, A/ = 1 Hz, and T = 3000°K,
1 N
we find
When working at the limit of sensitivity we are likely to be dealing
with highly diluted salts; for convenience we take A# = 1 G (i.e. line
width = 2 G right across at half intensity) and H = 3000 G (the
resonance field for a salt with g = 2 at about 9 GHz frequency).
From eqn (2.69) we then obtain
which for a system of spins S = \ requires some 3 x 10~16 T moles
at temperature T, or about 109 spins at 4°K.
In making this calculation we have assumed that the detector is not
overloaded by the power P incident on it, which under the optimum
2
coupling conditions assumed above is Pi/4. If it is necessary to keep P
2
to some maximum value less than Pi/4, then obviously it is better to
loosen the coupling to the cavity so as to increase the loaded Q rather
than to insert attenuation by means of a lossy device before or after

--- Page 144 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 129
the cavity since, from (2.74),
The means by which we can improve the sensitivity are rather
obvious from eqn (2.77). Assuming T and P already have the best
N 1
attainable values, we can reduce the band width d/. In considering the
choice of frequency we combine (2.77) with (2.69) to obtain
If we can scale the cavity in proportion to the wavelength, F varies
as v~* and Q as v~^, so that (#o) in varies as v~^ giving a big improve-
0 m 9
ment at higher frequencies, even allowing for rather poorer values of
T and P . This improvement assumes that we do not simultaneously
N ±
have to scale the size of the sample in order to accommodate it in the
cavity. In more precise language, the improvement is real for a sample
that is so small that it can be contained in the smallest wavelength
cavity without affecting the scaling argument. If we can use a larger
sample of the same material at longer wavelengths, so that we have a
constant filling factor, it is more realistic to discuss the quantity
(^ /F) , which refers to the minimum value of the volume suscep-
0 min
tibility. This varies only as v~*, so that allowing for poorer values of
T and P± there is little gain in sensitivity at higher frequencies.
N
For a paramagnetic substance where resonance is observed in the
ground levels we have #" proportional to T~l so that we always gain by
reducing the temperature provided that the spin-lattice relaxation
time does not become so long that we must reduce P in order to avoid
x
dynamic saturation effects. When hv becomes larger than kT, %
0
approaches a constant value (equivalent to static saturation of the
sample in the steady magnetic field), but this occurs only at tempera-
tures where the spin-lattice relaxation time is also likely to be long
because of the drop in the number of phonons of energy hv (see Chapter
10).
Dynamic saturation effects set a more fundamental limit than the
possible detector overload mentioned above, since the value of x" falls
at high values of H.\. The optimum then occurs when 1 = y2^r r ,
1 2
(see eqn (2.49)), since from eqn (2.75) we need to maximize %"'\/Pi,
which for a given coupling is equivalent to maximizing #"#i. With the
coupling conditions assumed in (2.73) the power dissipated in the
10

--- Page 145 ---

130 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
cavity is PJ2, and hence from (2.67) we have
since |(w/y)| = H and |(l/yr )| = A#.
2
Using the same numerical values as for eqn (2.79) we find
which means that P must be limited to a smaller value than
1
40 mW = 4 x 105 erg s"1 unless TJ is shorter than about 4 x 10~7 s. This
is quite a severe restriction. For example, the value of H = 0-1 G used
±
in § 2.8 corresponds to P = 3 mW, a level at which saturation sets in
1
for AH = 1 G unless r is shorter than about 5 x 10~6 s. If we have an
x
inhomogeneously broadened line for which the true r = 10~5 s,
2
corresponding to a spin packet width AH = 10~2 G, saturation of the
spin packet would occur for a value of P as small as 10~2 mW even if
x
TI were as short as r .
2
The situation can be improved (but only marginally) by using a
looser input coupling to the cavity to reduce H In terms of the power
lf
P dissipated in the cavity, (2.74) becomes, since P /P = V(rlrz)^
c C 2
which is optimized for a given value of P by making r = r+r
c 2 l
(matching the detector to the loaded cavity) and then adjusting the
input coupling to make r as small as possible consistent with a given
±
value of P . If then r <^r, the optimum output coupling condition
c ±
becomes essentially r = r, so that the detector is just matched to the
2
unloaded cavity.
Bolometer detection
In the previous section we have assumed that the detector was linear
in its response to the incident voltage (or amplitude of the microwave
radiation). We consider now a bolometer system, in which the micro-
wave power is absorbed in a suitable element and detected through the
rise in temperature of this element, which is proportional to the
magnitude of the incident power. The analysis is based on that of
Schmidt and Solomon (1966).
If the bolometer has thermal capacity C and thermal time constant

--- Page 146 ---

THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON 131
r, its response to an incident power P is determined by the equation
2
If P is time-dependent (e.g. modulated) with frequency/, the bolom-
2
eter will respond fully only if /r < 1. If the bolometer is in thermal
equilibrium at temperature T it undergoes temperature fluctuations
0)
dTj whose mean square value is
where k is Boltzmann's constant. In a narrow band d/ of frequencies
near the modulation frequency /, the fluctuations have the mean
square value
and when fr < 1 this can be written as
This temperature fluctuation is equivalent to a fluctuation P in the
n
incident power of magnitude
and this can be written in the form
where P = CT /r is a useful parameter with the dimensions of a power
0 0
that characterizes the sensitivity of the bolometer. The value of P
n
obviously sets a lower limit to the changes in incident power that can
be detected by the bolometer. Very much lower values of P can be
n
obtained by operating the bolometer below room temperature, partly
because T occurs in (2.87) but more particularly because P is greatly
0 0
reduced because of the rapid fall in the heat capacity C as the tempera-
ture is reduced. At 4°K it is not difficult to make P = 10~3 W, which
0
with unit band width d/ = 1 Hz gives P = 5 x 10~13 W.
n
We take this value of the 'thermal noise power' P to be the smallest
n
detectable amount of power P incident on the bolometer. In an ideal
2
system the spin-resonance sample acts as its own bolometer, the power
absorbed through the magnetic resonance effect appearing as heat in
the sample. The highest sensitivity is obtained by making the power
absorption as large as possible by increasing H and we must allow for
l9

--- Page 147 ---

132 THE RESONANCE PHENOMENON
saturation effects. From eqn (2.50) we have
which approaches a limiting value as we increase H . An experiment
1
where this is advantageous is the spin resonance of conduction electrons
in a semiconductor, where the spin system relaxes through the motion
of the conduction electrons, and the magnetic absorption results in a
heating of the conduction electrons which can be detected as a change
in the resistance of the specimen. In such a system r is short, and
t
Ti = T2- If we write yr± = yr = (A//)"1, then since M = % H we have
2 Q Q
If we can make H± > A#, the term in parentheses becomes unity, and
on setting P = P we have for the limiting sensitivity
2 n
This assumes, as in (2.50), that we are using circularly polarized radia-
tion. If, as is more likely, we use linearly polarized radiation, the value
of (2.88) should be multiplied by a factor £, and (2.89) becomes
In a typical example A# = 1 G, corresponding to r = 5 x 10~8 s.
±
Then at a resonance frequency of 10 GHz, H is approximately 3000 G,
and using the value P = 5 x 10~13 W given above for T = 4°K and
n 0
d/ = 1 Hz, we have
which for a sample with g = 2 at 4°K requires only about 105 spins.
This very high sensitivity is obtained only for a system with a very
short value of r such as conduction electrons. From eqns (2.89) or
l9
(2.90) we see that (%)min vapies as H~2 or as the inverse square of the
0
resonance frequency, so that such a bolometer method of detection is
advantageous at millimetre wavelengths but of little use for nuclear
magnetic resonance.

--- Page 148 ---

3
THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN
AND THE SPECTRUM
3.1. The spin Hamiltonian
IN general a paramagnetic resonance spectrum is rather complex, with
lines due to different electronic transitions, which may be further
divided into sub-groups of lines by interaction with a nuclear moment.
The magnetic fields at which these lines occur alter with the frequency
of the applied radiation, and, if anisotropy is present they will also
depend on the orientation of the external magnetic field with respect
to the crystal axes. Measurement of the spectrum observed under
varying conditions of frequency and orientation results in the accumu-
lation of a mass of data, which is bulky and not very meaningful
unless some simple interpretation can be found. The solution of this
problem lies in the use of a 'spin Hamiltonian', whose form can often
be guessed from considerations of crystal symmetry if it cannot be
obtained from theory. Such a spin Hamiltonian will contain relatively
few terms; its advantage is that a complete description of the experi-
mental data can be presented by giving the size of the coefficients of
these terms, together with the directions of the appropriate axes
relative to the crystal axes where anisotropy is present. For substances
where detailed crystallographic information exists about the para-
magnetic ion and its surroundings in the crystal, it is often possible
to construct a model and, by carrying through a full treatment of the
problem, to derive the spin Hamiltonian, as described in Chapters
16-21. In general the information available is insufficient to give more
than rough estimates of the size of the various terms. In other cases
crystallographic data may be scanty, but it may be possible to guess a
plausible spin Hamiltonian. In either case it is then necessary to relate
the spectrum observed under various conditions to a spin Hamiltonian.
As a result of ligand field interaction with the neighbouring dia-
magnetic ions or atoms in a crystal, the ground state of a paramagnetic
ion frequently consists of a group of electronic levels whose separation
is a few wave numbers or less, while all other electronic levels lie
considerably higher. The behaviour of this group can be represented
by defining an 'effective spin' S such that the total number of levels
9
in the group is 2/9 + 1, the same as in an ordinary spin multiplet. It is

--- Page 149 ---

134 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
further required that the matrix elements between the various states
determined by the full Hamiltonian that describes the system shall be
proportional to those of the effective spin. It is then possible to describe
the behaviour of this group of levels by a spin Hamiltonian involving
just the effective spin, and where hyperfine interactions are present,
the nuclear spins. The use of the symbol S for effective spin may be
somewhat misleading at first, but the spin Hamiltonian was initially
used for certain cases where the effective spin was the same as the
true electronic spin of the ion (for example, the introduction of terms
such as S* to represent splittings due to crystal fields by Van Vleck
(1940)). A general form of the spin Hamiltonian (see Chapter 19) for
ions of the 3d group was derived later, and the use of the symbol S
was thus gradually extended. In this chapter no confusion should arise,
but in Chapter 1 and later chapters the symbol S is used for the
effective spin when it is necessary to distinguish it from the true spin.
The most general form of the spin Hamiltonian contains a large
number of terms, representing the Zeeman interaction of the magnetic
electrons with an external field, level splittings due to indirect effects
of the crystal field (which we shall refer to as 'fine structure'), hyperfine
structure due to the presence of nuclear magnetic dipole and electric
quadrupole moments in the central ion or in ligand ions, and the
Zeeman interaction of the nuclear moment with the external field
(which may be modified by induced electronic moments — equivalent
to a 'paramagnetic shift'). In this chapter we shall give a fairly detailed
but not exhaustive treatment of the relationship between the various
terms in the spin Hamiltonian and the observed spectrum, starting
with the electronic Zeeman term and including progressively a number
of other terms. To keep the complexity within reasonable bounds we
shall generally assume some degree of symmetry, for example, that
the principal axes of the 'gr-tensor' and hyperfine 'tensor' coincide.
The extent to which these quantities are justifiably called 'tensors' is
discussed in Chapter 15; for simplicity we shall here continue to
use the name tensor, omitting the inverted commas but retaining the
mental reservations. For example, the electronic Zeeman interaction
may be written as
but if we choose a system where the (x, y, z) axes are the principal

--- Page 150 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 135
axes this reduces to the form
where for shortness g has been written for g , etc.
x xx
3.2. The effect of anisotropy in the 0-factor
In order to elucidate the behaviour of a resonance spectrum when
anisotropy is present we shall consider first the case of an ion with
an anisotropic ^-factor, but without any initial splitting of the elec-
tronic levels and without any hyperfine structure. A suitable spin
Hamiltonian then contains only the terms given in eqn (3.1). If the
field H is in such a direction that it has direction cosines (I, m, n) with
respect to the principal axes (x, y, z) of the ^-tensor, the Hamiltonian
is
If g were isotropic we could change to a new set of axes (x, y , z)
e e e
where z is parallel to the field H, and the Hamiltonian would reduce
e
(using primes to denote components of S relative to the new axes) to
where g = g = g = g. The energy levels are then clearly a set of
x y z
(2S + 1) levels equally spaced in energy by g/3H, and the allowed
transitions are those in which the component S' changes by one unit,
z
so that they require a quantum
When anisotropy is present, we cannot eliminate the terms off-diagonal
in the energy matrix by changing to a set of axes where z is parallel
e
to H. It is obvious, however, that our Hamiltonian can be written in
the form
where gV — gl, etc. If we now make (Z'2+ra'2+r&'2) = 1, the Hamil-
x
tonian is identical with that for an ion with a spectroscopic splitting
factor g, in a field H with direction cosines (/', m', n'). Hence the
energy levels will be just as given above, and the resonance condition
will be given by eqn (3.4), where, from the normalization of the
apparent direction cosines (1' m', n') we have
9
In essence, we have diagonalized the energy matrix by changing to a

--- Page 151 ---

136 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
new set of axes where the z -axis has direction cosines (V, m', ri) with
e
respect to the principal axes (x, y, z) of the gr-tensor.
Evaluation of the transition probability is rather more complicated
than in the case of a simple ion with an isotropic gr-factor. In the latter
case it is possible to choose the z-axis as that of the steady magnetic
field H, and the analysis of § 2.9 can be applied, if yH is replaced by
— gfi. Then the operator components in eqn (2.56) such as —lijit are
x
replaced by ligfiSy,, etc., and for the transition M <-> M — 1 we have,
instead of eqn (2.57),
where
The value of g is clearly a maximum if H is normal to H, when
1 l
(ll+m\) = 1 and^ = g.
To analyze the position when anisotropy is present, we assume that
we have a linearly polarized oscillatory field H cos cot, which is in a
1
direction with cosines (I m %) with respect to the principal axes of
l9 1?
the gr-tensor. The 'oscillatory Hamiltonian' is then
This must be referred to the system of axes (x, y , z) in which the
e e e
Hamiltonian (3.2) is diagonal. We can write the result formally as
The square of the matrix element for the transition M <-> M — 1 is
where, after some reduction, it can be shown that one obtains a value
of g analogous to that given above (eqn (3.7)) given by
±
where g is given by eqn (3.5). An alternative form of this is
To find the optimum direction of H from these equations we note
x

--- Page 152 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 137
that, from eqn (3.10b), g^ vanishes if ^ = I, m = m, % = n; that is,
1
if H! is parallel to H (this follows also from the fact that (3.8) would
then transform like (3.3) into a single term containing only S'). Thus
z
we conclude that H should be normal to H to have the maximum
x
effect, since any component parallel to H would be ineffective. (Note
that this does not in general mean that the coefficient of H^S'^ is then
zero.) The value of g will still depend on the orientation of H in the
l x
plane normal to H, so that there will be a specific orientation of H
x
which gives the greatest intensity.
This behaviour can be understood more clearly by considering a
special case. Let us suppose that H is confined to the plane y = 0,
and that it is at an angle 6 with the z-axis. We retain the general
condition that g , g, g are all unequal, but if g = g = g± so that
x y z x y 9
the z-axis is a symmetry axis, the treatment will apply generally since
we can then always choose our #-axis so that H lies in the 2#-plane.
FIG. 3.1. Rotation of axes (z» #e) from axes (z, x) through angle <f> about i/-axis, where
e
tan <j) = (g/g) tan 6. Note that unless g, g are both positive, z lies in a different
x z x z e
quadrant from H. The equations relating the two systems (where primes indicate
components in the X , z system) are (see eqns (3.11), (3.13), (3.13a), (3.14)).
Q e
If we change to a set of axes (x, y , z) rotated about the ?/-axis by
e e e
an angle (f> (see Fig. 3.1), this requires the transformation

--- Page 153 ---

138 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
Then
and we can make the coefficient of S' vanish by choosing the angle <f>
x
such that
If we define g by the equation
which is clearly a special case of eqn (3.5), then we have
and the Hamiltonian reduces to the form Jti? = g{}HS'.
z
Suppose now that H is applied in a direction making an angle r\
x
with the y-axis, and that its projection on the #2-plane makes an angle
6 with the z-axis. Then the components of H are H = H± sin Y\ sin 6
l x x l9
H = HI cos r\ and H = H± sin r\ cos 0 On transforming to the
y z l8
(x, y , z) axes the oscillatory Hamiltonian becomes
e e e
From this the value of g is found to be given by
±
It is clear from this equation that the best value of 6 is $±77/2, i.e.
:
the oscillatory field should be in the plane normal to H. The best
value of r\ is then either 0 or 77/2, depending on whether \g\ is greater
y
or less than \(ggjg)\. With axial symmetry (g = g = g , g = gr,,)
x x y ± z
this condition reduces to making ^ = 0 if |gr| > |gT|||, and r\ — ?r/2 if
±
l^il < l(7||l> since g always lies between l^yl and \g \.
±
Note that if g = g = 0 then g = 0, corresponding to the fact that
x y l
there are no allowed transitions.
Determination of the sign of the g-values
Though g is essentially positive for a free electron, the signs of the
principal gr-values in the spin Hamiltonian using an effective spin are

--- Page 154 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 139
not known a priori, and the question arises, how far can they be
determined experimentally ? The spectrum is not changed by reversing
the direction of H, and reversal of H is equivalent to a simple phase
x
change if H is linearly polarized. If circularly polarized radiation is
x
used, however, a comparison of the relative intensities of a given
transition using right- and left-handed senses can be used to obtain
information about signs. This will be discussed for the special case
where H lies in the #z-plane at an angle 6 to the 2-axis just considered.
The oscillatory Hamiltonian for a field H (perpendicular to H)
x
rotating in the right-handed sense about H is
(By changing the sign of co a field rotating in the opposite sense would
be obtained.) On transforming to the (# , y , z) axes in which the
e e e
static Zeeman energy is diagonalized, the oscillatory Hamiltonian
becomes (using eqns (3.11), (3.13a) and
We now assume that the sign of g is always positive, thereby resolving
the sign ambiguity in eqns (3.5) and (3.14). (If either g g or both hav
x) z
negative signs, this means that the z-&xis lies in a different quadrant
e
from H in Fig. 3.1.) It then follows that the level with S' = M lies
higher in energy than M — 1, and on calculating the intensity of the
transition between these two levels by the methods of § 2.3 it is found
to be proportional to {(gg/g) +g }2 for radiation that is right-hand
x z y
circularly polarized about H, and to {(gglg) —g}2 for the opposite sense.
x z y
Since g is taken to be always positive, experimental observation of
which sense gives the higher intensity yields the sign of gg relative to
x z
g, i.e. it determines whether the quantity (ggg) is positive or negativ.
y x y z
In § 15.6 it is shown that this quantity is invariant.
3.3. Multipole fine structure
When S = 1 or more, an additional splitting of the energy levels
may appear due to indirect effects of the crystal field. This may be
represented by adding to the spin Hamiltonian terms of higher powers

--- Page 155 ---

140 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
in S , S , S . It is convenient to group such terms into combinations
x y z
of spin operators, each such operator being the equivalent of a combina-
tion of spherical harmonics. This has the advantage that the appro-
priate spin Hamiltonian can generally be written down without detailed
calculation, since it must reflect the symmetry of the crystal field. If
the latter has trigonal symmetry, for example, it is only necessary to
include the spin operators corresponding to spherical harmonics with
threefold or higher symmetry about the trigonal axis. The number of
such spin operators is further limited by the more general restriction
that spin operators of odd degree are excluded because they are not
invariant under time reversal. Also operators of degree higher than 28
can be omitted since they have zero matrix elements ; thus for 8 = 1
or f , only terms of the second degree are required; for S > 2, terms of
the fourth degree must be included, and for S > 3, terms of the sixth
degree. In general, the spin Hamiltonian may be written (in the
absence of hyperfine structure) as
where Oq is a spin operator. The more important equivalent operators
k
are listed in Table 16 in terms of angular momentum J; expressions
identical with these, except for the replacement of J by S, are required
in eqn (3.19).
The use of spin operators of this form has several advantages. The
matrix elements of such operators are tabulated; these elements are
diagonal for operators with q = 0, and off-diagonal when q ^ 0. Thus
in a very strong magnetic field parallel to the z-axis of the spin operators
only the matrix elements of the operators with q = 0 are required for
a first order perturbation calculation. When the magnetic field is
applied in a different direction, it is sometimes convenient to use the
standard formulae for the rotation of axes of spherical harmonics to
transform to a system where H is again along the 'polar' axis. This
means that the corresponding combination of spherical harmonics can
be transformed to the new axes, after which the new set of spin
operators can be written down to correspond with the new combinatio
of spherical harmonics (see, for example, Bleaney, Scovil, and Trenam
(1954); Baker and Williams (1961)). (In this procedure it must be
remembered that the spherical harmonics contain normalizing coeffi-
cients that unfortunately have not been included in a systematic
way in the spin operators.) Then in strong magnetic fields the spectrum
is determined by the new set of coefficients of the operators 0°, which

--- Page 156 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 141
are of course related to the original set of coefficients B* in a known
way. Thus by observation of the spectrum at a sufficient variety of
angles, all the coefficients Bq can be determined.
k
In a case where a number of multipole spin operators are required,
there will in general be more than one interpretation depending on the
identification of the observed lines with the various allowed transitions.
However, the fact that different transitions have different intensities
is of considerable help in the identification. For example, in strong
magnetic fields (Zeeman energy > multipole energy), the strongly
allowed transitions are those for which AJf = ±1, and the intensity
of the M <-» M — 1 transition is proportional to 8(S + l)— M (M — 1).
When measurements of the positions of the spectral lines as a function
of angle have been completed, the relative signs of the coefficients B^
are determined as well as the magnitudes. There is, however, an ambi-
guity in the overall sign, which arises as follows. The reversal of the
direction of flow of time ('time reversal') is an operation which does
not change the energy spectrum of a Hermitian operator since, as
shown in Chapter 15, time reversal is an antiunitary operator. However,
under such an operation the spin components S , S , S change their
x y z
sign and the Hamiltonian (3.19), in which all the indices Tc are even,
becomes
The Hamiltonian (3.19a) must have the same energy spectrum as
(3.19) and, since in a resonance experiment only differences of energy
are measured, (3.19a) must have the same resonance spectrum as
A comparison of (3.19) and (3.19b), which differ only in the reversed
signs of all the Bq but correspond to the same resonance spectrum,
k
shows that the absolute signs of the BQ remain undetermined.
k
This ambiguity can be resolved by observation of the relative
intensities of the different lines as the temperature is reduced towards
the region where Tc T is comparable with the overall splitting of the
energy levels. The population of the lower levels will then be increased
at the expense of that of the higher levels, and transitions between the
lowest levels will gain in intensity noticeably over transitions between
the highest levels; from this the order of the levels can be found. With

--- Page 157 ---

142 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
this information, the absolute signs of the spin operator terms can be
found; an example of this is given in § 3.6.
3.4. Fine structure in cubic fields (S = f, f)
The highest degeneracy left in a crystal field even of cubic symmetry
is usually only fourfold, corresponding to an effective spin of 8 = f.
Hence magnetic resonance spectra corresponding to S = 2 or more
occur normally only for ions with half-filled electron shells, where the
free ion is in an $-state that is split in the solid state by rather small
amounts through higher-order effects of the crystalline field. Examples
are 3d5, 6£, (Mn2+, Fe3+) and 4/7, 5/7, ^ (Eu2+, Gd3+, Cm3+). In these
f
cases g is isotropic and very close to the free-spin value; a special case
of some interest is that of cubic symmetry, and this will be considered
first.
Formulae for S = -f
In terms of Cartesian coordinates, the potential term of the fourth
degree with cubic symmetry that satisfies Laplace's equation is
This has the operator equivalent
The coefficient a is that used in early work on paramagnetic salts with
spin S — f. In terms of the operator equivalents listed in Table 16
the fourth degree cubic operator may be written as
where the first form is referred to the fourfold axes and the second to
the threefold axes. The numerical relation between these and the earlier
form is expressed by the relation
The matrix elements of the spin operators are given in Table 17.
For either (3.22a) or (3.22b) there is only one off-diagonal element, so
that the energy levels are given by quadratic expressions. The matrix
elements of the Zeeman interaction are diagonal if we take its direction
to be the z-axis, and if the magnetic field is directed along either a
fourfold or threefold axis we again have only one off-diagonal element

--- Page 158 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 143
TABLE 3.1
Energy levels and states for 8 = f-, cubic field, magnetic field along
fourfold axis
(3.22o)
Energy matrix
States Energy levels
Here the upper signs must be taken with tan 2a = V(^) a/(2« + 4^£T) and the lower
signs with tan 2a = V(5) al(2a — 4:gf}H).
of the cubic field, provided we use the operator expression whose
'polar5 axis is the direction of H. The energy matrices, energy levels,
and states are given in Tables 3.1 and 3.2.
In zero magnetic field the levels reduce to a quadruplet state at +a,
and a doublet at — 2a; these are just the fourfold F and twofold F
8 7
levels into which a level with angular momentum f splits in a cubic
field (see § 14.4). We shall evaluate the zero-field states, from which we
also obtain the first-order weak-field Zeeman effect for a magnetic
field along the fourfold and threefold axes. A complete series expansion
including the second-order Zeeman effect in weak fields (gj3H <^ a)
TABLE 3.2
Energy levels and states for S = f, cubic field, magnetic field along
threefold axis
Energy matrix
States Energy levels
Here the upper signs must betaken with tan 2 a = —<\/(8Q)al(a-\-9g/3H) and the
lower signs with tan 2a = v/(80)a/(a — 9g/3H).

--- Page 159 ---

144 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
for an arbitrary direction of the magnetic field is given by Kronig
and Bouwkamp (1939).
Weak-field Zeeman effect (gfiH < a)
We consider first the F doublet at energy — 2a. The states referred
7
to the fourfold and threefold axes, and the energy in a weak field along
these axes are given in Table 3.3. We see at once that the Zeeman
TABLE 3.3
Energy levels and states for 8 = f, F doublet in weak magnetic field
7
(gpH <o)
States (fourfold axis) Energy States (threefold axis)
splitting is the same along the fourfold and threefold axes; in fact
the F doublet has an isotropic (/-factor, as we would expect for a
7
doublet in a cubic field. In representing the doublet by a spin-Hamil-
tonian with an effective spin S = J, we must identify the state S = +|
z
with that on the upper line, and §z — — | with that on the lower line,
since we need the operator $_ to take us from the former to the latter
in the one representation and S_ in the other. This means that the
effective (/-factor for the weak-field Zeeman eifect (and hence for the
representation § = |) is — fgr; this is a simple example of a case where
the effective ^-factor is negative.
We consider now the F quadruplet at energy +a. The unusual
8
behaviour of such a quadruplet will be discussed for the general case
in Chapter 18, where it is shown that the fourfold manifold of states
can be fitted with a spin Hamiltonian of the form
with S = f. This Zeeman interaction is a special case of the general
vector V discussed in Chapter 18 where the matrix elements of V are
z
Here the (x y, z) axes are the fourfold cubic axes, so that the matrix
9
elements of V give the Zeeman interaction for a field along one of the
z
fourfold axes in the weak field case where @H < a. The energy levels
of the F quadruplet of S = f for this case are shown in Fig. 3. 2 (a),
8

--- Page 160 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 145
(a)
(b)
FIG. 3.2. (a) Energy levels in weak magnetic field along the fourfold axis for the T
8
quadruplet of S = f in a strong cubic crystal field. The states have two alternative
representations in S = f; in the nomenclature of Chapter 18, eqn (18.16), the choice
labelled (i) above requires P = —(±±)gf}H,Q = +J00H, while (ii) requires P = —\g$H,
Q = -\-(i£-)gf$H. The symbol R by a transition indicates that it requires right-handed
circular polarization, while L requires left-handed polarization, if circularly polarized
radiation is used. The numbers indicate the relative intensities, (b) Energy levels in weak
magnetic field along threefold axis for the F quadruplet of S = f in a strong cubic
8
crystal field. The symbols R, L indicate whether right- or left-handed polarization is
required, if circularly polarized radiation is used. The numbers indicate the relative
intensities. The Zeeman splittings agree with those calculated from eqn (18,36), using
either of the two sets of values for P, Q given above.
11

--- Page 161 ---

146 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
together with the states calculated from eqn (3.22c). These can be
identified with the four states of § = f in two ways, as shown on the
diagram. These require either P = — (^gfih, Q = + %g/3H or
P = — \g$R, Q = +(J6L)<7|S# where g is of course the parameter in
J
eqn (3.22c) and not either of those in eqn (3.22e).
The Zeeman interaction is anisotropic; its value for an arbitrary
direction of the magnetic field can be found from eqn (18.30) or from
the expressions given by Kronig and Bouwkamp. For the particular
case of a field along a threefold axis the levels are shown in Fig. 3.2(b),
together with the states calculated from eqn (3.22d) where the threefold
axis is taken as the z- or polar axis. It is readily verified that the
Zeeman splittings agree with those calculated from eqn (18.36).
If circularly polarized radiation is used, some of the transitions require
right-handed polarization and some left-handed polarization. In terms
of the states formed from S = f , all transitions are of the type
&M = ±1, that is they are allowed (as we should expect) between
levels whose states contain values of S differing by one unit. The
z
polarization rule can be stated as follows ; in a transition of the form
M<->M — I, right-handed polarization is required if the level M — l
lies lower in energy than M and left-handed polarization if it lies
9
higher. The polarization rules and the relative intensities are also
shown in Figs. 3.2(a) and 3.2(b).
Strong-field Zeeman effect (gflH > a)
To the second order in perturbation theory, the energy levels in a
strong magnetic field (see also Kronig and Bouwkamp) with direction
cosines (I, m, n) are given in Table 3.4, and the strong transitions in
TABLE 3.4
Energy levels for S = f , cubic field, with strong magnetic field H along
direction (I, m, n) with respect to the fourfold axes
States Energy levels
Table 3.5. In these tables p = l—5(l2m2+m2n2+n2l2): the quantum
>
numbers labelling the states, and the relative intensities, are exact
only in the strong field limit (ajgfiH) -> 0.

--- Page 162 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 147
TABLE 3.5
Resonance transitions (AJf = ±1) and approximate relative intensities
for S = f, cubic field, in strong magnetic field (gfiH > a)
Transition Position Relative intensity
In sufficiently strong fields, where terms of order a2lg($H can be
neglected, the resonance spectrum consists just of the five lines for
which AJf — ± 1 . Their relative intensities follow from the square of
the matrix elements, which is just $($ + !)— M(M — 1) for the transi-
tion M «-» M — 1. The lines form a symmetrical pattern, as shown in
Fig. 3.3(a); the spectrum retains the same form for all directions of
H, but with varying displacements of the outer lines depending on
the quantity p. This displacement varies with angle in the same way as
the cubic potential, since p can be written in the form
The extreme values of p are +1 along a (100) axis and — f along a
(111) axis, with another stationary value of — i along an (Oil) axis.
In the important cube planes p varies as follows :
{111} plane: p = — J (invariant).
{001} plane: p = 1— f sin220, where 0=0 along a (100) axis.
{OlT} plane: p = 1— 5 sin20+^ sin40, where 0 = 0 along a (100) axis.
The last plane is important, as it contains the (100), (HI), and (Oil)
axes.
Formulae for S = \
For ions where S = 3 or more, terms of the sixth degree must also
be included. The full operator equivalent for the case of cubic symmetry
then becomes
where the first form is that referred to the four fold axes and the
second that referred to the three fold axes. The case most generally

--- Page 163 ---

148 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
Relative intensity 8 5
Transition
(a)
Displacement from
H= (hv/gfl), in units of (pajgft)
Relative intensity
Transition
(b)
Displacement from H=(hvlgf}), in units ofpb/gfi
4
FIG. 3.3. (a) Spectrum for S = f, cubic field splitting, in strong magnetic field.
(b) Spectrum for S = i cubic crystal field splitting of fourth degree only, in strong
magnetic field. In each case constant frequency and variable field are assumed.
encountered is that of S = \, for the ions with configuration /7. For
this case closed formulae for the levels can be given only when the
magnetic field is directed along one of the (001) axes (see Table 3.6)
These results show that the values of a, /? when H = 0 become
independent of 6 , 6 so that the states are uniquely determined. In a
4 6
cubic field S = % splits into two doublets F , F and a quadruplet F ;
6 7 8

--- Page 164 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 149
TABLE 3.6
Energy levels and states for S = f, cubic field, with magnetic field H
along an (001) axis
States Levels
Here the abbreviations 6 = 60.B, 6 = 1260B have been used, while the values of a
4 4 6 6
and j5 are given by
since these occur only once, the states are independent of the cubic
field parameters. The energy levels in a weak field parallel to a fourfold
axis, and the zero field states are given in Table 3.7.
More general expressions for the energy levels in a magnetic field,
including series expansions for arbitrary directions of the magnetic
field in both strong and weak magnetic fields, are given by Lacroix
(1957). He uses a different nomenclature (as also does Low (I960)),
whose connection with that used here can be seen from a comparison
of the formulae for the levels in zero magnetic field given in Table 3.8.
In strong magnetic fields the only allowed transitions are those in
which AJf = ±1, and the states are fairly accurately represented by
single values of M, where M is the component of angular momentum
about an axis parallel to the magnetic field. There are then seven
TABLE 3.7
Energy levels and states for 8 = %, cubic field, in a
weak magnetic field H along an (001) axis
States Energy levels
In this F quadruplet the values of P, Q are the same as for
8
the F quadruplet of S = f.
8

--- Page 165 ---

150 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
TABLE 3.8
Comparison of nomenclatures for S — -J in
cubic field
(This notation) Lacroix Low
Doublet 326 — 86 (8 + e)<5 8c-2d
6 4 6
Quadruplet 206 + 28& 5d 5c-f7d
8 4 6
Doublet 0 00
7
allowed transitions, whose position and relative intensities are given
in Table 3.9. Here the abbreviations 6 — 605 , 6 = 1260£ have
4 4 6 6
again been used ; p is as defined above for S = f , while q is the equiva-
lent expression of the sixth degree
whose angular variation is similar to that of the sixth degree cubic
potential
Values of q for specific directions are +1, +-1/ along (100) and (111)
axes respectively. In a {111} plane
where 6 is measured from a (112) direction. Since p is invariant at — i
in this plane the sixth degree term can be measured directly by rotating
H in a {111} plane. These results follow also from eqn (3.23) since
both 0| and 0^ have zero expectation values in this plane, and if
TABLE 3.9
Resonance transitions (AJf = ±1) and relative
intensities for 8 — -J , cubic field, in a strong
magnetic field H (g{3H > 6 , 6 )
4 6
Transition Position Intensity
7
12
15
16
15
12
7

--- Page 166 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 151
eqn (3.23) is rotated through 90° (cf. eqns (5.78), (5.79)) we have for
the diagonal part just
In an {001} plane we have
and in an {Oil} plane (which contains the (100), (111), and (Oil) axes)
the angle 6 being measured in each case from the (100) axis.
Measurements of line positions in the spectrum do not yield the
absolute signs of any of the splitting parameters, though the relative
signs of 6 , fc can be found when both fourth and sixth degree terms
4 6
are present. The absolute signs can, however, be determined by
observing the change in relative intensities of the lines as the tempera-
ture is reduced, because of the depopulation of the states with positive
values of M, just as in the case of a second degree splitting (see § 3.6).
In practice the splitting due to 6 is usually small compared with that
6
due to 6 . The spectrum in a strong magnetic field (gfiH > 6 ) with
4 4
6 = 0 is shown in Fig. 3.3(b).
6
The results quoted in this section are based on the assumption that
the spectroscopic splitting factor g is isotropic; in a cubic field g would
be expected to be rigorously isotropic. In fact with very few exceptions
no anisotropy in g has been detected outside the experimental error
for an ion in an S-state.
3.5. Electronic 'quadrupole' fine structure (S = 1, f)
When the symmetry is less than cubic, fine structure terms of the
second degree will generally be present. This is an effect of more
common occurrence than higher multipole fine structure, and hence
we shall consider it separately, another reason for so doing being that
it occurs in cases when g may be anisotropic.
In terms of the spin operators 0°, 0\ listed in Table 16, the second
degree or 'quadrupole' terms are
These may be expressed in an alternative form, which can be written
as a single term S . D . S. where D is a tensor quantity. Referred to the
principal axes, this term is

--- Page 167 ---

152 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
where it is convenient to take the sum of the three coefficients as
zero, i.e. D +D +D = 0. If this sum is not zero, it can be made so
x y z
by subtracting the quantity
which is just a constant that moves all the levels up or down by the
same amount, and so does not affect the resonance spectrum. The fact
that one can set the sum of the three coefficients equal to zero means
that there are really only two independent coefficients, as in eqn
(3.24). The connection between the two forms is revealed by manipula-
tion of eqn (3.25) as follows:
where
The form (3.25) is often convenient when all the coefficients are
unequal, since the energy levels can be computed for the case of a
magnetic field along one axis, and the formulae for the other axes
obtained by cyclic permutation of the subscripts. The permutation
required is (moving from column to column):
When axial symmetry is present, D = D and E = 0. The forms
x y
(3.24) or (3.26) are then to be preferred since they contain only one
parameter. Even when E ^ 0 they have the advantage of containing
only two parameters instead of three (which are not all independent).
Formulae for 8 = 1
The quadrupole terms have no effect on the energy of a doublet
(S — |) but with larger values of 8 they produce a splitting of the
levels when no magnetic field is present. For the cases of S = 1 and
8 = f, the energy levels can be expressed in a closed form when a
magnetic field is applied, so long as it is parallel to one of the three
principal axes of the tensor D. We shall examine the first of these
(8 = 1) fairly completely, as it illustrates in a simple fashion the
effects that occur.

--- Page 168 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 153
The spin Hamiltonian, when an external magnetic field is applied
along the z-axis, is
The energy matrix is
and the quantum states and energy levels can be written as
where tan 2 a = EjG and G = g{$H. The allowed transitions between
z
these levels have varying intensity according to the orientation of the
oscillatory magnetic field, as shown in Table 3.10. The behaviour of
TABLE 3.10
Transitions and relative intensities for 8 = 1, rhombic field, H along
z-axis
Quantum Intensity (value of
Transition required H along ic-axis 2/-axis z-axis
l
the energy levels for the special case ofE = \D are shown in Fig. 3.4,
together with the transitions requiring a quantum equal to f D.
In zero magnetic field a = 45° and the three states are
each of which is an eigenstate with (S) = (S) — (S) = 0. Thus
x y z
the system has no permanent magnetic moment, and the line width
due to spin-spin interaction is extremely small. This makes it possible
to measure the zero-field transitions with very high accuracy, a result
that has been applied in the measurement of the spectrum of the
photoexcited triplet state of phenanthrene (see Brandon, Gerkin, and
Hutchison (1962)). Another curiosity of the zero field spectrum is that

--- Page 169 ---

154 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.4. Energy levels for S = I with rhombic splitting (D = 2E), in units of (gpH/D),
z
with magnetic field along the z-axis. The vertical arrows indicate the allowed transitions
for a quantum hv = f D.
each of the transitions is strongest for an oscillatory magnetic field
linearly polarized along a different principal axis.
When a magnetic field of increasing size is applied along the z-axis,
the value of a decreases towards zero; the three quantum states
approach the simple description |+1), |0), and |—1), and the energy
levels eventually diverge linearly with slopes g$H times +1, 0, and
z
— 1 respectively. This shows that in strong fields the magnetic moment

--- Page 170 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 155
simply precesses about the axis determined by the magnetic field,
whereas in zero field its motion can be regarded as consisting of three
mutually perpendicular linear vibrations of different frequencies; in
intermediate fields its motion is more complicated. In strong fields the
transition ! + )<-> |—) becomes smaller and smaller in intensity; it is
often loosely referred to as a cAJf = ±2' transition, but this assumes
that the states are labelled by their strong field description as | + 1)
and | — 1). This nomenclature is only accurate in infinitely strong fields,
' and the two states | +), | —} at finite fields are each an admixture of
the two states | +1), | — 1). It would be more correct to call it a AJf = 0
transition, since it is allowed only because the same values of M occur
in the two states. This agrees with the simple polarization rule, that
AJf = 0 transitions require an oscillatory field parallel to the axis
used to specify the components M of angular momentum while
AJf = ±1 transitions in strong fields require an oscillatory field
normal to this axis.
Although these formulae have been given only for a field along the
z-axis, they can be applied for fields along the x- and 2/-axes by making
the substitutions D = fZ>, E = %(D—D) and using cyclic permuta-
2 x y
tions. They can also be used for the case of an axial fine structure
term with the magnetic field normal to the axis of symmetry by taking
the field direction as the z-axis, and the fine structure term as
which is equivalent to
Formulae for S = f
Using the spin Hamiltonian (3.27) but with S = f, the energy
matrix is
from which the states and energy levels are
States Energy
where G = g^H and tan 2a = ^(3)E/(D±G). The nomenclature \M}
is a useful shorthand which is a correct description of the states only

--- Page 171 ---

156 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
TABLE 3.11
Transitions and relative intensities for 8 = f, rhombic field,
H along z-axis
Transition Orientation of Hj^ Intensity (value of g\ |*5^|2)
In the limit of strong magnetic fields a —> 0 and only three transitions
with relative intensity 3:4:3 are allowed, with the oscillatory field
normal to the steady field.
in the limit of very strong magnetic field. The transition probabilities
for various orientations of the oscillatory field are given in Table 3.11.
3.6. Electronic 'quadrupole' fine structure in a strong magnetic
field
For values of 8 > f , or if the external field is in an arbitrary direc-
tion, calculation of the energy levels is cumbersome and no simple
formulae can be given. In cases where the Zeeman energy is very large
or very small compared with the fine structure energy, perturbation
methods can be used. The former case is the one more commonly
encountered in practice, and the following discussion is restricted to
this case.
When the symmetry is rhombic, measurements at arbitrary field
directions are useful in finding the positions of the principal axes, if
not already known; precise measurements can then be made in the
directions of the principal axes, where the theory is more amenable to
simple calculation. For intermediate directions the formulae are
therefore carried only as far as first order perturbation theory. On
transforming to the new set of axes (x, y , z) to diagonalize the
e e e
Zeeman energy, as in § 3.2, the quadrupole term
transforms into a mixture of all possible products of the second degree
in the spin components. Using the relation D + D + D = 0, the
x y z

--- Page 172 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 15-3
diagonal term becomes
where
and g is given by eqn (3.5).
The transition M <-» M — 1 occurs at
and, in this approximation where terms of order D2jhv are neglected,
the spectrum consists of 28 lines equally spaced at intervals of D"
about the position corresponding to D = 0. The splitting interval D"
varies with angle, reaching extreme values along the principal axes
3
but becoming zero at certain intermediate directions since not all the
coefficients D D , D can have the same sign. This equal spacing is
xy y z
upset by the second-order terms, but these will be evaluated only for
the case of axial symmetry.
Axial symmetry
When axial symmetry is present,
The calculations will be carried to second order of perturbation theory,
assuming that the Zeeman energy > electronic quadrupole energy,
and that the external field is at an angle 6 with the z-axis in the
#z-plane. Then the spin Hamiltonian becomes
The Zeeman energy is first diagonalized as in § 3.2 by a rotation about
the ?/-axis through an angle (f> given by eqn (3.13). Then the spin Hamil-
tonian becomes
The last two terms are off-diagonal, and on evaluation by second-
order perturbation theory the energy of the state S' = M is found to
z
be
Here g is given by eqn (3.14), and G = g/3H. The ratios g \g, g\\\g
L

--- Page 173 ---

158 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
that occur arise from the relations between sin (f>, cos (/> and sin 6,
cos 6.
The diagonal term in eqn (3.33) is of course just a special case of
(3.29) with
and to a first approximation the spectrum is given by eqn (3.31) with
this special value of D"'. The angular variation of D" is just (3 cos2</> — 1),
corresponding to the fact that 3S'2— S(S-\-l) transforms like
z
and (/) is the angle made by z, the spin axis, with the symmetry axis.
e
The variation with angle is shown in Fig. 3.5 for the case of isotropic
Magnetic field (G)
FIG. 3.5. Variation of the fine structure with angle (showing the experimental points and
the calculated curves). Dilute manganese fluosilicate, S = f, at 3-3-cm wave-length, and
90°K (Bleaney and Ingram 195la).

--- Page 174 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 159
g and S = f. At 6 = 77/2 the splitting is just half of that for 0=0,
and the lines occur in the reverse order; the first-order splitting is zero
at 3 cos20 = 1, or 6 = 54° 44'. If g is anisotropic, this zero occurs at
3 cos2</> = 1.
The effect of off-diagonal terms in the energy matrix which were
neglected in eqn (3.31) but included in eqn (3.33) is to give small
shifts in the energy levels of order D2jG. There are corresponding shifts
in the lines, which for the transition M «-> M — 1 is given by adding
to eqn (3.31) the quantity
These shifts account for the departure from a simple (3 cos2 0 — 1)
variation shown in Fig. 3.5.
The off-diagonal matrix elements are of two kinds: elements between
\M) and \M — 1), whose magnitudes vary with sin 20 and which there-
fore vanish both parallel and perpendicular to the symmetry axis;
elements between \M) and \M — 2), which vary with sin20 and hence
vanish only parallel to the symmetry axis. Elements of these two
kinds give rise to and determine the intensity of the so-called 'for-
bidden' transitions with AJf = ±2 or higher. When the external field
is along the symmetry axis such transitions are forbidden entirely;
when H is normal to this axis they are allowed only if the oscillatory
field H! is parallel to H; but for intermediate directions they are
allowed with H either parallel or perpendicular to H. The transition
x
If+ 1 <-> M — 1 occurs at
When the spectrum is observed at constant frequency these lines
occur at roughly half the field required for the normal transitions but
the average separation in field between successive lines is the same;
the intensity is smaller by a factor of order (D/G)2. Also, for inter-
mediate directions of the magnetic field H the intensity of the normal
transitions (AJf = ±1) does not vanish when H is parallel to H but
x
falls only by a factor of order (Z>/6?)2.
The number of strong transitions of the form Alf = ±1 is just 28
9
and the intensity of the transition M<^M — 1 is proportional to
{$($+!)— M(M — 1)} in the first approximation. Unlike the cases of

--- Page 175 ---

160 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
higher multipole splitting discussed in § 3.4 the intensity is highest in
the centre and smallest for the outside lines of the spectrum. This
intensity variation makes it possible to identify the transition corre-
sponding to a given line, except for an ambiguity in the sign of the
values of M involved. This ambiguity can be resolved by observing
the change in the relative intensity of the lines as the temperature is
reduced as mentioned in § 3.3. The way in which this can be done is
readily understood from the energy levels shown in Fig. 3.6 for the
FIG. 3.6. Energy levels with electronic 'quadrupole' splitting, for S — f, with magnetic
field H along symmetry axis (O = gf$H), for the spin Hamiltonian,
z
case of S = f in a strong field. The diagram shows positive and
negative values of D respectively and it will be seen that one set of
levels is just inverted from the other. At low temperatures when IcT
is comparable with the overall splitting the population of the highest
levels will be noticeably smaller than that of the lowest levels, and the
intensity of the transitions between the higher levels will decrease
relative to those between the lower levels. Comparison of the intensity
of these transitions is easiest in strong fields working at constant

--- Page 176 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 161
frequency, when the different transitions can be traversed by varying
the field. It is readily seen that if D is positive the transition between
the highest two levels, which has the lower intensity at lower tempera-
tures, comes at highest frequency in a given field or at lowest field for
a given frequency; if D is negative the reverse is the case. In this way
the order of the levels can be identified, and the sign of D estab-
lished.
This is possible in measurements at zero field, for which the energy
levels are shown to the right and left of the diagram, but then the
splittings are much smaller and the difference in populations will be
much lower than that for the transitions compared in strong fields.
In addition it would be necessary to compare the relative strengths of
transitions at different frequencies when working in zero field, which
is experimentally much more difficult to do accurately.
The strength of this method is illustrated by inserting some numerical
values. For an ion with S = f, g = 2 in a field of about 10 kG the
allowed transitions occur near 1 cm wavelength. The intensity ratio
between the extreme transitions +-1 <—> +f and — f <-» —| is very
nearly exp(—4:hvlkT). Even at 14°K, a temperature readily obtained
with pumped hydrogen, this intensity ratio is about 1-5, which is
easily discernible in the spectrum. This makes it possible to label the
transitions and determine the sign of D; it should be noted that the
method can be used for quite small values of D, the only limitation
being that D must be larger than the line width so that the various
transitions are resolved.
The method outlined above for determining the sign of D can be
used for multipole splittings of any degree. Figure 3.7 shows an example
where it is used for a splitting that is predominantly due to the cubic
term of eqn (3.21). As remarked in § 3.3, measurements of the line
positions in the spectrum at a sufficient number of directions will
give the values of the coefficients of all the multipole splitting terms,
together with their relative signs. Thus only one observation of the
change of intensity with temperature is required to determine all the
signs. This may be illustrated, using as an example, a rhombic splitting
of the second degree. Measurements of the fine structure of the spectrum
observed with a magnetic field along each of the three principal axes
of the tensor D determine the three quantities \D \, \D \, \D \, but
X y Z
since D -}-D +D = 0 there is only one choice of the relative signs of
x y z
the three coefficients which is possible. We may summarize this situa-
tion by saying that only the sign of the product (D D D) is unknown,
x y z
12

--- Page 177 ---

162 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.7. Paramagnetic resonance at 24000 MHz of Fe3+ in rubidium aluminium
sulphate with H parallel to (100) direction. The change of intensity at low temperatures
shows that the cubic field parameter a is positive, since the transitions which gain in
relative intensity must be those between the states of low Zeeman energy (negative
values of M); cf. Fig. 3.3(a)). (Geschwind 1959).

--- Page 178 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 163
and a knowledge of the sign of any one of the three individual param-
eters is sufficient to determine the overall sign. In a strong field along
the #-axis, for example, the energy levels will approximately be as
shown in Fig. 3.6 except that the parameter D would be replaced by
3D /2. Observation of the change of relative intensity with temperature
x
would then give the sign of D . It may be remarked here that the
x
change in population of the levels with temperature also gives a term
in T~2 in the susceptibility whose sign is related to that of D (see eqn
(A.34), Appendix A); hence in some cases the sign of D can be found
from anisotropy measurements (see, for example, Bleaney and Ingram
195la). This is not such a good method, since it can only be used when
g is quite isotropic, and for non-cubic crystals.
These last limitations apply generally to susceptibility measurements
as compared with paramagnetic resonance measurements. Also the
information obtained from a resonance measurement in strong fields
is very much greater than that in zero field. For example, in zero
field for S = f, the energy levels reduce to two doublets separated
by an energy (D2 + 3E2)%, so that a measurement in zero field would
yield a value only for this quantity. On the other hand, by measure-
ments in a strong field one can find the values of D and E separately,
and also determine the directions of the axes associated with these
quantities, together with the principal g-values.
3.7. Hyperfine structure I (introductory remarks)
The effects of hyperfine structure in free atoms are well known, and
can usually be described by a Hamiltonian of the form
where the first term represents the interaction between the nuclear
magnetic moment and the electronic magnetic field (whose steady
component is parallel to the electronic angular momentum vector J);
the second term the interaction between the nuclear electric quadrupole
moment and the electronic electric field gradient (also parallel to J)
at the nucleus, and the third the Zeeman interaction between the
nuclear magnetic moment and the external magnetic field. In an
external magnetic field we have also the electronic Zeeman interaction
<tf? = <7j|#H. J, but none of the fine structure terms discussed
z
earlier in this chapter. In a strong field (gjfiH > a^), the allowed

--- Page 179 ---

164 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
electronic transitions are those in which the nuclear magnetic quantum
number m does not change, and the diagonal part of the quadrupole
interaction term is
where the 2-axis is parallel to the external field. The quantum required
for a transition (M,m) <—> (M — I, m) is
and by measuring a sufficient number of such transitions the parameters
can be determined except g which does not appear in eqn (3.38a).
l9
In strong magnetic fields L and S may be partially decoupled, a
result that is expressed quantum mechanically by the admixture of
the first excited state «7±1 into the ground state J. Amongst other
effects this modifies the apparent nuclear Zeeman interaction through
cross terms of the form
where J is the ground state and J+l the excited state. This may be
written in the form
where
and <J + 1|| N ||J), (t7 + l|| A ||J) are numbers such as those tabulated
for the 4/ group in Table 20. This gives an additional energy for the
transition (M, m)<^+ (M — \, m) of
which gives useful additional information about the atomic structure
(see, for example, Harvey (1965)). It will be seen that the additional
energy given by eqn (3.38c) is of the form H.I; it is essentially the
same effect as gives rise to the 'paramagnetic shift' in nuclear resonance.
The atomic state is modified by the applied field by an amount which
is linear in H, making the field seen by the nucleus different from the
external field by a constant fraction varying as (2M — I).

--- Page 180 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 165
In a weak magnetic field (gjfiH < a,j) the off-diagonal terms in eqn
(3.37) cannot be neglected and the behaviour of the energy levels is
correspondingly somewhat more complicated. In zero field I and J
may be vectorially combined to give a resultant F, whose motion in a
weak magnetic field is a precession about H. This gives a weak field
Zeeman interaction that can be expressed in terms of a magnetic
quantum number m = M-\-m. We shall not consider the possible
F
transitions in detail but note that transitions in which m changes by
p
±1 require an oscillatory magnetic field perpendicular to the steady
magnetic field, while those in which Am^ = 0 require an oscillatory
field parallel to the external field. In the strong magnetic field limit
the latter have vanishing intensity, while the former fall into two
classes: those in which £±M = ±1, which have an intensity determined
by the electronic magnetic moment, and those in which Am = ±1,
whose intensity is determined by the nuclear magnetic moment and
are therefore very weak in comparison.
The method of electron paramagnetic resonance has been applied to
free atoms in a gaseous mixture, and has produced a number of signifi-
cant results. These form rather a separate field, more related to the
results of atomic beam and other methods of precision hyperfine
structure measurement than to solid state paramagnetism, and we shall
not discuss them further. Our main purpose in writing down the
equations given above is for convenience in introducing the more
complex subject of hyperfine interactions in the solid state, and later
to draw some useful comparisons with atomic hyperfine structure.
In the solid state the electronic magnetic moment is often highly
anisotropic, and we would expect its interaction with the nuclear
moment also to be anisotropic. The electronic charge cloud is far from
spherical in shape, and the electric field gradient at the nucleus must
be expressed by a tensor whose principal axes are fixed in the crystal.
Before considering the main results of these effects on the hyperfine
structure, we mention the case of cubic symmetry. For a F quadruplet
8
the hyperfine magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole terms require
drastic modification; this may also occur for F , F triplet states, and
4 5
even the F doublet, as discussed in Chapter 18. Minor modifications
3
may also be needed for ions with half-filled shells in ^-states with
S = f , 1 ; the corrections are usually so small that they can be detecte
only in Endor experiments, and will be discussed in Chapter 5. The
following discussion applies mainly to ions where the crystal field
leaves a doublet ground state, or to states with a higher multiplicity

--- Page 181 ---

166 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
where the complications just mentioned do not occur or are so small
that they can be neglected.
In the presence of anisotropy the interaction between the magnetic
moment of a nucleus of spin I with the electronic field of an ion whose
effective spin is S, may be written in the form S.A.I. The nature
of the quantity A is discussed in Chapter 15; for brevity we shall still
refer to it as a 'tensor' with a mental reservation similar to that for
the g 'tensor'. When referred to its principal axes the term takes the
form
but when axial symmetry is present we may use the form
(in the literature the nomenclature A, B has generally been used for
When the nucleus has a spin / > 1, and there is also an electric
field gradient at the nucleus, an interaction with the nuclear electric
quadrupole moment may arise whose form for an ion with effective
spin S = | may be written as I . P . I. Here P is a tensor qu
The electric field gradient is set up by the anisotropic distribution of
electric charge on the paramagnetic ion and its immediate neighbours,
and the tensor P generally has the same principal axes as the quantities
g, D, A. The general form of the interaction is
but when referred to its principal axes it has the simpler form
which is similar to that of the tensor D (eqn (3.25)). Thus by analogous
reasoning, we can set P +P +P = 0, so that there are only two
X X Z
independent parameters. Then we can transform (3.40b) into an expres-
sion analogous to (3.26):
where P,, = 3PJ2, r\ = (P —P )IP. This form is particularly useful
x y z
if axial symmetry is present, when 77 = 0.

--- Page 182 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 167
Since the nomenclature adopted here is somewhat different from
that in other branches of radio-frequency spectroscopy, we note that
where q = (32F/dz2) is the electric field gradient at the nucleus.
Finally, we have a term — /3H . g(7) . I, which represents the interac-
tion between the nuclear magnetic moment and the external field H.
If this were a simple direct interaction, g(/) would be a scalar quantity,
equal to the ordinary nuclear ^-factor. However, when an external
magnetic field is applied the electronic wave-function is changed by an
amount that is in first approximation proportional to H, and the elec-
tronic field at the nucleus is similarly modified, producing the equivalent
of paramagnetic shielding (or anti-shielding). An atomic example of
this is given in eqn (3.38c). In the solid state this effect can be quite
large; when low-lying excited electronic states are present so that the
electronic wave-function is appreciably modified in a magnetic field,
and the (anti-)shielding correction may outweigh the direct interaction.
For example, Lewis and Sabisky (1963) find that for the Ho2+ ion in
CaF the apparent value of g(/) is forty times larger than the true
2
value. Also, when the electronic ground state is anisotropic the (anti-)-
shielding will be anisotropic, so that g(7) becomes a 'tensor' usually
with the same principal axes as the g-factor.
3.8. Hyperfine structure II—strong external field
In general the energy levels of a system with hyperfine structure
must be evaluated either by numerical or by perturbation methods.
In most cases the electron Zeeman energy is the largest term in the
Hamiltonian, and perturbation methods can be used if this term is
diagonalized first. These methods are adequate for many purposes, and
also give qualitatively the behaviour of the spectrum in the general
case.
The hyperfine terms in the spin Hamiltonian are
If the electronic Zeeman term (3H . g . S is the largest interaction term,
then it must be diagonalized first. This is accomplished by changing
to new axes, as in § 3.2; if the magnetic field H has direction cosines
(I, m, n) with respect to the principal axes of the gr-tensor, then the z -
e
axis of the new system must have direction cosines (Igjg, ^g \g, ng/g).
y z

--- Page 183 ---

168 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
When the new system of axes is introduced for S in the magnetic
hyperfine term S.A.I, where A is assumed to have the same principal
axes as the gr-tensor and to be a symmetric tensor (see below), terms
involving products of all possible pairs of the components of S and I
appear. Those containing /S£, S' are off-diagonal and connect levels
v
separated by the electronic Zeeman energy; they can be treated by
second-order perturbation theory. The term in S' is
g
The coefficients of I I I , if suitably normalized, can be regarded as
X9 y) z
a set of direction cosines; this normalization requires that
Then by changing to a set of axes (# , y , z ) for I, where z has the
n n n n
direction cosines (IgyAJgA), (mgyAlgA), (ngA/gA), the first order
y z z
hyperfine term given by eqn (3.43) reduces to
where the primes indicate that S' refers to the 'electronic5 coordinate
x
system (# , y , z) and I' refers to the 'nuclear' coordinate system
e e e z
(#n> 2/n> z ). From eqn (3.45) it is obvious that in the first order the
n
energy of a state (M, ra) is displaced by an amount AMm, where A
is given by eqn (3.44). The strongly allowed transitions are of the type
(M, m) <-> (M — 1, m), and these are displaced in energy by an amount
Am. Thus each electronic transition is divided into 21 + 1 hyperfine
lines, which are equally spaced in this approximation (see Fig. 3.8).
Since at ordinary temperatures all nuclear orientations are equally
probable, the hyperfine lines in each electronic transition have equal
intensity; this makes it readily possible to distinguish a hyperfine
splitting from an electronic 'fine splitting', where the lines have unequal
intensity (see § 3.3).
In physical terms these results arise as follows. In a sufficiently strong
external magnetic field the magnetic electrons may be regarded as
giving rise to a magnetic field H at the centre of the ion, whose direc-
e
tion and (to some extent) magnitude depend on the direction of the
external field. H is usually much stronger than the external field (and
e
here we have assumed that this is so); its direction defines the axis
denoted by z above, so that it is natural to take this axis in labelling
n
the 2/ + 1 nuclear quantum states. In this approximation their energy
is just —g^H m, where g is the true nuclear g-factor. In an electronic
z e z
transition the value of H changes; it is proportional to M, and in the
e

--- Page 184 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 169
FIG. 3.8. Energy levels and allowed transitions for S = J, I = f with magnetic hyperfine
splitting, observed at constant frequency in strong magnetic field.
transition Jf = + i <-> — Jit simply changes sign. The energy difference
between each electronic state is therefore different for the 21 + 1
nuclear orientations, and this gives rise to 21+1 lines. Alternatively
we may regard the electronic transition as taking place in a net field
H+H , where H is the mean magnetic field produced by the nucleus
n n
and acting on the electronic magnetic moment; the value of H is
n
proportional to the nuclear magnetic quantum number m.
In the treatment given above we have assumed that the quantity
A has the same principal axes as g. This is not necessarily true in cases
of low symmetry (see, for example, Bleaney and O'Brien (1956)) when,
if x, y, z are the principal axes of the g 'tensor', the magnetic hyperfine

--- Page 185 ---

170 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
structure term will have the general form
Then on transforming to a new set of axes (x, y , z) where the z -axis
e e e e
has direction cosines (gj/g, g m\g, gn\g), in order to diagonalize the
y z
electronic Zeeman interaction when a field H is applied with direction
cosines (I, m, n), we obtain a term in S'
of which eqn (3.43) is clearly a special case. This can be diagonalized
by changing to a set of axes (a?, «/, z ) for I, where the direction cosines
n n n
of zn are just the coefficients of Ix, Iy, Iz in eqn (3.45b), whose normaliza-
tion condition gives
This is the equation of an ellipsoid in (I, m, n) space whose projection
on a plane is an ellipse. If the quantity g2A2 is plotted as a function
of angle while the magnetic field is rotated in any given plane, a sinu-
soidal variation is obtained repeating every 180°. If the angle 0 is
measured from an axis corresponding to an extremum of g2A2, then a
plot of g2A2 against cos20 or sin20 will give a straight line. If the plane
contains one of the principal axes (assumed to coincide) of g and A,
such a plot (cf. Pryce (1949)) can be used to extrapolate the hyperfine
constants to axes along which resonance cannot be observed.
The method of diagonalization we have used above depends on the
fact that we can use different sets of axes as a reference for S and for
I, a technique that would not be possible if A were a genuine tensor
quantity. This is a particular illustration of a result that is discussed
more generally for A and for g in Chapter 15; in contrast, quantities
like D and P are tensors whose components multiply two components
of the same vector quantity, S and I respectively.
The results obtained above are not changed in the first approximation
by the inclusion of the second and third terms in J>f, eqn (3.42),
n
provided that they are small compared with the first term, as is usually
the case. (Other possibilities are considered in §3.11.) When this

--- Page 186 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 171
• condition is satisfied, we diagonalize the magnetic hyperfine structure
> by transforming to the axes (#, y , z ) for I ; then the diagonal terms
n n n
of 3? ^ are (assuming all 'tensor' quantities to have the same principal
axes)
where
and
while A is given by eqn (3.44). These diagonal terms in P and G
2
change the energy levels but not, in a first approximation, the transi-
tions, since only levels with the same value of m are involved in a
strong transition, and these levels are displaced equally by such terms.
Hence to the first order, the transition \M, m)<-> \M — 1, m} is still
displaced from the position at which the transition M <-» M — 1 would
have occurred in the absence of the hyperfine structure by an amount
Am. The quantity A, like g, must be taken to be positive.
The derivation of eqns (3.47), (3.48) is as follows. In the transforma-
tion to axes (# , y , z ) the term PyJ^+Pyl^+Pyl* gives rise to a term
n n n
together with terms in I' , I'2 and cross terms. The diagonal terms are
x y
since Similarly the term
transforms to
plus terms in I' , I' . It will be seen that a general advantage of the
x y
method of approximate diagonalization used in this chapter is that
the first-order terms can be extracted from the directions of z and z
e n
without determining the directions of the axes x , y or # , j/ .
e e n n
Off-diagonal terms
The effect of the off-diagonal terms in the magnetic hfs is twofold :
(1) they allow transitions in which the nuclear magnetic quantum

--- Page 187 ---

FIG. 3.9. Spectrum, at 20°K and 3-3 cm wavelength, of dilute manganese ammonium sulphate, with magnetic field parallel to the tetragonal
axis of ion A. The hyperfine structure and fine-structure separations are given in gauss. Only two groups of lines for ion B are resolved; X is
the narrow line of the organic radical used to determine g. Note that within each hyperfine group (I to V) splittings increase to the right (increasing
magnetic field), and that different groups have different mean hyperfine splittings; the latter can be used for determining relative signs (see text)
(Bleaney and Ingram 195la).

--- Page 188 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 173
number ra changes by ±1, smaller in intensity than the strong transi-
tions by a factor ~(Alhv)2', (2) they introduce energy terms of order
A2l(hv) which involve m2, and hence make the hyperfine lines unequally
spaced; (3) for S > -J, they introduce terms in Mm which change the
spacing of the hyperfine lines in different electronic transitions by
amounts of the order A2f(hv). These effects are illustrated in Fig. 3.9.
The effect of terms of this order can be eliminated by taking the average
of all the separations between successive hyperfine lines to find A.
The effect of the off-diagonal terms arising from I . P . I is also to
make transitions allowed in which m changes, smaller in intensity by
a factor ~(P/A)2. The positions of the strong transitions are affected
by amounts of order P2jA. The off-diagonal terms in /5H . g(J) . I are
usually too small to have an observable effect.
In general we shall evaluate these second-order effects only in the
case of axial symmetry.
Axial symmetry—magnetic hyperfine interaction only
In order to look at the behaviour of hyperfine structure in some
detail, it is more profitable to restrict the discussion to the case of
axial symmetry, and to omit at first the nuclear electric quadrupole
interaction as well as the electronic fine structure terms. With axial
symmetry we can choose the direction of the #-axis so that the external
magnetic field lies in the #z-plane. Then the Hamiltonian may be
written as
w^here the effective nuclear ^-factor g(/) is assumed also to have axial
symmetry. The electronic Zeeman term, which we again assume to
be much the largest, is first diagonalized, as in § 3.2, by changing to
a new set of axes for S which are rotated from the original set by an
angle <f> about the ?/-axis. This leaves terms in the hyperfine structure
involving S'I , as well as terms such as S I and S' I ; the latter connect
9X XX V V
levels that differ in energy by gfiH and can be treated by second-order
perturbation theory if \A\ <<//?#. However a term such as S'I
ZX
cannot, and must be eliminated by changing to a new set of axes for I.
If this system is rotated from the Original system (as in Fig. 3.10) by
an angle \p about the y-axis, then the coefficient of 8'^ after this

--- Page 189 ---

174 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.10. Orientation of magnetic field H, electron spin (z) and nuclear spin (z) when
e n
anisotropy is present. The figure is drawn for g > g, A > A (all positive). The dotted
x z x z
vector is appropriate to a negative value of A the other parameters remaining positive.
at
The equations relating the components of I in the two systems eqns (3.49), (3.51) and
Fig. 3.1.) are (primes refer to the x , 2/> Zn system):
n n
with
transformation is found to be
which vanishes if we choose w so that
The term in S'l' can now be written as AST', where

--- Page 190 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 175
This is clearly the special form of eqn (3.44) appropriate to axial
symmetry.
The spin Hamiltonian now becomes
If g(I) is isotropic, the last term reduces to
corresponding to the fact that the angle between H and the z -axis is
n
just (6 — w). The angle ip can be eliminated using the relations
In most cases the nuclear Zeeman term is so small that we need retain
only its diagonal part, and using first- and second-order perturbation
theory the energy of the state (M, m) is found to be
where
Hence the transition requires a quantum
The significance of the angle ip is similar to that of </>, and can be
pictured as follows. The steady component of the electronic moment
lies along z, and has components proportional to cos </> = (g\\/g)cos 6
e
and sin $ = (gjg) sin 6 parallel and perpendicular to the symmetry
axis respectively. Owing to the anisotropy in the hyperfine interaction,
the corresponding components of the magnetic field H which the
e
electrons produce at the nucleus are proportional to A^(g^/g) cos 0
and A (g±lg) sin 0 respectively, and the nucleus therefore precesses
±

--- Page 191 ---

176 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
about the direction z given by the resultant of these two components,
n
in a field H proportional to (g\A\ cos20+g* A2 sm20)^/g. It is con-
e L L
venient to call this direction the 'nuclear spin axis', though the nucleus
does not precess in a simple manner about this axis.
The second-order terms vary as (g/3H)-1 or (hv)~l and so vanish in
strong fields. They are of two kinds, and we consider first those which
vary as m2. These cause a departure from equal spacing in the hyperfine
structure; under normal conditions the lines observed at lower field,
when working at constant frequency, are closer together than those at
higher field, as illustrated in Fig. 3.9. This may be reversed at certain
angles if \A\\\ > \A \ because the term in sin220 in eqn (3.56) has the
L
opposite sign to the term in which 6 does not occur explicitly (there is
an implicit variation with angle in both terms through the variation
in A). This effect is shown in Fig. 3.11.
The second type of second order term is linear in m, and has been
FIG. 3.11. Spectra of dilute cobalt ammonium sulphate near the perpendicular to the
tetragonal axis at T = 20°K, v = 0-8 cm"1. Normally the second-order terms make the
hyperfine lines closer together at the high field end, but in cases of high anisotropy this
may be reversed near 6 = 90° by the term in sin220 in eqn (3.56) (Bleaney and
Ingram 19516).

--- Page 192 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 177
combined with the principal term Am. It is present only when 8 > \.
Its effect is to produce a variation in the spacing of the hyperfine
components in different electronic transitions. If these are not split by
a fine structure interaction, then the hyperfine lines belonging to
different electronic transitions are slightly split by an amount increasing
with \m\; this is greatest at the two ends of the hyperfine structure
pattern, and if not resolved, may appear as a broadening of the outside
lines. If there is a fine structure, then the appropriate terms from
§§ 3.3-3.6 must be included in the spin Hamiltonian and in a first
approximation the consequent displacements of the lines can be added
linearly to eqn (3.56). It is then possible to observe experimentally
whether the transitions occurring at higher frequencies in a constant
field (i.e. in lower fields at constant frequency) have greater or smaller
mean separations between the hyperfine lines. From this some informa-
tion can be obtained about the signs of A etc., provided that the
X9
signs of the g-values and of the fine structure terms have been deter-
mined, as described earlier.
For simplicity we consider only a quadrupole-like electronic splitting,
but the argument is readily extended; initially we also assume axial
symmetry. Then, if H is along the axis of symmetry, it is readily seen
from Fig. 3.6 that if D is positive, the transitions between levels with
positive values of M occur at higher frequencies in constant field
(lower fields at constant frequency), and vice versa if D is negative.
Then from eqn (3.56) the hyperfine structures in the transitions with
positive values of M have a larger mean spacing if A \\ is positive;
thus the sign of A \\ relative to that of D is determined. If H is perpen-
dicular to the symmetry axis, the electronic transitions occur in the
reverse order (see Fig. 3.5) and so also does the change in the mean
spacing. However it is clear from eqn (3.56) that this still yields only
the sign of A \\ relative to that of D, since A occurs only in the square
L
in the second-order terms.
If there is only rhombic symmetry, the coefficient of (2M — I) in
eqn (3.56) becomes (A A Al2A2G), where the value of A is A A A
x y z X9 V9 z
according as the external field is directed along the corresponding axis
(the coefficient has not been evaluated for intermediate directions,
though its form suggests that it is still correct if the appropriate value
of A is used). Thus in this case observation of the variation of the
mean hyperfine spacing between different electronic transitions
determines the sign of (AyAyA) relative to that of D D , D if the
z X9 y z
external field is directed along the three axes in turn. The situation is
13

--- Page 193 ---

178 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
rather similar to that for the gr-values: with rhombic symmetry the
use of a circularly polarized oscillatory field yields the sign of (ggg),
x y z
while from the fine structure one finds the sign of (D D D ) provided
X V Z
a relative intensity measurement can be made at low temperatures;
from the hyperfine structure the sign of (A A A ) is determined if the
X V Z
signs of the principal values of the D-tensor are known (if not, only
the sign of (A^AyA^ relative to that of (D D D) can be found). With
x y z
axial symmetry, circularly polarized radiation yields the sign of g\\
uniquely, and the hyperfine structure gives the sign of A \\ relative to
that of D. No information about the signs of A A , A is obtained if
xt y z
only one electronic transition is observed, as in the case of S = %.
At first sight it might appear that the argument given above might
have to be reversed if one of the g-values were negative, since G appears
in the denominator of the second-order terms in eqn (3.56). However
the labelling of the transitions would also have to be reversed in sign,
and the argument is still correct. This illustrates the advantage of
always taking g and A to be positive quantities; the actual signs of the
principal values of the g, A tensors then only affect the quadrants in
which the angles </>, ip lie, and appear automatically in equations such
as (3.56) where functions of <f>, ip have been translated back into
functions of 6.
3.9. Hyperfine structure III—nuclear electric quadrupole
interaction
We discuss first a special case where explicit formulae can be obtained
for the energy levels, and which shows some similarity to a free atom:
an ion with S = J, and axial symmetry. If the external magnetic fiel
H is applied along the axis of symmetry, the spin Hamiltonian is
The effect of the term in A is to admix the states (M = + J, m) and
±
(M — — J, m + 1), where m is the nuclear magnetic quantum number.
These two states both have the same component of total angular
momentum along the z-axis; this component is m + J (in units of H),
which we may write as m , where m = M+m. It is similar to the
F F
magnetic quantum number m used in the hyperfine structure of free
F
atoms (see Fig. 3.12), being the component of the total angular
momentum along the z-axis, but with the difference that the symmetry
axis of A and P (the z-axis) is fixed in the crystal, whereas in the free

--- Page 194 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 179
FIG. 3.12. Hyperfine levels of 143Nd in lanthanum ethyl sulphate in zero magnetic
field. The Nd3+ ion in this salt has axial symmetry, so that the levels ±m are de-
F
generate, giving doublets except for the levels m = 0. The transitions corresponding
F
to Amjp = ± 1 are shown on the left, the broken lines indicating rather weak transitions;
the transitions km = 0 are shown on the right. If there were no anisotropy (An •== A ^
F
P|| = 0), the upper and lower groups of levels would each be unsplit, corresponding to
F = 4 and F = 3 respectively.
atom there is no restriction and the 2-axis can be taken as that of the
external magnetic field. In the present instance we restrict the discus-
sion to the case where H is along the z-axis, in order to obtain a simple
closed form for the energy levels. Then the energy of the two states
with the same value of m is
F

--- Page 195 ---

180 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
where the positive sign must be taken for the state where the electronic
spin moment is parallel to the field and the negative sign when it is
anti-parallel.
The transitions that are allowed within this set of energy levels are
of two kinds. If the oscillatory field H is normal to the z-axis, only
t
transitions of the type Am_^ = ± 1 are allowed, but we must distinguish
between transitions of the form \M, m)«-» | Jf ± 1, m) and of the form
\M,m)<-*\M,m±I). In strong external fields where hv ^>A the
L
admixture of states for a given value of m becomes very small, so
F
that each state is rather accurately specified as just \M,m}. Then the
transitions in which AJfef = ±1, Am = 0 are strong ones, involving
the electronic moments, and require a quantum of the order
The transitions in which AJkf = 0, Am = ±1 are weak transitions
involving (in the strong field limit) only the nuclear moments, and
require a quantum of the order A\\M+P\\(2m±l):fg(^)^H.
In intermediate fields these latter transitions gain in intensity
because some electronic magnetic moment is involved through the
mixture of states.
If the oscillatory field is parallel to the z-axis, the selection rule is
Am^r = 0. Hence the only allowed transitions are those between the
two energy levels with the same value of m , and from eqn (3.58),
F
The matrix element for these transitions has the squared value
(neglecting the nuclear magnetic moment)
It depends on the value of m , and as the frequency increases the
F
transition probability becomes vanishingly small. From eqn (3.59) it
follows that measurements on transitions of this kind yield the
quantities \(g\\ +g\*})\, \A\\ —2P\\\, and \A \. If these are combined with
L
observation of transitions of the type AM = ±1, Am = 0, which yield
different combinations of the parameters, we can find the quantities
|<7||J)1, \A || |, |P|||, the sign of g(^ relative to g\\, and that of Py relative to
A\\. If the sign of g\\ is known, then that of g(^} is determined (and
vice versa); similarly for P\\ and A\\. In practice it is not usually
possible to find g(^ because it is ~IQ-3g\\, and to obtain sufficiently

--- Page 196 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 181
accurate measurements observations must be made in fields such that
g(I)j3H is comparable with the line width; then the transitions involved
in eqn (3.59) usually have insufficient intensity to be detectable.
Nuclear electric quadrupole interaction—perturbation theory
We now extend the treatment of § 3.8, hyperfine structure in strong
external fields, to include the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction.
The first-order effects of this interaction have already been evaluated
(eqn (3.47)) and shown to produce no effect on the spectrum in this
approximation. The second-order effects therefore become unusually
important, since it is only through their effect on the spectrum that
the size of the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction can be found.
In general, the magnitude of this interaction is smaller than that of
the magnetic hyperfine interaction, and we make this assumption in
applying perturbation theory to treat the case of axial symmetry,
without restriction on the value of 8.
If an external magnetic field is applied at an angle 0 to the symmetry
axis (the z-axis) in the #z-plane, and the nuclear coordinate system
(#n> 2/n> Zn) is introduced where the z -axis makes an angle ^ with the
n
z-axis, the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
becomes
The last two terms are off-diagonal and give rise to matrix elements
between the states \m) and |m±l), \m±2) belonging to the same value
of the electronic magnetic quantum number M. This gives a complicated
energy matrix in which perturbation methods can only be applied if
|P| < \AM|, since AM is the energy difference between successive
nuclear levels. If this inequality holds, the strongly allowed transitions
are still those in which Am = 0, AJf = ±1. The first (diagonal) term
in eqn (3.61) adds to the energy of the state \M, m) in eqn (3.54) an
amount
which is just a special case of eqn (3.47). The off-diagonal terms,
treated by second-order perturbation theory, add to the energy a

--- Page 197 ---

182 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
further amount
The quantum of energy required for the transition
is increased by an amount
where the term in P (eqn (3.62)) has vanished since it does not depend
on M. The second-order terms, unlike those in eqn (3.56), do not vanish
in strong fields, since the denominators contain A and not G. In addition
to terms in m, which change the spacing of all the hyperfine lines
equally, they contain terms in m3 that make the spacing of the hyper-
fine lines greater at the outside than at the middle when 6 = 90°,
with the reverse effect at intermediate angles. This effect vanishes at
6 = 0°, where there are no off-diagonal terms if there is axial symmetry.
Thus quadrupole effects give a pattern that is symmetrical about the
centre, unlike second-order effects of the magnetic hyperfine structure,
which produce terms in m2.
A more important and more easily detectable effect of the off-
diagonal elements of the quadrupole interaction is that they give rise
to transitions in which the nuclear magnetic quantum number changes
by one or two units (Am = ±1, ±2) that would otherwise be for-
bidden. In a first approximation, where energies of the order (PjA)2
are neglected, these transitions occur as follows (in these equations
the value of P, which occurs in the energy, is given by eqn (3.62)).
Transitions \M, k±$)<r+\M — l,k^$):
Hyperfine energy
The intensities, relative to that of the Am = 0 transitions, are:
Transitions
Hyperfine energy
The intensities, relative to that of the Am = 0 transitions, are:
(01-41/flf2.4a)2{P|| sin2e/8J.7lf(Jf-l)}2x{(I + l)2-m2}{jr2-m2}. (3.68)
Here G is in general given by eqn (3.55), but if g(I) is isotropic the
x
rather complicated angular dependence of G is simply cos(0 — ip) as
I 9
can be seen from eqn (3.53). If the quantities g^ A y, g A are of opposite
L L

--- Page 198 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 183
sign, G may pass through zero, since there is an angle at which (6 — \p)
I
is 90°, corresponding to a situation where the electronic magnetic fiel
H at the nucleus is perpendicular to the external magnetic field H.
e
The general behaviour of the energy levels and transitions is illus-
trated in Fig. 3.13.
(a)
(b)
FIG. 3.13. (a) Schematic energy-level diagram for S = \, I = f. Of the transitions
shown, Am = 0 and Am = ±2 are allowed if the external magnetic field is along a
rhombic axis, while Am = ± 1 are allowed only in intermediate directions.
(b) Schematic representation of the spectrum corresponding to (a).
Second-order terms have been neglected; the intensities are not to scale.

--- Page 199 ---

184 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.14. Quadrupole effects in spectrum for S = 4, / = f, with no anisotropy and
The behaviour of these lines can best be appreciated from a simple
example. Figure 3.14 shows the spectrum at various angles for a
hypothetical ion for which S = \, I = f, A\\ = A = 5P\\, g\\ = g .
L L
At 6 — 0 only the four Am = 0 lines are allowed. As 6 increases the
Am = ±1 lines appear first, as doublets symmetrically situated about
the midpoints between all the m = 0 lines except at the centre of the
whole spectrum. From (3.65), since (M — %) = 0 in this case, the splitting
of these doublets is (4P& —2G) and so is greatest at the ends of the
Z
spectrum, but is asymmetrical because the terms 4Pk and 2G add at
Z
one end and subtract at the other. The intensities (eqn (3.66)) are
greatest when 6 = 45°, and fall to zero again at 90°. The behaviour
of the Am = ±2 lines is rather similar, except that the doublets have
twice as great a splitting (see eqn (3.67)) and are centred on each of
the Am = 0 lines except the outside lines; the intensity (eqn (3.68))
increases to a maximum at 0 = 90°K. Figure 3.14 is drawn for a case
of no anisotropy, but the behaviour is qualitatively similar when axial
anisotropy is present. The nuclear quadrupole effects then essentially
depend on the angle ip,. which may be very much closer than 6 to 0

--- Page 200 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 185
or TT if |(g||-41| lg A \ > 1, or closer to ±77/2 if this quantity is less than
L L
unity. If IG7||-4||/{7j/4j.)| is much greater than unity, the quadrupole
lines appear only at values of 6 close to 90°, and the whole of the
variation of P (which passes through zero at cos y = 3~^) occurs over
a small range of 6 close to 90°. On the other hand, if |(flr|j-4 u /g±A )\ < 1,
±
the quadrupole effects are spread over a wide range of the angle 0,
and may appear with considerable intensity when 6 is quite small.
In principle, observation of these quadrupole lines gives a good deal
of extra information, since the doublet splitting yields both |P[, from
which the nuclear quadrupole moment can be calculated if the electric
field gradient is known, and |6?j| from which the nuclear magnetic
moment can be obtained directly. Determination of the relative signs
of these quantities needs careful analysis.
Since both g and A are positive quantities, the lines for which ra
or Ic are positive occur always at the high frequency (low field) end of
a group of hyperfine lines. When 8 = J, the extra lines due to quadru-
pole interaction fall into doublets from whose splitting the relative
signs of P and G can be determined, since the splitting will be smallest
z
at the high frequency (low field) end if P, (?/ have the same signs, and
vice versa (see Fig. 3.13(b)). Inspection of the expressions for P, G
1
shows that observations at different angles then give the sign of P\\
relative to the signs of (A^g^jg^), (A^gjg^) which occur in G (eqn
z
(3.55)), together with the magnitudes of |P,,|, \g™\, \g™\, \A \, \A \.
}1 L
Further information about signs can be obtained from theory or
from consideration of second-order effects:
(1) atomic theory of the electronic ground state may give the sign
and magnitudes of the quantities g^ g , (A^/g^), (A/g±)), and
9 ± ±
(PjQ)' then the signs of (A^g^/g^), (A gJg(^) are known and from
9 L
the experiments one can deduce the sign of P and hence also of Q,
the electric quadrupole moment of the nucleus;
(2) the second-order terms in eqn (3.64) are of fixed sign and if
their effect is observable, the actual signs of P and G can be found;
x
(3) the second-order terms in eqn (3.56) are of fixed sign and by
observing their effect in intermediate fields the sign of P, and hence of
G (either directly or from the strong field experiments) can be found;
z
(4) if 8 — 1 or more, the signs of P and G are found from first-
z
order effects through the terms in AM in eqns (3.65), (3.67), provided
that the sign of M has been identified for the various electronic
transitions; otherwise the first-order terms give only the signs of P, G
z
relative to the fine structure terms.

--- Page 201 ---

186 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
In many cases sufficient resolution may not be available to determine
all these quantities. The term O is usually rather small so that it cannot
z
be determined accurately unless measurements are made at rather
high fields.
It must be stressed that the perturbation methods used above are
valid only if \PjA\ is quite small. From Fig. 3.14 it can be seen that
even for P\A = 0-2 the Am = ±1 transitions have an intensity about
0-4 that of the Am = 0 transitions at some angles; this reflects the
fact that the off-diagonal terms are by no means small compared with
the diagonal terms in the energy matrix. The effects of G and terms
z
of order A2/G on the intensity can also be quite important, as is
illustrated in Fig. 3.15.
FIG. 3.15. 'Perpendicular' spectrum of (Mg, Cu)La(NO) .24DO in a <110> direction
3 2 312 2
relative to the local fourfold axes: (a) at 0-3 cm"1, (b) at 0-8 cm"1. The increased
asymmetry at the higher frequency is due to the interaction of the larger external
magnetic field with the nuclear magnetic moment (Bleaney, Bowers, and Trenam 1955).
3.10. 'Forbidden' hyperfine transitions
In the paramagnetic resonance spectra of ions which have a more
than doubly degenerate ground state, split by the crystalline electric
field by amounts of the order 10~2 to 10"1 cm"1, and which also have
a hyperfine structure, a number of extra hyperfine lines have often
been observed which appear to correspond to transitions in which

--- Page 202 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 187
the nuclear magnetic quantum m changes by ±1. These were first
reported by Bleaney and Ingram (195la) in manganese ammonium
sulphate and manganese fluosilicate (both diluted); they appeared
when the external magnetic field was at an angle between parallel
and perpendicular to the crystal axis, and were inexplicably large in
intensity. They arise from second-order effects due to cross terms in
the spin Hamiltonian between the 'fine structure' splitting and the
hyperfine structure splitting, as shown by Bleaney and Rubins (1961).
We consider an ion with spin 8( > J) and a fine structure term of the
second degree with axial symmetry; for simplicity we shall assume that
the spectroscopic splitting factor and the hyperfine structure are both
isotropic, as is closely the case for ions such as d5 and /7, or d3 in an
octahedral field, where such effects are usually observed. The spin
Hamiltonian is then
(3.69)
If H is at an angle 6 to the crystal axis, and the Zeeman energy is the
largest term, the latter can be diagonalized by choosing the direction
of H as the new z-axis. With axial symmetry this change can be
treated as a rotation through an angle 6 about the ^/-axis, and the
Hamiltonian then becomes
Zero-order wave-functions \M, m) (where M, m are the electronic
and nuclear magnetic quantum numbers), which would be appropriate
to an ion in a very large magnetic field, are admixed by the off-diagonal
terms in this Hamiltonian. The effect on the energy of first-order
admixtures due to terms in A and D has been evaluated earlier, but
there are important second-order admixtures arising from cross
products of the terms in D and A. These consist of products
and other products formed by permutation of the components of S,
whose energy coefficients are of order (DA/Zeeman energy). Such terms
can be reduced to an equivalent operator

--- Page 203 ---

188 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
and if D < gfiH, we can take the energy denominators as
when (3.71) reduces to
The importance of the terms in (3.71) and (3.72) derives from the fact
that they contain operators connecting hyperfine levels with the same
M, which differ in energy only by AM. Hence a nuclear state \m)
becomes admixed with states Ira^} by amounts of order
and transitions of the type kM = ±1, Am = ±1 become allowed
with intensities of the order of the square of this admixture coefficient,
relative to the intensities of the ordinary transitions in which m does
not change. Detailed evaluation of these gives for the relative intensity
the expression
for the transitions
These lines are strongest in the electronic |+!)<->• l~i) transition,
and their angular dependence is such that they vanish parallel or
perpendicular to the symmetry axis, being strongest at 6 = 45°. Their
intensity is surprisingly large, for at this angle they would rival the
Am = 0 transitions in intensity for a value of Djg^H as small as TZ.
Under such conditions transitions with Am = ±2 will also have
appreciable intensity. It is readily seen that these arise from admixtures
due to the repeated application of the cross-product terms already
considered, together with cross-products of the form (DS+)(AS__I )2
+
and (DS^_)(AS+I_)2. By means of perturbation theory it can be showna
that the relative intensity of the transitions
is, assuming

--- Page 204 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 189
Positions of lines
The energy of the state \M,m) due to the hyperfine terms is
where all second-order terms have been included, together with the
important third-order terms arising from the cross products considered
above. An idea of the appearance of the spectrum is obtained by
omitting at first the energy terms which vanish at high frequencies;
then for an ion with S = |, / = f and D large enough to separate out
the three electronic transitions, the spectrum will be roughly as in
Fig. 3.16. For the central transition, the Am = ±1 lines occur as
FIG. 3.16. Schematic plot of spectrum for S = f, I = I showing the strong Am = 0
lines and the extra Am = ± 1 lines.
doublets, with splitting 2g^H centred on the points midway between
z }
the main lines, and with greatest intensity at the centre. For the outer
transitions, half of the Am = ± 1 lines are displaced by an amount A
towards the higher frequencies, while the other half are equally dis-
placed in the opposite sense; hence one line at each end of a hyperfine
set falls outside the main hyperfine structure lines. For an ion with a
higher value of S, the displacements are ±2A for the
transitions, and ±3^4 for the | ±1} <-» | ±1) transitions.
To this must be added the second-order displacements. As would be
expected, the term in A(D/g{}H)2 is the most important if D is large.
However, for the electronic |+i)<-> |— £) transition this term shifts
the two components of the Am = ± 1 doublets equally, and so does
not affect the splitting of each doublet, which is
Measurement of the splitting at different field strengths makes it
possible to determine both quantities in (3.76). This is not usually a
very precise method of determining g, but it may be of use in fixing
z
its sign (strictly only its sign relative to g can be found). If there were
a nuclear electric quadrupole interaction (with a corresponding term
as in eqn (3.62)), a term 2P(2m —1) would have

--- Page 205 ---

190 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
to be included between the modulus signs in eqn (3.76). This would
increase the splitting of the doublets at one end and decrease it at the
other. Thus equal spacing in the doublets serves as rather a delicate
test of such an interaction, though caution must be observed in using
this test, since terms in m2 which would give similar effects may arise
from higher order effects neglected in treatment.
The positions of the Am = ±2 lines can be easily seen. For the central
electronic transition they form doublets spaced by twice the amount
given by eqn (3.76), centred on all the main hyperfine lines except the
outside ones. For the outer electronic transitions they will be displaced
sideways, but by an amount twice that (in first order) for the
transitions.
These sideways displacements give the sign of A relative to g from
ly
observation whether the displacement is added to or subtracted from
that due to gjfiH in the outer transition with positive M. The sign of
M is, however, only identified if that of D is known; otherwise only
the sign of the product DAg is determined.
z
The general correctness of this theory has been verified by Bleaney
and Rubins (1961) in the spectrum of a single crystal of ZnSiF ,6H 0
6 2
containing about 1 per cent of F2+. This ion, 3d3, has a singlet ground
state with 8 = f, and the abundant stable isotope 51F has
The spin Hamiltonian (3.69) is applicable with the parameters:
The value of D is so large that perturbation theory can be used only
for angles where sin 26 is rather small; Fig. 3.17 shows the central
electronic transition |+J)<-» |— J), with H at 78° to the crystal axis.
At the shorter wavelength the Am = ± 1 lines are visible as unresolved
doublets, whose intensity at the centre is nearly equal to that of the
Am — 0 lines. At the longer wavelength the intensity of the 'forbidden5
transitions is considerably greater: both Am = ±1 and ±2 lines are
visible, while the Am — 0 lines have sunk to small intensity except at
the two ends. Exact diagonalization of the energy matrix using a
computer showed that a very complex spectrum would be expected;
for example near 6 = 45° the Am = ±3 and ±4 transitions should
be the most intense.
Graphs showing the computed variation of intensity of the various
'forbidden' transitions with angle are given by Bleaney and Rubins;
though applicable only to a special case, they illustrate the fact that

--- Page 206 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 191
the intensity can be remarkably large, so that the observed spectrum
may bear little resemblance to that expected from simple theory.
Obviously fine structure terms other than the simple DS* term can
Z
produce similar effects, and these have been analyzed for a cubic
term (see, for example, Cavenett (1964) who has compared the theory
with the experimental results for Mn2+ in cubic ZnSe).
FIG. 3.17. Central | -f J) < > \ — £) transition for dilute vanadium fluosilicate, with H at
78° from the crystal axis: (a) wavelength 1-3 cm (H /--' 8200 G), (b) wavelength 3'2 cm
(H ^ 3400 G); the line at the extreme right is abnormally intense through an accidental
coincidence with a line belonging to an outer electronic transition (Bleaney and Rubins
1961).
Although the appearance and intensity of the 'forbidden' transitions
is their most striking feature, they are naturally accompanied by
displacements of the Am = 0 lines from their expected positions.
These displacements must of course be taken into account in calculating
values of the spin Hamiltonian parameters from experimental measure-
ments on the spectrum; however, unless the orientation of the magnetic
field with respect to the crystal axes is very accurately known it is
generally best to make measurements in extreme directions where
less accuracy in orientation is required. This rather elementary rule
is quite general in its application, but we wish to emphasize that in
Endor measurements, where hyperfine structure can be measured with
great accuracy, the effects of the off-diagonal terms discussed in this
section can become quite remarkably important. In many cases serious
errors arising from their neglect can be avoided only by aligning the
magnetic field along a crystal axis to a high degree of accuracy.

--- Page 207 ---

192 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
3.11. Ligand hyperfine structure
When the magnetic electrons are not entirely localized on the central
'magnetic' ion, and their wave-functions include orbitals belonging to
the ligand ions, an additional splitting of the paramagnetic resonance
lines is observed if the ligand nuclei possess nuclear spins. This ligand
hyperfine structure (sometimes known as 'super' hyperfine structure)
is described by additional terms in the spin Hamiltonian, which have
axial symmetry about the 'bond' axis — the line through the centre of
the ligand ion and the centre of the magnetic ion. If this line is the
z-axis, the additional terms due to the one ligand ion L are
where IL is the spin of the ligand nucleus, S the fictitious spin of the
magnetic ion, and the parameters are analogous to those used to
describe the hyperfine structure of the central ion.
In general the magnitude of these parameters is such that when an
external field is applied large enough to bring the resonance spectrum
into the microwave region, we can treat the ligand interaction by
means of perturbation theory retaining only the first-order terms.
Then the allowed electronic transitions are those in which the orienta-
tion of the ligand nucleus remains unchanged (AmL = 0), and if the
external magnetic field makes an angle 0 with the bond axis, the
transition is displaced by an amount .4LmL, where
provided that the central ion has an isotropic (/-factor. If the (/-factor
is anisotropic, and its principal axes coincide with the x, y, z axes
appropriate to eqn (3.77) and the z-axis is the bond axis, the value of
J.L is given by an equation similar to (3.44),
where (I, m, n) are the direction cosines of the magnetic field with
respect to the x, y, z axes.
The effect of this additional interaction is to sub-divide each
electronic transition, or each hyperfine line if the central ion has a
nuclear spin, into (2/L + l) lines of equal intensity with separation AL.
, If the number of ligands is n (all identical), then the sub-division is
into (2/L + l)n lines, which with an ion octahedrally coordinated to
six ligand ions of nuclear spin /L = \ would give 26 = 64 lines.

--- Page 208 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 193
Fortunately the problem is not so serious as this calculation suggests,
since many of the lines coincide. If the magnetic ion is at a centre of
inversion symmetry, the ligand ions will always be identical in pairs,
and the line displacement due to such a pair will be AL(m+m ), where
I 2
m m each take on their (2/L + l) possible values. The ligand hyperfine
l9 2
structure due to such a pair is shown in Fig. 3.18 for values of /L
FIG. 3.18. (a)(b)(c) Hyperfine structure due to two identical ligand ions, with nuclear
spins (a) I = j, (b) I = 1, (c) I = f. (d), (e) Hyperfine structure due to 6 ligand nuclei,
all with / — J. In (d) the hyperfine constant is twice as large for two nuclei as for the
other four. In (e) all hyperfine constants are identical.
equal to ^, 1, and f. The structure consists of a set of equally spaced
lines of separation ^4L, but with an intensity which increases in arith-
metical progression towards the centre owing to the number of ways
in which (m +m ) can sum to a given value. The total intensity in (a),
1 2
(b), and (c) of Fig. 3.18 is drawn to be identical in each case; the higher
the nuclear spin, the greater the number of lines between which the
intensity must be divided, and the lower the intensity of individual
lines.
Two examples of the ligand hyperfine structure due to six nuclei,
where simple numerical relationships between the hyperfine parameters
produce a simplification of the patterns, are also shown in Fig. 3.18.
14

--- Page 209 ---

194 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
In (d) it is assumed that the hyperfine splitting of two identical ions
is twice that of the other four, so that lines from different ligands are
superimposed. Each nucleus is assumed to have / = ^, so that two
identical ions produce a 1:2:1 intensity pattern, and four identical ions
produce a 1:4:6:4:1 pattern. The resultant intensity pattern can be
regarded either as a superposition of five 1:2:1 patterns, with relative
intensity 1:4:6:4:1, or three 1:4:6:4:1 patterns with relative intensity
1:2:1. These can be identified visually by reading the intensity ratios
below the figure horizontally and diagonally, respectively. The case
where four ions are identical but different from the other two is typical
of a regular octahedron of ligand ions, with the magnetic field in one
of the planes of reflection symmetry normal to a twofold axis. The
ratio of 2:1 in the hyperfine splittings may occur at some particular
orientation of the magnetic field; if the coupling were purely dipolar,
it would be numerically twice as large for the two ions whose bond
axis is parallel to the magnetic field as for the four ions whose bond
axes are normal to the field.
Naturally the simplest pattern is obtained when all ions give the
same hyperfine splitting. This is shown in (e) for six ligand ions each
with / = J. The intensity pattern is 1:6:15:20:15:6:1, the same as
the binomial coefficients in the expansion of (x+y)6. The rather large
intensity ratios, typical of patterns due to a number of nuclei, often
make it difficult to see the outermost lines in the spectrum (to bring
the total intensity to be the same as in (a), (b), (c) the lines should be
smaller by a factor 2 in (d) and (e)). Thus the outside lines in (e) have
each an intensity which is only er (= (i)6) of the total intensity associ-
ated with any given electronic transition (which may already be sub-
divided because of hyperfine structure due to a nuclear moment on the
central ion). In the case of eightfold coordination to a regular cube
of fluorines (for example, a paramagnetic ion replacing a Ca2+ ion in
CaF ) the intensity pattern is 1:8:28:56:70:56:28:8:1 if all ions give
2
the same hyperfine splitting, so that each outside line would have only
of the total intensity.
A situation where all ligand hyperfine parameters are equal normally
occurs only for certain directions of the external magnetic field, and
also requires high symmetry in the complex. With a regular octahedron
of ligand ions, the magnetic field must be directed along a threefold
axis; with a regular cube or tetrahedron of ligand ions, the magnetic
field must be along a fourfold axis. Of course it will also occur if the
hyperfine parameters in eqn (3.77) are equal, in which case

--- Page 210 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 195
' the ligand hyperfine pattern will be independent of the orientation of
the magnetic field. Since there are a number of contributions to the
ligand hyperfine structure, the condition A^ = ±A^_ may be for-
tuitously obeyed; it will also be approximately correct if the contribution
from s-electrons on the ligand ion is much larger than the contributions
from any other source (including dipolar interaction).
The Hamiltonian for ligand hyperfine structure has been treated
above by means of first-order perturbation theory. This implies that
the hyperfine parameters are small compared with the electronic
Zeeman energy, and this condition is normally fulfilled. The treatment
given also implies that the magnetic hyperfine interaction be large
compared with the other terms in eqn (3.77), since we have diagonalized
the main portion of this term, as in § 3.8; then the allowed transitions
are those in which AmL = 0, whose positions are not affected (in first
order) by the nuclear electric quadrupole term or the nuclear Zeeman
interaction with the external field. Obviously there will be second-order
shifts of order ((AL)2lhv), but these are not usually important in an
electron spin resonance experiment, though they may well be in an
Endor experiment where the precision is much higher. For a nucleus
whose spin / is greater than J, the electric quadrupole term P^ may
be comparable with ^4L, in which case transitions with AmL ^ 0 may
have appreciable intensity; this gives a situation similar to that
considered in § 3.9, but the hyperfine structure is more complex
because of the number of nuclei involved. A further possibility is that
the ligand hyperfine structure is rather small, so that AL is comparable
with, or smaller than, the nuclear Zeeman term; this needs a rather
different treatment, which we give below.
For simplicity we consider only the case where the nuclear electric
quadrupole interaction is zero. However our treatment is not necessarily
confined to a hyperfine structure due to a ligand nucleus, so that we
will omit the superscript L and the restriction to axial symmetry. The
hyperfine Hamiltonian including the nuclear Zeeman energy is then
where the nuclear (/-factor may be anisotropic owing to indirect effects
as discussed in Chapter 18, but is assumed to have the same principal
axes as the hyperfine 'tensor' A. Suppose the external magnetic field
has direction cosines (I, m, n) with respect to these axes. Then the
electronic Zeeman interaction is diagonalized as in § 3.2, and on

--- Page 211 ---

196 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
retaining only the terms in S' in the magnetic hyperfine interaction the
z
nuclear Hamiltonian becomes
The coefficients of I , I I may be regarded as the components of an
x y) z
interaction which can be diagonalized by a suitable transformation of
the nuclear axes to a set (x , f/, z ) where the z -axis has direction
n n n n
cosines proportional to the coefficients of I , I , I. Then the interaction
x y z
may be written in the form KI', where
z
and the hyperfine energy is simply Km, where m is the nuclear magnetic
quantum number defined by the projection of the nuclear spin onto an
axis parallel to the vector K. The vector K may be regarded as the
sum of two vectors, one representing the interaction with the electronic
magnetic field and the other the interaction with the external field
(the latter vector is, of course, parallel to the external field if g(I) is
isotropic), as shown in Fig. 3.19. The length of the former vector is
proportional to S', and is therefore different in different electronic
z
states; thus the resultant vector K is different both in magnitude and
direction for different electronic states. In a given state with S' = M,
z
we denote it by K . In a transition (M, m) <^> (M1, m'} the additional
M
energy due to the hyperfine interaction will be mK —m'K , assuming
M M9
that the state M lies higher in energy than Mr. Here there will in
general be no restriction relating the allowed values of m' to m\ in
other words, changes in the nuclear magnetic quantum number are
allowed. The reason for this is that m, m' represent the components
of nuclear spin along the directions K , K ,, which are differently
M M
oriented. If we take a given state m referred to the K axis, and
M
transform it by a rotation that takes the z -axis from K to K ,, it
n M M
will be represented by a linear combination of all possible states m'
referred to the latter axis. Thus a transition in which the orientation
of the nuclear magnetic moment remains fixed in space must be
represented by a sum of transitions in which the nuclear magnetic
quantum number m, as defined above, changes to all values m' without
restriction, though in certain definite proportions that determine the

--- Page 212 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 197
FIG. 3.19. Diagram illustrating the vector addition of the electronic interaction with the
nucleus (AS^) and the nuclear Zeeman interaction (G) for the case of S — f. If the
7
nuclear gr-factor g(I) is isotropic the direction of G is the same as that of the external
7
magnetic field. The net hyperfine interaction energy in a state (M, m) is mK .
M
relative amplitudes in the various transitions. These proportions are a
function of the angle e between K and K ,, and are shown for the
M M
case of S = £, / = f in Fig. 3.20. From this figure it will be seen that
when the angle e = 0, the only allowed transitions are those in which
m' = m; this corresponds to the limit in which the electronic magnetic
field at the nucleus is zero (A = 0), and the only field is the external
field, which remains fixed in direction during a transition. When the
angle € = 180°, the only allowed transitions are those in which
m' = — mi this corresponds (for S = J) to the case considered earlier,
where the electronic magnetic field at the nucleus is much greater than
the external field, so that to a good approximation the net field is just
reversed in the transition Jf = £<->—£. (These allowed transitions are
of course those which were labelled Am = 0 in earlier sections, since
the positive direction for m was then considered fixed, instead of
reversing when M goes from +| to — J, as in the present treatment.)
The hyperfine displacement mK —m'K , vanishes for the transitions
M M
in which m' = m if K = K ,. The latter holds if A = 0, but it may
M M

--- Page 213 ---

198 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.20. Relative strengths of the various transitions (+J, m) <-» (— -|, m') as a
function of the angle e between Kj and K_| for S = |, / = f. D ,(Q, e, 0) is a matrix
mm
element of the three-dimensional rotation operator. (After Weil and Anderson 1961.)
also occur when A ^ 0 provided that the hyperfine energy is comparable
with the nuclear Zeeman energy. For the transition M = J*-* — J this
requires that the direction of A be normal to that of G , as in Fig.
7
3.21; this will occur only at certain specific orientations of the external
magnetic field, and also requires that the principal values g^A^ 9 A ,
y y
gA do not all have the same sign (or, a less probable alternative, that
z z
9(*}> vT* y^ ^° not a^ kave t*16 same sign)- Cases where the hyperfine
structure passes through zero in this way have been observed by Weil
and Anderson (1961) and Woodbury and Ludwig (1961).
When A > G we have a hyperfine structure of the normal kind
z
discussed in earlier sections where the extreme hyperfine lines are
displaced by ±AI in any electronic transition. If transitions occur in
which Am ^ 0, these lie within these extremes when S = |. This is not
necessarily true for the case discussed in this section, where A may be
smaller than G . A clear example arises in the situation represented by
z
Fig. 3.21, where the hyperfine transitions ( + J, m) <-> ( — |, m) are
undisplaced, but a transition with m' ^ m occurs at K(m—m'), where
Such transitions appear as 'satellites' either side of the
main line; if A < G they are displaced by an amount almost equal to
I

--- Page 214 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 199
FIG. 3.21. When the vectors A, G are perpendicular the values of K\ and K_\ are
7
equal, so that the net hyperfine energy for the transition vanishes.
From eqn (3.82) this requires that
or or that is the
vectors A (direction cosines and (direction cosines are
mutually perpendicular.
the precession frequency of the nuclear moment in the external field (cf.
Fig. 1.39), or a multiple thereof. Such transitions were first explained
by Trammell, Zeldes, and Livingstone (1958) as due to 'spin flips' of
the proton nuclear moments in the electron magnetic resonance spectrum
of various irradiated acids. When the ligand nucleus has / = \ we
would expect only one satellite line on each side of the main line, due
to the nuclear magnetic quantum number changing from +J to —\
or vice versa, but when a number of ligand nuclei have nuclear moments,
further satellites of smaller intensity can be seen due to 'flips' of more
than one nuclear moment. The theory of such transitions has been
considered in some detail by Baker, Hayes, and O'Brien (1960), and
compared with experiment for a number of lanthanide ions in CaF .
2
In conclusion, we point out that such satellite lines have a simple
classical explanation. If the external magnetic field is directed along
the z-axis, the Hamiltonian may contain terms such as To
take a concrete example, let the magnetic field be parallel to a fourfold
axis in CaF , with a paramagnetic ion on a Ca2+ site surrounded by a
2
cube of eight fluorine ions. The Ca—F bonds lie along the threefold

--- Page 215 ---

200 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
axes, so that a dipole on a Ca2+ site parallel to the fourfold or z-axis
produces a magnetic field at a F~ nucleus which is normal to the z-axis. If
the direction of this dipolar field at this site is taken as the #-axis,
then the interaction of the fluorine nuclear moment with this field
will give rise to a term of the form A S I , since the ^-component of the
ZX Z X
field is proportional to S . Conversely, the ^-component of the nuclear
z
moment of the fluorine ion will give rise to a magnetic field at the Ca2+
site in the z-direction. If the external field is much larger than the
local field of the paramagnetic ion at the F~ site, the fluorine nuclear
moment will precess about the external field at a frequency v = gjfiHIh,
n
and will give rise to a magnetic field t±H parallel to H at the Ca2+
site which oscillates at this frequency. Thus the electron moment will
precess about a field H+&H cos 2 7rv t, so that the precession may be
n
regarded as frequency modulated, with a carrier frequency v and side-
e
bands separated from this frequency by ±r and multiples thereof,
n
with decreasing intensity.
3.12. The spectrum of a powder
If a paramagnetic resonance spectrum is completely isotropic, it can
be examined in a powder (under which term we include a polycrystal-
line specimen) without loss of resolution. For this purpose local cubic
symmetry at the ion is a necessary but not a sufficient condition—for
example, the spectrum of an ion with a cubic 'fine structure' term of
the type discussed in § 3.4 is by no means isotropic. In a powder the
spectrum of any ion that is anisotropic will naturally be spread out;
to a considerable extent the detail will be lost, and the information
extractable from the spectrum may be drastically reduced. Such
information as can be retrieved comes usually from the limits of the
spread-out spectrum, since these normally appertain to ions whose
orientation is such that the magnetic field happens to lie along one
of the principal axes of the tensor parts of the spin Hamiltonian.
Little (if any) analysis has been attempted of the powder spectrum
of ions with less than axial symmetry, and we shall restrict discussion
to this case. The number of ions for which the magnetic field makes
an angle between 6 and 0+d0 with the unique axis is then proportional
to sin 6 dd, and since the spectrum is not affected by reversal of the
magnetic field we may restrict the range of angles to be considered to
lie between 0 and 7r/2, in which case the factor of proportionality is
unity. Assuming the spectrum is observed at constant frequency and
variable magnetic field, we need to relate the angle 6 to the magnetic

--- Page 216 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 201
field at which the spectrum line for an ion at this angle would be
observed. For this purpose we consider first an ion with an anisotropic
gr-factor of axial symmetry, for which (eqn (3.14))
From this relation we have
where the symbols H, H^ and H refer to the fields at which the lines
9 ±
appropriate to values g, g\\ and g would occur. Differentiation gives
9 L
This distribution function allows only for the random orientation of
the crystallites, and is equivalent to that given by Sands (1955). It
must be modified to allow for the fact that the transition probability
is also a function of angle (see Bleaney 1960); in other words, to allow
for the anisotropy in g*. Equation (3.16) shows that the intensity is a
maximum when the microwave field is normal to the steady field, and
we shall assume that it is so oriented. Then, in eqn (3.16),
and on averaging over r\ for a powder we have
so that the average value of is
This can be related as before to the field at which resonance occurs,
and for the sake of obtaining an expression for the distribution of
intensity which is non-dimensional we extract only the factor
On multiplying this by eqn (3.84) we find for the intensity distribution,
powder intensity
The main feature of this function is the infinity at H = H (see Fig.
L
3.22) which arises because no line width mechanism has been included.
Attempts have been made to remedy this deficiency (see, for example,
Searl, Smith, and Wyard 1961; Ibers and Swalen 1962) which give fair

--- Page 217 ---

202 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.22. Relative intensity distribution in the spectrum of a powder for an ion with
and an axially symmetric (/-factor, from eqn (3.86).
Curve curve
agreement with experiment for small anisotropy. With large anisotropy
a proper knowledge of the line shape (which may be a function of angle)
becomes much more important, particularly in concentrated sub-
stances.
In some cases effects due to hyperfine structure can be observed
in a powder, as each hyperfine line has its own limits for maximum and
minimum fields. An example is shown in Sands (1955) for the Cu2+
ion in glass, though it should be noted that his conclusion that A\\
and A have opposite signs cannot be justified from the observed
L
spectrum, as the hyperfine lines do not invert in order (as assumed by
him) in going from the parallel to the perpendicular direction (see
§3.8).
In his work on glass Sands found that a large number of samples

--- Page 218 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 203
showed lines corresponding to apparent anisotropic (/-values of approxi-
mately 6 and 4*2, which later work (Castner, Newell, Holton, and
Slichter 1960) suggests are due to Fe3+ ions with rather large crystal
field splittings. If the term DS* is large compared with hv, we are in
the weak Zeeman effect region. For an ion with S = f, the spectrum
in zero field consists of three well-spaced doublets corresponding to
respectively. In a weak magnetic field only
resonance within the latter doublet is observable, and it behaves like
an ion with an apparent S = % and g\\ = 2, g = 6. The latter corre-
±
sponds to the point of maximum intensity in a powder, and is presumed
to give rise to the anisotropic line at g = 6. The line at g = 4-2 has
been ingeniously explained by Castner et al., who assume that it is
due to a ferric ion with a fine structure term of the form E(S^— S*).
In zero magnetic field this splits the S = f levels into three equally
spaced doublets, the wave-functions for the middle doublet being
In a weak magnetic field this has an isotropic
(/-factor of (15<7/7) = -3^r = 4-28, in good agreement with the value of
s
4-27 observed by Castner et al. This unexpected result of an isotropic
weak field (/-factor for an ion with a highly anisotropic Hamiltonian
shows that great care is often required in the interpretation of a spin
resonance spectrum.
For an ion whose effective spin is greater than £, a number of elec-
tronic transitions occur whose position is generally sharply dependent
on orientation, owing to the 'fine structure' discussed in §§ 3.3-3.6,
even when g is isotropic. A conspicuous exception in such cases is the
l+i)^ | — 2) transition, which is not dependent on orientation as far
as terms linear in the fine structure parameters, provided that g is
isotropic (as is often true in such cases to a good approximation).
Thus, if terms of order (fine structure parameter)2/(//?# are relatively
unimportant, the central transition |+i)<—> |— J) can be observed in
a powder without much loss of resolution. If the source of such lines
is unknown, the spectrum gives little help in identification unless a
characteristic hyperfine structure is present; if g is isotropic the hyper-
fine structure is usually also isotropic and may be well resolved in the
central transition. The spectrum of a sample of modelling clay is
shown in Fig. 3.23; at a wavelength of 1-3 cm, six almost equally
spaced lines are observed which may be rather confidently attributed
to Mn2+, with g = 2-0013±0-0006 and \A\ = (88-7±0-3) x 10~4 cm-1.
At the longer wavelength of 3-2 cm, the spectrum shows a number of
additional lines, which may be identified as the 'forbidden' hyperfine

--- Page 219 ---

204 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.23. Spectrum of modelling clay at (a) 1*3 cm, (b) 3-2-cm wavelength. The
spectrum is attributed to the | + i) <-+ | — i) transition of a trace of 65Mn2+. High field is
towards the right (Bleaney and Rubins 1961).
lines discussed in the previous section. Their intensity may be used to
estimate a value of D, which cannot be determined directly, by using
eqn (3.73) averaged over all values of 6 from 0 to 77/2, with a weighting
factor of sin 6. This results in sin220 being replaced in eqn (3.73) by A-
An independent estimate of D in such a specimen or a powder can
be obtained from the splitting of the hyperfine lines Am = 0 shown in
Fig. 3.23(b). This results from the combination of higher-order effects
of two kinds: shifts of order D2lg/3H, which can be found from eqn
(3.35) and are the same for all hyperfine lines; and shifts of order
D2AI(g()H)2, which arise from the last terms in eqn (3.75), which are
proportional to the distance of the hyperfine line from the centre of
the spectrum. On combining all the terms that depend on the angle 6,
we find that the position of the transition is
shifted by an amount
with and where
and The number of ions whose spectrum
lies in the range of field H to H + A# is proportional to
and intensity peaks occur in the line shape when (A^/AZT) is infinite.
From eqn (3.87) the quantity sin 6(dO/dH) is inversely proportional to
cos 6{(y+2z)sm2d— y cos20} and thus becomes infinite at 0 = ?r/2 and
X
at 6 where tan20 = yl(y+2z). Peaks in the spectrum corresponding
2 2
to the two values of 6 will therefore occur at fields which differ by

--- Page 220 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 205
Since y is a function of m, the splitting of the hyperfine components
varies within the central electronic transition. When d is small, eqn
(3.88) reduces to
and since (5, e are proportional to m, the splitting varies linearly from
one end of the hyperfine structure to the other. In fact the splitting
is always greatest at the high field end (as in Fig. 3.23(b)), since this
corresponds to negative values of m if A is positive (and vice versa),
and d, e are proportional to (Am).
In making a similar calculation for the 'forbidden' hyperfine lines
allowance must be made for the fact that the transition probability
is proportional to sin220 (see eqn (3.73)) so that there is no intensity
peak at 6 = 77/2. Hence the forbidden lines are not split, though they
±
will be broadened.
In the modelling clay specimen examined by Bleaney and Rubins,
the average separation of the 'forbidden' Am = ± 1 lines at the shorter
wavelength was 16^1 G, in good agreement with the value calculated
from (3.76) using the known nuclear moment of 55Mn. The difference in
splittings at either end was less than 2 G, suggesting that any nuclear
electric quadrupole term P was less than 10~5 cm"1. The value estimated
for \D\ by the methods outlined above is about 0-01 cm"1. This value
was confirmed by the observation of two asymmetrical lines, assigned
to the electronic transitions |±f)<-» |±i), which move as
with intensity peaks at
3.13. Effects of crystal imperfections
We have hitherto assumed that all parameters have sharp values,
which might be true in a perfect crystal but is seldom the case in
practice. In this section we consider the broadening of resonance
lines due to crystal imperfections (broadening due to spin-spin interac-
tion and spin-lattice relaxation is discussed in Chapters 9 and 10).
We distinguish between two effects :
(a) mosaic structure, in which the crystal is not truly single but
consists of a multitude of small crystallites with slightly different
orientations. The spin Hamiltonian parameters are the same in each
crystallite, so that no broadening is observed in the resonance lines
in zero magnetic field, but the lines become broadened in a magnetic
field because (with a few obvious exceptions) the positions of the

--- Page 221 ---

206 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
resonance transitions depend on the angle that H makes with the
individual crystal axes. Such broadening is a minimum at directions
(such as the principal axes) where the resonance lines reach extreme
positions in the spectrum, and their first-order dependence on crystal
mis-orientation by a small angle vanishes.
(b) impurities, dislocations, and other defects set up stresses within
a single crystal, which may change the point symmetry at the para-
magnetic ion, or preserve the point symmetry but change the crystal
field parameters slightly. The changes in the parameters are not
independent of each other, since for any given ion they are linked to a
specific deviation in its ligand field. Simple examples illustrating this
point abound in Chapter 5, where it is shown that under axial symmetry
the values of g\\, g can often be related to a single parameter (see for
L
example, eqn (5.12)); thus even a strain preserving axial symmetry
may produce changes in g\\, g that are simply related to one another.
L
Whatever the cause, the effect of a variation in g differs from that of
variations in other spin Hamiltonian parameters because
so that at constant frequency v we have
and the root mean square width in field increases linearly with the
resonance frequency. On the other hand, for any parameter that splits
the spectrum lines as in fine or hyperfine structure effects, we have
and
showing that (6H2) from this cause will not be frequency dependent.
We now consider briefly the effect of mosaic structure. Variation
of orientation of the crystallites means that instead of H being along
a specific direction (I, m, n) with respect to the principal axes for all
ions, we have a spread in the values of Z, m, n. For small variations,
since , we have
and if H is along a principal axis for the median point of the distribution
(say along [100]) we have m = n = 0 and hence dl = 0. Then from a
formula such as (3.5) we have
and clearly dg = 0 when H is along a principal axis. Since all spin
Hamiltonian parameters such as D"', A, P (see eqns (3.30), (3.44), (3.47))

--- Page 222 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 207
appropriate to a strong external field vary in a manner dependent on
Z2, m2, ?i2, the spread in field (dH2) due to mosaic structure also vanishes
in first order when H is along a principal axis.
For simplicity we now restrict discussion to the case of axial sym-
metry. Then, from eqn (3.14), writing we have
and hence, using (3.90),
which obviously vanishes always if g^ = g (no anisotropy), but
L
otherwise only at the extrema 6 = 0 and 77/2. Similarly we have for
the second degree fine structure parameter in strong magnetic field
from which
which again vanishes at 6 = 0 and 77/2. For fine structure splittings of
higher degree there may be intermediate positions where the splitting
parameter is independent of small angular variations. For example, in
a cubic field the splitting parameter p = 1— 5(Z2/7i2+m2ft2+^2Z2) has
stationary values (independent of small variations in three mutually
perpendicular directions) along the fourfold, threefold, and twofold
axes, as can be verified from the formulae in § 3.4. Hence we would
expect spreading in the resonance line to vanish when H is along any
of these axes, as far as small random variation in crystallite orientation
is concerned. This has been verified by Shaltiel and Low (1961) for
Gd3+ in Th0 , where the splitting is predominantly due to the fourth-
2
degree cubic field parameter (in fact the splitting due to the sixth-
degree parameter has extrema along the same axes).
Whatever the cause of the variation in the fine structure parameters,
the resulting line widths in strong external magnetic fields are largest
for lines furthest from the centre of the spectrum, being just propor-
tional to the distance from the centre (the same is true for hyperfine
lines). Since the fine structure parameters involve only even powers of
the magnetic quantum number M, a transition such as
is not broadened in first order, though it may be in second or higher
order. Thus for an ion with half-integral spin, the 'allowed' transition
is not broadened in first order, nor are 'forbidden'
transitions such as for integral spin this holds for a

--- Page 223 ---

208 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
'forbidden' transition such as |+!)<-> | — 1). In either case
transitions (except | +i) <-»| — i)) are broadened in first order, and the
variation in line width for different transitions within the spectrum
gives a measure of the variation in the fine (or hyperfine) structure
parameters.
Attempts have been made (see Feher 1964, McMahon 1964, Stoneham
1966) to relate the excess line width (which is not necessarily isotropic
even in a cubic crystal such as MgO) to strain fields within the crystal.
When present, excess line width due to variations in the fine structure
parameters is generally larger than that due to variation in the {/-value,
though both are strongly dependent on the amount of orbital momen-
tum in the ground state. Representative values of the excess width
(which may vary of course from crystal to crystal) are given in Table
3.12, for the ions Mn2+, Fe2+, Ni2+ in MgO. In the latter two cases the
TABLE 3.12
Measured line widths for three ions in MgO, showing the variation
between different lines for each ion, and the large variation from ion to
ion. Since the excess line width is due to strains, variations between crystals
are to be expected, and the values given here must only be regarded as
representative order of magnitude results
Line width
Ion g Transition (G) Reference
Mn2+, 3d5, S = f 2-0014 | + J>^|-i> 0-7 Feher (1964)
l±f> <-» |±J> 0-9 to 2-4
|±*> -|±|> 1-4 to 4-5
Ni2+, 3d8, S = 1 2-1728 |±1> HO> 50 Orton et al. (1960a)
| +1) «-> | — 1) 3 Smith et al. (1969)
Fe2+, 3d6, S = I 3-428 |±1> -|0> 103 McMahon (1964)
| +1) «-> | — 1) 20
transition (which would be forbidden in the absence of
strains) is much narrower than the |±1}<—>• |0) transitions; coincident
with the latter a narrow line has also been observed which is attributed
to a 'double quantum' transition. This is essentially a
transition (hence its small line width) which involves the absorption
or emission of two quanta instead of one. Thus it occurs at the point
where the | ±1) <-> |0) transitions would occur in the absence of strain,
whereas the ordinary | +1) «-> | — 1) 'forbidden' single quantum transi-
tion occurs at twice the frequency at constant field strength, or at half
the field strength at constant frequency.

--- Page 224 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 209
3.14. The weak-field Zeeman interaction for non-Kramers
ions
Specific formulae for the weak-field Zeeman effect, where the Zeeman
splitting is small compared with fine structure splittings, have not so
far been considered except in the cases (see § 3.4) of ions with S — f, -J
in a cubic field. In a ligand field of axial symmetry a manifold of
(2$ + l) states will split into ($ +J) doublets if S is half-integral, or S
doublets and one singlet if S is integral. If the ligand field splitting is
large compared with the Zeeman (and other, such as hyperfine) interac-
tions, each doublet can be treated using an effective spin Hamiltonian
with an effective spin S = \. For a set of Kramers doublets this was
illustrated in § 1.8 by the example of a 4/1 ion in its ground state J = f.
The position for non-Kramers ions is rather different, and we first
illustrate the problem by means of another simple example.
Assume we have an ion with 8 = 2, subject to a strong axial splitting
represented by a term D{82 —1$($ + 1)}. Then, if a magnetic field H
z
is applied at an angle 6 to the symmetry axis (the z-axis) in the z#-plane,
the spin Hamiltonian is
Under the conditions gf$H <^ D, the energy levels and states are in
first order (see Fig. 3.24(a) and (b))
with no allowed transition in either doublet. In second-order perturba-
tion theory the calculation is complicated because the states |±1),
which are degenerate when cos 6 = 0, each has a matrix element of
with the state |0). Similar difficulties arise if a small
rhombic splitting term is present; not only
does this split the |±1) states in first order, but it also splits the
states in second order through their matrix element with |0).
A useful trick in such cases is to use as the basis states
which are simple linear combinations of the form
The energy matrix and energy levels for the spin Hamiltonian (3.96)
together with the term are given in Table 3.13, correct to
15

--- Page 225 ---

210 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.24. Energy levels corresponding to S = 2 for the spin Hamiltonian (3.96) with
(a) H = 0, (b) H parallel to z-axis (the symmetry axis), (c) H perpendicular to the z-axis.
second order in perturbation theory. This shows the following:
E = 0.
No allowed transition within the |±2) doublet, but for the
doublet each state is an admixture of the form | + 1, 0, —1) for an
arbitrary value of 6, and a transition is weakly allowed except when
H is along the z-axis (6 = 0) through the second-order Zeeman effect,
as shown in Fig. 3.24(c). (The splitting of the | ±1) doublet states due
to the second-order Zeeman effect can also be seen in Fig. 1.7 for S = 1.)
The states are again admixed, but both for and for
However, if either 6 = 0 or we can neglect the small splitting of order
of the states, we have for both doublets
energy levels of the form (see Fig. 3.25)
where for the doublet and for the
doublet neglecting small corrections to
that arise from admixtures of the other states. In each case the states
can be written in the form

--- Page 226 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTBUM 211
TABLE 3.13
Energy matrix and energy levels for S = 2 with the spin Hamiltonian
The perturbation denominators are written (W — W ), etc., because this
2 1
indicates the origin of the second-order terms and allows the displacement
of the energy levels by a diagonal fourth degree term of the form B®0% to
be easily included if present
Energy matrix
Energy levels
where
where and are the states in the
limit while in the opposite limit of the states
are The states (3.98) have a matrix element linking
them of so that transitions are allowed
between the two levels for an oscillating magnetic field along the z-axis
whose probability is given by (cf. eqn (2.51))
and which require a quantum

--- Page 227 ---

212 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.25. Energy levels and states corresponding to Table 3.13, but neglecting terms
of order (gpH)2/&W, where A W equals W — W± or W — W . The states in zero magnetic
2 1 0
field are shown on the left, the modified states in a field H, with a component H cos 0
along the z-axis, on the right.
An example of such a transition occurs in the ground doublet
(S = ±2) of Fe2+, 3d6, S = 2 in ZnF which has rhombic symmetry
z 2
(Tinkham 1956a). Such transitions are allowed transitions, though
from eqn (3.99) their probability diminishes with the inverse square of
the frequency, and the line shape is normal. The value of A will
obviously be larger for the |±1) doublet than for the |±2) doublet,
depending on E in the former case and on EZI(W — W) in the second
2 0
case. These conclusions are not substantially altered by the presence
of fine-structure terms of the fourth degree, such as B^O^+B\0\+B^0\.
The first of these is diagonal, the second has matrix elements between
states differing by 2 in S and thus behaves similarly to
z
while the last connects states differing by 4 in S and thus splits the
z
| ±2) levels in first order.
When E = 0, and H is zero, we are in the anomalous position that
if we take the doublet states as (±2), (±1) there appear to be no
allowed transitions within either doublet, but if we take any linear
combinations (which should be equally valid as basis states) such as

--- Page 228 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 213
for which there are matrix elements
we expect to find allowed transitions if the oscillatory magnetic field
is along the z-axis. In practice there will always be some perturbation,
such as a component H due to the external or the local field, or a
z
deviation from axial symmetry, which lifts the degeneracy and gives
properly defined states.
In this situation strains that upset the axial symmetry (e.g. strains
corresponding to E ^ 0) play a special role for non-Kramers doublets.
In the absence of any strain, and neglecting second and higher-order
Zeeman effects, we see that a field H with a component H along the
z
z-axis splits such a doublet, giving states such as |±2}, |±1> with no
allowed transitions, corresponding to g = 0 in the effective spin
L
Hamiltonian with 8 — \ for each doublet. A rhombic strain will give
rise to a small splitting A when H = 0, and even for a finite H the
z
states will be of the form (3.98) for which weak transitions are allowed.
If the strains are random, we do not expect sharp energy levels and
the resonance line will be broadened. A suitable spin Hamiltonian
under these conditions (see § 18.5) is, with § = J for each doublet,
for which the energy levels and transition frequency are given by eqns
(3.97), (3.100) and the transition probability by (3.99), with
The resonance line lies wholly on the high-frequency side of hv = g\\ f$H
z
at constant H, or on the low-field side of H = (hvlg\\{3) at constant
Q
frequency, the displacement being determined by the value of A2.
If the line shape is dominated by the spread in A2 rather than by any
other source of line width, we have, in place of eqn (2.51), for an
oscillatory field (H^) ^ along the z-axis
where is the normalized probability distribution in A2. If we
assume a random Gaussian distribution for A^, A we have
y

--- Page 229 ---

214 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
where A^ is the most probable value of A2. On inserting eqn (3.103)
into (3.102) and using eqn (3.99) we see that the transition rate is
zero for A = 0 and for A = oo, with an asymmetrical line shape. If
the resonance is observed at constant frequency and variable field,
and A < (Ha)), we can write H = H — h where
0 z Q
and instead of a frequency distribution we nave
where Then the transition rate is, as a function of
field strength,
for which a typical line shape is shown in Fig. 3.26(a), with maximum
intensity at h = h .
Q
FIG. 3.26. Comparison of line shapes for resonance in a non-Kramers doublet (a) due to
an oscillating magnetic field (H^ y along the symmetry axis, (b) due to an oscillating
electric field (Ei)± normal to the symmetry axis. The quantity x = (hjh^) where h,h
9 Q
are defined in the text; h = H—H = (Hco/'g iif$)—H so that increasing h (or x) means
0 Z zt
decreasing field strength H at constant frequency. The units for intensity are arbitrary
z
and not the same in (a) and (b).

--- Page 230 ---

THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM 216
If the paramagnetic ions occupy sites whose point symmetry is
such that there are one or more planes that are not planes of reflection
symmetry, there may be an electric dipole moment normal to any
such plane (see § 15.10). For a non-Kramers ion in a ligand field of
axial symmetry, the important term in the (anisotropic) interaction
of such an electric dipole moment with an applied electric field, which
we may write in the form
where E is the local applied field (which may be different from the
external field), will be
Such a term is allowed if the site symmetry lacks reflection symmetry
in planes containing the z-axis, and is thus possible, for example, for
C symmetry but not for C . If an oscillatory electric field (Ei)± is
3h 3v
applied normal to the z-axis, transitions can be induced within the
doublet, and instead of (3.102) we have for the transition rate
where
This differs from (3.99) in the important respect that it is a maximum
at A2 = 0, leading to a different line shape in which maximum intensity
occurs at the undisturbed frequency fico = g\\fiH , since a strain
Q
(A2 7^ 0) is no longer needed to produce an allowed transition. Under
these circumstances we have instead of eqn (3.106) a transition rate
as a function of magnetic field strength Ji = H —H at constant
0 Z
frequency given by
The line shape as a function of h when transitions are due to a perpen-
dicular oscillatory electric field only is shown in Fig. 3.26(b), the
maximum intensity now falling at h = 0.
In a resonant cavity at microwave frequencies a sample can be
placed in a position of maximum (-Hi)u or of maximum (J^i)j., and
(if sufficiently small) it can experience one field without the other.
The results of an experiment (Williams (1967)) on yttrium ethylsulphate

--- Page 231 ---

216 THE SPIN HAMILTONIAN AND THE SPECTRUM
FIG. 3.27. Comparison of absorption intensities due to oscillatory 'electric' and 'magnetic'
fields for the non-Kramers doublet ground state of Pr3+ in yttrium ethylsulphate. The
purely 'magnetic' resonance of Nd3+ ions in the sample and in another crystal is used as a
reference signal.
(a) Pr3+ \
(\)\ NV13+I m sample a^ position of maximum (E^)^ and minimum
(c) Nd3+ in second crystal used as reference signal for (a), (b);
(d) Pr3+ )
(e) Nd3+ m sample at potion of minimum (EJ^ and maximum
(f) Nd3+ in second crystal used as reference signal for (d), (e).
(After Williams (1967).)
(symmetry C ) containing small amounts of Pr3+ and Nd3+ ions, whose
3h
ground states are a non-Kramers and a Kramers doublet respectively,
are shown in Fig. 3.27. This shows from the comparison of intensities
that the transition in the non-Kramers doublet is primarily due to
(Ei) rather than to (#i)||, with a corresponding line shape in which
L
the maximum is close to h = 0.

--- Page 232 ---

4
, ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE
RESONANCE (ENDOR)
4.1. Introduction
IN hydrated crystals such as many paramagnetic salts of the iron
group, the magnetic ion is surrounded by a number of water molecules.
The line width of the electron spin resonance spectrum, even in a highly
diluted specimen at such low temperatures that the spin lattice relaxa-
tion time is too long to give an appreciable contribution, is of order
10 G, or about 30 MHz for g = 2. This line width is due mainly to the
local magnetic fields of the proton nuclear moments in the water
molecules. In a deuterated crystal this can be reduced by a factor of
about ^, because of the smaller nuclear magnetic moment of the
deuteron. In oxides such as MgO, CaO, or Th0 , where only a minority
2
of the nuclei have magnetic moments, the line width may be about
1 G or smaller (dependent on crystal imperfections), corresponding to a
few MHz in frequency units. This residual line width sets a limit to the
accuracy with which measurements of the position of the line may be
made, which in very round terms we may take to be of the order of
1 MHz.
In the determination of a hyperfine structure parameter from a spin
resonance spectrum, measurements must be made of the positions of
successive lines, and the parameter is deduced from the differences in
these positions. When anisotropy is present, it is best to make measure-
ments along each of the principal axes; not only does this give directly
the 'diagonal' components of any 'tensor' interaction, but the positions
of the spin resonance lines are then passing through extrema, and small
inaccuracies in orientation of the external magnetic field are least
important. The accuracy with which the magnetic hyperfine parameter
A can be determined is then limited by the considerations of line
width set out above. The other hyperfine parameters such as a nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction or the nuclear Zeeman interaction with
the external magnetic field are more difficult to determine because
they are usually rather small, and their presence is revealed in the
electron spin resonance spectrum only if the simple selection rule
Am = 0 is broken down. In many cases this means that measurements
must be made with the external field at an angle to the principal axes

--- Page 233 ---

218 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
of the hyperfine 'tensor', in order that otherwise 'forbidden' lines can
be observed. Even in cases where this is possible, the accuracy of such
measurements is rather restricted, and the determination of signs of
the parameters is, to say the least, awkward.
It is true that if measurements are made in zero or rather small
magnetic field, transitions of the type Am ^ 0 have matrix elements
comparable with those for which Am = 0 (cf. § 3.9 and Fig. 3.12), and
have been observed, for example, by Bleaney, Scovil, and Trenam
(1954). Such transitions have line widths comparable with those
quoted above, and they generally occur in frequency regions where the
sensitivity of a magnetic resonance spectrometer is inherently much
lower, with the additional drawback of having to sweep over a wide
frequency range.
The accuracy of such hyperfine measurements, and the total informa-
tion content, would be greatly improved if nuclear transitions could be
observed directly, particularly in strong external magnetic fields where
the nuclear Zeeman interaction is not unduly small. Unfortunately the
matrix elements for such transitions involve (in the strong field limit
of complete decoupling) only the nuclear magnetic moment, and the
transitions are correspondingly weak, though there is some enhance-
ment in practice of the oscillatory field at the nuclear frequency (see
below and § 4.3). In this chapter we describe a technique by which
these problems are solved. In §§ 4.2-4.8 we shall be primarily concerned
with hyperfine interactions with the nuclear moments of the para-
magnetic ion itself; these are usually associated with a resolved hyper-
fine structure in the electron resonance spectrum, and the approximation
is generally valid. They can also be applied to unresolved
hyperfine structure due to ligand nuclei (the cause of the line widths
mentioned above); the relevant hyperfine parameters are then usually
comparable with g^H. This rather different case is discussed in more
detail in § 4.9.
The difficulties are overcome by the method of Electron-Nuclear
DOuble Resonance, or Endor, invented by Feher (19566). The method
has been outlined in § 1.13, and here we illustrate the principles briefly
by reference to a system with 8 = J, / = J. In the absence of aniso-
tropy, the spin Hamiltonian is
In a strong magnetic field (gfiH > A > g^H) the levels are approxi-
z
mately as shown in Fig. 4.1. The electronic states M = +| lie above

--- Page 234 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 21fi
FIG. 4.1. The energy level scheme for S — J = £, showing the level populations in
thermal equilibrium in the approximation where d = (hv/kT) <^ 1, and d = (hvu/kT)
e e n
is neglected. The relaxation paths are indicated by broken lines, the vertical paths being
the more rapid (TI <^ r); other, slower, relaxation paths are omitted.
x
the M = — \ states by about gfiH, while the nuclear states with the
same value of M are separated by (±A/2—gz^H)9 if we ignore for the
present terms of order A2/gf)H.
In thermal equilibrium the populations are approximately
where <J = (gpH/kT) = (hv /kT), provided that (5 <l. Here hv is
e e e e
the quantum required for electron magnetic resonance, and for the
transitions
but we ignore the correction to d due to the term in A. This is
e
equivalent to ignoring the small differences in population of order
where Tiv is the quantum required for a nuclear
n
magnetic resonance transition, which is
for the and
transitions respectively. The population differences are maintained
by means of relaxation to the lattice through the paths marked by
broken lines, the vertical paths being usually the more rapid in action.

--- Page 235 ---

220 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
If only a weak electron magnetic resonance driving field is applied to
either of the Alf = ±1, Am = 0 transitions, the populations will
remain substantially unaltered; this is also true if we apply simul-
taneously a driving field at the nuclear magnetic resonance frequency,
and since this does not appreciably affect the intensity of the electron
magnetic resonance signal, the nuclear transition will remain undetected,
being too weak to be observed directly. If, instead, a strong magnetic
resonance driving field is applied to either of the A.M = ±1, Am = 0
transitions, the difference between the populations of the two levels
involved will be reduced and, in the limit of complete saturation, they
will become equal. If the relaxation time for the sloping relaxation
path is r the populations of the two m = — J states will remain
X9
unaltered for a time short compared with r if the m = + £ transition
x
is saturated; and vice versa (see Fig. 4.2(a)). Thus we have a population
FIG. 4.2. The level populations in the system S — I = £, after (a) saturation of the
electronic (-{-£, +i) <-+ (—i, +i) transition, (b) adiabatic rapid passage through the
same transition, in each case before the populations of the m = — \ levels are affected
through the sloping relaxation path. In (a) the populations of the two levels involved in
the electronic magnetic resonance are equalized; in (b) the populations are inverted.
difference of order d between adjacent nuclear levels m = ±J with
e
the same value of M, where formerly the population difference was
(in our approximation) zero. Under these conditions the effect of
applying a nuclear magnetic resonance driving field to the

--- Page 236 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 221
transitions is enhanced, though not usually enough to make
them directly detectable. However, if this driving field is strong enough
to induce nuclear transitions at a rate faster than l/r , the population
x
of the two w = + £ levels will be appreciably altered, with a resultant
change in the intensity of the electron magnetic resonance absorption
between these two levels. Obviously the effect is greatest when the
nuclear driving field is at either of the resonant values given by eqn
(4.3), so that we have a method of determining these two frequencies
(and hence measuring A and g^H) through the effect on the electron
x
paramagnetic resonance signal, with a sensitivity comparable with that
in a simple electron paramagnetic resonance experiment.
When the relaxation times are exceptionally long, as in the original
experiments of Feher on donors in silicon, it may be more convenient
to use the technique of adiabatic rapid passage. This results in inversion,
instead of equalization, of the populations of the two levels involved, as
shown in Fig. 4.2(b). Clearly the situation as regards the difference in
population between adjacent nuclear levels resembles that in Fig.
4.2(a) (actually the differences are twice as large), so that application
of the appropriate nuclear resonance frequency will again affect the
intensity of the electron resonance signal, as measured either by applica-
tion of a weak driving field at the electron resonance frequency, or by
a further traverse of the electronic line under adiabatic rapid passage
conditions.
The major advance in an Endor type experiment is that, not only
does it enable us to measure the hyperfine interaction constants and
the nuclear Zeeman interaction directly, but it also gives them with
much higher precision. In fact much greater (fractional) precision may
be obtained in the measurement of A in an Endor experiment than of
g in a simple electron paramagnetic resonance experiment. As indicated
in § 1.13, this is possible only when we are dealing with inhomogeneously
broadened lines. We shall not at this point repeat the reasons for the
high precision obtainable when this requirement is satisfied (see § 1.13),
believing that the experimental results reported later in this chapter
will serve as an adequate demonstration. Essentially it stems from the
fact that the nuclear resonance is taking place in the electronic field
H (see § 1.2), which is of order 105 to 106 G, rather than just the applied
e
field H, but the line width may still be only a few gauss.
This large electronic field also assists in enhancing the nuclear
transition rate w . As indicated above, this rate must be at least
n
comparable with l/r in order to affect the level populations sufficiently
x

--- Page 237 ---

222 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
to produce an observable change in intensity in the electron para-
magnetic resonance signal. For a nucleus with g ~ 10~3, and an r.f.
t
field amplitude H± = 1 G, we have w ~ 103 s"1 if the Endor line
n
width is 10 kHz, and 102 s"1 if it is 100 kHz; this is sufficient only if
r is greater than 10~3 or 10~2 s respectively, so that any enhancement
x
in w may be very important. The enhancement produced by the
n
electronic field H at the nucleus may be understood classically from
e
Fig. 4.3.
FIG. 4.3. (a) Direction of a steady magnetic field H along the z-axis, the component S
z
of the electron spin, and the electronic field at the nucleus H = — (ASlgj^); (b) when a
e z
low-frequency oscillatory field H! is applied normal to H, both the electron spin and the
electronic field H follow the resultant external field H t> setting up an additional
e to
oscillatory field (H^ at the nucleus, which is larger than H by a factor | (H/H)\.
l e
Suppose the steady external field H is applied in the z-direction; then,
assuming no anisotropy, the electronic magnetic moment corresponding
to a given value of S is also directed along the z-axis, and this sets up
z
an electronic field H at the nucleus, corresponding to the term
e
AS I = —g^HJ.^ which is also along the z-axis, but oppositely
Z Z
directed to 8 if (A/g) is positive. The application of an oscillatory
Z z
field H normal to the z-axis gives a resultant field H inclined at an
x tot
angle Q ~ (H^H) (assumed small) to the z-axis. If H^ is a rotating field,
then H rotates about the z-axis; if H is a linearly polarized field
tot x
along (say) the #-axis, then H oscillates about the z-axis in the
tot
z#-plane. Provided that H oscillates at a frequency low compared with
x
the electronic Larmor frequency (see § 2.4), the direction of the
electronic magnetization will follow H , setting up an oscillatory field
tot
(HJj at the nucleus, as in Fig. 4.3(b). Although (He)l is here oppositely
directed to H1? it is of order 6He = (H^]H)H^ = H^HJH), and so maya
be as much as 100 times or more larger than the externally applied field

--- Page 238 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 223
H As can be seen, the degree of enhancement is proportional to H
v e
and hence to S = M, and thus is largest for the largest values of \M\,
g
vanishing for M = 0.
This enhancement process is simply a form of 'paramagnetic anti-
shielding' (equivalent to an enormous 'chemical shift'), and is similar
to that which occurs within a domain in a ferromagnetic substance.
In a paramagnetic substance the situation may be complicated through
the presence of anisotropy. A quantum-mechanical analysis is given in
§4.3.
In the following section (§ 4.2) we carry out a somewhat tedious but
necessary analysis of the information that can be obtained from Endor
measurements. Also, § 4.3 contains a rather detailed analysis of the
enhancement of the nuclear transition probability, and the reader who
wishes to obtain a general picture of the power of the Endor method
may prefer to read first the outline of the elegant experiments of Feher,
given in §§ 4.4 and 4.5.
4.2. The Endor spectrum
In general, the accuracy of Endor measurements is such that they
must be fitted to a numerical solution of the spin Hamiltonian evaluated
by means of a computer—approximate methods of solution using
perturbation theory will not suffice. However, to discover what informa-
tion can be obtained from the Endor spectrum it is convenient to make
use of the formulae obtained in the previous chapter for the energy
levels, using perturbation theory. An important question is—what
information do the experiments give about the signs of the parameters
in the spin Hamiltonian, as well as their numerical magnitudes. To
simplify this problem we shall use the approximate formulae derived
in the last chapter for the energy levels in a strong magnetic field with
arbitrary orientation. As before, we assume that quantities such as
G = gfiH, A are necessarily positive, though the principal values of
the g and A 'tensors' may be of either sign. As a further simplification,
we consider first the case of an ion with effective spin S = J and
magnetic hyperfine structure only.
S = -|, magnetic hyperfine structure only, axial symmetry
A typical Endor transition is that in which the nuclear magnetic
quantum number changes by one unit while the electronic quantum
number remains fixed. We shall therefore consider always the transition
From the formula for the energy levels given in

--- Page 239 ---

224 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
eqn (3.54), this requires a quantum of energy
This formula applies to the case where H is applied at an angle 6 to the
unique axis of an ion with axial symmetry, so that G = g@H where g is
defined by eqn (3.14), and A is defined by eqn (3.51). G is the diagonal
f
part of the nuclear Zeeman term as defined by eqn (3.55), so that we
are making the implicit assumption that A > 6? . If linearly polarized
7
radiation is used to induce the nuclear Endor transition, we cannot tell
experimentally which of the two levels involved is the higher and we
therefore write hv within modulus signs.
n
The terms contained in eqn (4.4) are of three types:
(i) AM, which has the values +AJ2 or —A/2 according to the elec-
tronic energy level involved. Since the Endor transition is detected by
the change in the intensity of the electronic transition M <-> M— 1,
transitions in both the levels M = +£ and — \ will in general be
observed while sitting on a given hyperfine line in the e.s.r. spectrum
(see §4.6);
(ii) the two terms (A^A^ J4:AG)+G which occur together and are
L I}
independent of M and m. These two terms can be separated by
measurements at different e.s.r. frequencies (different magnetic fields),
since the term with G in the denominator varies as H -1 while G varies
T
as H. To obtain good accuracy in measuring the two terms separately
it is preferable to make measurements at widely different fields, but it
may also be possible to calculate the first term with sufficient accuracy
from the known values of the hyperfine parameters and g.
(iii) the last term, which involves both M and m in the form
M(2m — 1). This term vanishes for m = J, and otherwise may be
calculable with sufficient accuracy, as in (ii).
The different dependences on M and on m mean that by making
sufficient measurements all three terms can be evaluated separately,
while the two terms in (ii) can be separated using measurements at
different electron resonance frequencies. This raises the general
question, how many different measurements can be made? Clearly this
number can be multiplied by making Endor measurements over a
range of different electron resonance frequencies, and to define the
position we restrict ourselves to just one such frequency.

--- Page 240 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 225
In practice, the Endor transitions and
can usually be detected while observing
just the one electronic hyperfine line \M, m)<-» \M — 1, m). This means
that at a single value of H, four Endor frequencies can be measured
except for the hyperfine lines m = ±J, for each of which obviously
only two are possible. Altogether, for an ion with effective spin 8 the
number of Endor frequency measurements possible is 167'S, and this
usually means that the hyperfine parameters are overdetermined, giving
a valuable check on internal consistency.
We consider now the question of the determination of signs. Since
we can measure only only can be found, but
as pointed out above these two terms can be measured separately by
observations at different field strengths. Their relative sign is also
determined in this process, and since we take A, 0 to be positive
quantities, we know the sign of G relative to A\\. However, from eqn
z
(3.55),
so that if we measure in the direction 6 = 0 we find, relative to A^
9
the sign of g(^g\\A y, and the final result is a determination of the sign
of <7||7) relative to that of g^. This is the same result as is obtained by
observation of the 'forbidden' lines in the electron spin resonance
spectrum itself, as outlined in § 3.8. Measurement at d = 90° would
give the sign of G (i.e. of g(±}gj_A ) relative to that of A^, but as the
z ±
signs of g and A are indeterminate, no fresh information is obtained.
L ±
It is possible, of course, to use circularly polarized radiation for the
Endor transitions. If the largest term in eqn (4.4) is AM, we would
need right-handed polarization for the transitions m<-»m — 1 in the
electronic level M = + |, and left-handed polarization for those in
M = —\. For simplicity, we consider just the transitions m = +J to
— |. If those requiring right-handed polarization have the higher
frequency, then G + (A^AZ I4AG) is negative (and vice versa), so that
I L :
we find the sign of A ^ unambiguously, together with that of the product
(0j|7>(7||)> but the latter still gives the sign of g{^} only relative to that of
S = -£, axial symmetry, including electric quadrupole interaction
We now include a term P\\{I* — J/(/ + l)}, which means that for an
arbitrary orientation of the external magnetic field we must add to the
energy in first order (i.e. if P < A] an amount
16

--- Page 241 ---

226 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
where P is given by the equation
There are also second-order terms in m\M and m3/Jf , whose coefficients
involve only the squares of g\\, g , A\\, A and are therefore fixed in
L L
sign; these terms are given in eqn (3.63). In an Endor transition for
S = | these give rise to terms that behave like M, Mm, and Mm2, which
can all be sorted out by their angular dependence and give no further
information. They vanish if measurements are made with the magnetic
field along the unique axis, and considerable complications are thus
avoided.
Essentially therefore we have to add to \hv \ for the transition
n
m<->m — 1 an increment P(2m — 1). In its dependence on m alone it
differs from any of the terms in eqn (4.4) and it can therefore be
evaluated separately by making sufficient measurements of different
hyperfine lines. Since A is positive, the e.s.r. lines for positive m come
at the low-field end of the spectrum for constant frequency (and vice
versa). If we take the mean of the Endor transitions for a given value
of m (i.e., the mean of the measurements for M = +J and — J), we
obtain the quantity
and since we know the sign of m, we can determine the sign of P relative
to those of A || and G . But the sign of G can be found relative to that
x z
of A || , as already shown, so that we can find the sign of P (and hence
of P||) relative to that of A\\.
The conclusions we have reached about signs for the case of S = \
agree with those stated by Halford (1962), and can be summarized as
follows :
(i) Endor gives the sign of g(\f} relative to that of g\\ ;
(ii) Endor gives the sign of PH relative to that of A \\ .
In addition, if circularly polarized nuclear radiation is used,
(iii) the sign of A | (and hence of P\\) can be found.
(
(The fact that the net oscillatory field at the nucleus may be oppositely
directed to the external oscillatory field (see end of § 4.1) does not cause
any complication, here, since both must rotate in the same sense.)
In cases where an ion with S = J interacts with two nuclear spins,
information concerning the relative signs of the two hyperfine param-
eters can be obtained by driving two Endor transitions simultaneously
(see Cook and Whiffen 1964, 1965).

--- Page 242 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 227
axial symmetry, magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole hyper-
fine structure
The more general case of 8 > J can now be disposed of quite simply.
From eqns (3.54) and (3.62) the Endor quantum for the transition
is
which differs only from our previous expressions in that the second
term contains the quantity {M2—S(S + 1)}, which is just —\ for
S = \. This means that we can separate this term from G by making
z
measurements using different electronic transitions, without needing to
make measurements at two different e.s.r. frequencies. The Endor
transitions for different values of \M\ come at very different frequencies,
and there is no difficulty in identifying the value of \M\ concerned. As
regards signs, the Endor spectrum yields (as before) the sign of g(*]
relative to that of g \\, and the sign of P\\ relative to that ofA\\. However
the sign of the fine-structure terms can be found by measurements of
the e.s.r. spectrum at low temperatures, and hence the sign of A\\ from
the second-order effects in the e.s.r. spectrum, as described in §§ 3.3, 3.6.
In this case the sign of P\\ can be established.
In eqn (4.5) the second-order terms in P2jA have been omitted; in
fact they vanish if measurements are made along the unique axis. It
is almost essential to make Endor measurements along such an axis
for reasons of precision. Not only are the off-diagonal terms tiresome
to evaluate (though this can be done by a computer), but they cannot
be evaluated correctly unless the exact orientation of the external
magnetic field relative to the crystal axes is known (which cannot be
found by a computer). When S > -|, the second-order terms of the type
considered in § 3.10, which are of order (^./C?) x (fine structure parameter),
become of tremendous importance and must be eliminated by careful
alignment of the crystal so that the external magnetic field is exactly
along a principal axis. Experimentally, the alignment of the crystal
can be checked directly in the e.s.r. spectrum by observing the intensity
of the 'forbidden' transitions due to these second-order terms, and
adjusting the orientation to make their intensity as small as possible.
With exact alignment they should vanish, and in practice the degree of
mis-alignment can be estimated from their intensity, so that the
resultant error in the Endor measurement can be gauged and, in

--- Page 243 ---

228 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
favourable cases, reduced to an insignificant amount. For example,
Baker and Hurrell (1963) estimate that misalignment by 0-1° could
produce an unresolved splitting of 40 kHz in Endor of Eu2+ in CaF .
2
A ligand Endor spectrum can also be used to obtain exact alignment
(see Bessent and Hayes 1965, Davies and Hurrell 1968).
In this connection, measurement of the Endor transitions using the
highest possible frequency for observation of the e.s.r. spectrum is
clearly very desirable because
(i) second-order terms arising from matrix elements between
different electronic levels become less important, since the energy in
the denominators of a perturbation expansion is maximized; thus
alignment of the crystal becomes less critical. In addition, line widths
are reduced, as mentioned in § 4.10;
(ii) in many Endor experiments the prime motive is determination of
g(I) through measurement of the energy G which is linearly proportional
z
to H. The value of g(I} can therefore be measured with greater accuracy
if a high e.s.r. frequency (larger magnetic field) is used. Obviously this
does not help to separate the true g from the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman
z
terms, and since these are largest when there are nearby electronic
levels they can then be calculated accurately only if the electronic states
and levels are known rather well.
The importance of the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman terms can be seen
from a rough estimate. The change in frequency that they produce in a
nuclear transition is of order r(^L/A), where v is the microwave
e e
frequency, A the hyperfine constant, and A the energy of the relevant
excited state. Taking v = 1010 Hz, we need (-4/A) to be less than
e
10~6 if the shift is not to exceed the line width, which may be only
104 Hz. This inequality is fulfilled usually only for a half-filled shell
such as d5 or/7, where A is unusually small and A exceptionally large.
In an extreme case such as Ho2+ in CaF , which has a low-lying excited
2
state at about 30 cm"1 (see Lewis and Sabisky (1963)), the apparent
value of g(I) is some forty times larger than the true value of g.
z
4.3. Enhancement of the nuclear transition probability
We consider now the question of the nuclear transition probability,
since this is important if the nuclear transition rate is to compete with
spin-lattice relaxation processes that are electronic rather than nuclear
in origin. In addition to the direct coupling of the oscillatory field with
the nuclear magnetic moment, we have two other effects:
(a) the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect, discussed in § 1.8(e), § 3.7, and
more fully in § 18.1; this arises from the admixture of excited

--- Page 244 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 229
states by the electronic Zeeman interaction, and in some cases
can be much larger than the true nuclear Zeeman interaction
(cf. §§4.2 and 4.8);
(b) modulation of the electronic hyperfine field by the applied
oscillatory field, as outlined at the end of § 4.1.
In fact both these effects are essentially similar; we can incorporate
(a) with the direct nuclear Zeeman interaction by using the same
approach as in the static spin Hamiltonian, and follow this by a separate
calculation of (b).
On this basis, the modified nuclear Zeeman effect is written in the
form (cf. eqn (3.42))
where (x, y, z) are the principal axes of the nuclear 'gr-tensor', which
includes the direct interaction with the nuclear moment as well as the
'pseudo-nuclear' Zeeman interaction. For simplicity, we take not
the most general case of an arbitrary orientation of the static field
H, but (as in § 3.2) assume H lies in the plane y = 0 at an angle 6 to
the z-axis (cf. Fig. 3.1). We assume that all tensor quantities have the
same principal axes, and allow all principal values to be unequal;
however, if the principal values for the x, y axes are equal, so that the
z-axis is the unique symmetry axis, there is no loss of generality in our
assumption about H since we can always choose the #-axis so that H
lies in the #z-plane. Without appreciable danger of confusion, we call
the nuclear oscillatory field H and assume it to be linearly polarized in
1?
a direction making an angle r\ with the £/-axis, whose projection on the
#z-plane makes an angle 6 with the z-axis (cf. § 3.2). Then the com-
l
ponents of H! are
In a strong steady magnetic field H, we diagonalize the static Hamil-
tonian as in Fig. 3.10 by rotating the nuclear axes about the ?/-axis
through an angle y>, a procedure that is appropriate if the magnetic
hyperfine term dominates the nuclear Zeeman interaction; then

--- Page 245 ---

230 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
where the primes refer to the axes (# , y , z ) and
n n n
Our oscillatory nuclear Zeeman interaction then becomes, combining
eqns (4.6)-(4.9),
The rate at which nuclear transitions are induced is proportional to the
sum of the squares of the coefficients of I' , I' so that by analogy with
x y
eqns (3.8a) and (3.16) we can define an oscillatory nuclear (/-factor g[Z)
whose value is given by
It is clearly best to make either sin r\ or cos r\ = 1, according to which
of the multiplying factors is the larger. In the former case the optimum
value of #! is given by
so that the optimum value of 0 is ^ + 77/2 if there is no anisotropy in
X
g(I), as we should expect, and 0 + 77/2 if there is no anisotropy in g(I\
g, or A.
We now consider the effect of Hj acting through the electronic
magnetization and the hyperfine interaction. From eqns (3.8a) and
(3.15) the electronic oscillatory spin Hamiltonian is
where
if we assume that 6 = 0 + 77/2, so that H! is normal to H. The primes
l
on the components of S indicate that these refer to the axes (x, y , z)
e e e
in which the static electronic Zeeman interaction is diagonal (see § 3.2).

--- Page 246 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 231
Since we are interested only in nuclear transitions that depend on the
components I' , I' , we combine (4.13) with the relevant part of the
x y
hyperfine interaction, which from (3.52) is
In the combination we use the terms S' S'_ from (4.13) and (4.15), and
+9
vice versa to obtain terms diagonal in S', which are found to be alto-
z
gether
and if we assume that
reduces to
on substituting for g , g and omitting the term in I'.
lx ly z
To be strictly logical we should add the coefficients of I' , I' in (4.17)
x y
to those in (4.10) (with 0 = 0 + 77/2), and take the sum of the squares
X
of the resultant coefficients to give a net value of (g^)2. However the
two mechanisms are so disparate in size that this is hardly worth while.
Clearly we should again make sin r\ or cos r\ = 1 in (4.17), according to
which coefficient is the larger, and with high anisotropy they can be
quite different in magnitude. In the absence of anisotropy (4.17) and
(4.10) with 0! = 6 + 77/2 add to
where the coefficient H^AMjH) is just equivalent to the classical value
deduced at the end of § 4.1, which would correspond to an oscillatory
Hamiltonian
since g^H = —AM, by comparison with eqn (1.28).
z e
If we refer to the formulae used to derive the static pseudo-nuclear
Zeeman effect (e.g. eqn (1.97)), we can see that the mechanisms involved
in deducing eqns (4.10) and (4.16) are basically similar. The oscillatory
electronic Zeeman interaction induces an oscillatory component in the
electronic magnetic moment (by admixture of other electronic states)
proportional to H, which then interacts with the nuclear magnetic

--- Page 247 ---

232 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
moment through the magnetic hyperfine interaction. In general, (4.16)
gives the larger effect, because the admixed electronic state comes from
a level only distant gfiH in energy, whereas (4.10) involves levels
separated by a ligand field splitting (or other larger interactions). If the
ligand field leaves low-lying excited states, and we apply a static field
H such that g()H becomes comparable with the energy of another ligand
field state, the two expressions (4.10), (4.16) will become comparable
in magnitude, since the energy denominators required in the perturba-
tion theory will be of the same order. We have also inherently assumed
that H > H, since essentially we diagonalized the hyperfine inter-
e
action (as far as possible) by choosing nuclear axes such that z is
n
parallel to H . If H and H are comparable in magnitude (as often
e e
occurs in ligand hyperfine structure), we should use a more sophisticated
approach analogous to that in § 3.11 following eqn (3.81). However the
enhancement factor for the nuclear transition probability is then
relatively small, and usually of insufficient importance to justify a more
elaborate calculation. We content ourselves by remarking that the
optimum direction of ^ for an Endor nuclear transition, if g(I) is
isotropic, is simply normal to the appropriate vector K in Fig. 3.19.
M
From eqn (2.51), the rate at which nuclear transitions are induced
between levels m and m ± 1 is
where we have written (H ) to remind ourselves that this must be at
ln
the nuclear (Endor) frequency, and (g^)2 is given by (4.11) modified to
include the analogous terms from (4.17). /(co) is the appropriate shape
function, which we take to be that of a spin packet; if the half width at
half intensity of the latter is (Aco/27r), then at the centre of the Endor
line we have from (2.65) for a narrow line,
Use of a circularly polarized nuclear field
When we have anisotropy and the steady field H is in an arbitrary
direction, analysis of the Endor signal resulting from the use of a
circularly polarized nuclear oscillatory field is exceedingly tedious, and
not worth while in view of the fact (see § 4.2) that accurate measure-
ments are made usually with H along a principal axis. We therefore
assume that H is along the z-axis, and that H is normal to it; however
ln
we do not assume that we have axial symmetry about the z-axis, since
the analysis is then applicable to the x y axes by using a cyclical
9

--- Page 248 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 233
interchange x -> y -> z. The oscillatory nuclear Hamiltonian is then,
instead of eqn (4.6),
i where we have used a transformation similar to that between eqns
(3.17) and (3.18).
i The operator /_ induces the transition m->m — 1, for which the
required energy is (in first order)
, which may be positive or negative. By an analysis similar to that
i following eqn (3.18) we find that the rates at which nuclear transitions
are induced vary as follows.
Sign of Transition rates are proportional to
Right-hand sense Left-hand sense
positive
negative
This table shows that the sign of W — W _ (and hence of the largest
m m 1
term in this energy) can be found by observing the Endor intensities
with right- and left-handed nuclear signals, provided the relative signs
of g£7) and g(J} are known.
If the oscillatory field inducing nuclear transitions is due primarily
to the effect of 'stirring' the hyperfine field rather than to direct inter-
action with the nuclear moment, the oscillatory Hamiltonian under the
conditions assumed above is
from which a similar table is readily constructed, and it is apparent that
we need to know the relative signs of (gyA) and (gA).
x y y
If we have axial symmetry about the z-axis, then
and only one sense of the nuclear circularly polarized signal is effective.
If A M is the largest term in W — W _ this gives the sign of
Z m m l9
(those of are indeterminate).

--- Page 249 ---

234 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
4.4. Endor on donors in silicon
The method of Endor was invented by Feher (19566), and it is fitting
that we should start discussion of experimental work by outlining his
comprehensive and elegant experiments on donors in silicon. As we do
not discuss elsewhere shallow traps in semiconductors, we give here a
very brief resume of the essential features. The donors used are
principally the group V atoms P, As, Sb, which have one electron more
in their outer shells than silicon. When these atoms replace a silicon
atom in the silicon lattice, four of the outer electrons are used in forming
bonds with the four immediate silicon neighbours of the diamond-type
lattice, as in the case of a silicon atom itself. The extra electron of the
group V atom may remain attached to the donor, giving it one unpaired
electron spin; or it may be excited in to the conduction band to act as a
conduction electron, in which case the ionized impurity atom is left
with one net positive charge and no unpaired electron spins. The
'ionization potentials' required for this process are given in Table 4.1;
TABLE 4.1
Data of Feher (1959) for three group V donors in silicon. V is the ionization
{
potential to the conduction band; g the spin resonance g-factor relative to
that g = 1-99875(10) for conduction electrons in a more highly doped
G
sample, A is the magnetic hyperfine constant for the isotope whose mass
and nuclear spin are also given
Fi Isotope Ml Nuclear
Donor atom meV ff-ffc mass (MHz) spin
Sb 39 -l-7(l)xlO-« 121 186-802(5) A
2
123 101-516(4) i
P 44 — 2-5(1) XlO-4 31 117-53(2) i
As 49 — 3-8(1) xlO-4 76 198-35(2) 2
since for room temperature the equivalent voltage (eV = kT) is about
25 mV, the electrons will be practically all in the lower energy state,
bound to their parent donor atoms, at helium temperatures. The
substance is then a good electrical insulator so long as the donor
concentrations are of order 1016 cm~3, as used in Feher's experiments;
conduction electrons occur in more highly doped samples, with donor
concentrations •—'1018 cm~3, and give a narrow homogeneously
broadened electron spin resonance line.
The ground state of the extra electron attached to a donor is 2$i,
though its wave-function is very much more extended than in a free

--- Page 250 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 235
atom and has a finite density at many neighbouring silicon nuclei. The
electron spin resonance spectrum occurs at a gr-value very close to the
free electron value, and shows hyperfine structure due to interaction
both with the nuclear magnetic moment of its parent donor and with
the nuclear moments of silicons on neighbouring lattice sites provided
these are occupied by the odd isotope 29Si, for which I = %, and whose
natural abundance is about 5 per cent. The effective spin Hamiltonian
for the electron bound to its parent donor is therefore (8 = J)
where g, A are isotropic and g is the true nuclear (/-factor. To this we
z
must add the interaction with neighbouring 29Si nuclei for which, with
/ = A, we have
where the summation is over all lattice sites L occupied by 29Si nuclei.
The first term in (4.22) represents the interaction arising from the
electron density of «s-like character at the 29Si nucleus due to the donor
electron; the second is the 29Si nuclear Zeeman interaction in the
external field H; and the third arises from magnetic dipole interaction
between the 29Si nuclear moment and the extended electron spin
magnetization of the donor electron, the direction z' being that line
joining the donor nucleus to the 29Si nucleus at lattice site L. In a strong
external magnetic field H the energy levels are approximately
where 6 is the angle between H and the z'-axis, and the approximation
we have made is that
In an ordinary electron resonance transition
we have for
in which the hyperfine splitting Am due to the donor nucleus is usually
well resolved, while that from the remaining terms due to the 29Si
nuclei is not and gives an inhomogeneously broadened line. The nuclear

--- Page 251 ---

236 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
(Endor) transitions occur for giving
for the donor nucleus, and for the silicon nuclei at AJ^f = Am = 0,
giving
where the ± signs refer to the electronic states M = ±i respectively.
The frequencies (4.25) are close to the values of A given in Table 4.1,
while the frequencies (4.26) give two sets of lines around
at H = 3000 G, and the AL A% terms range from a few MHz for
9
nearby 29Si nuclei down to zero for the more distant nuclei.
Because of the very long spin-lattice relaxation times in silicon
(T! ~ 1 h), it is possible to carry out either adiabatic rapid passage
experiments or saturation experiments, both for the electronic and
nuclear transitions (cf. §§ 1.12, 1.13). In the work of Feher (1959), a
small part of the inhomogeneously broadened line was saturated by a
high-power pulse, so that a 'hole was burnt' in the line, as shown in
Fig. 4.4, since only the spin packets within that part of one hyperfine
line at the resonance frequency were saturated. If the electron resonance
signal at this same frequency is now monitored at a low level, the
FIG. 4.4. 'Burning a hole' in the electronic transition ( + J, +J) <-> (— £, + J) for phos-
phorus donors in silicon. After a strong saturating pulse is applied at H , the electronic
0
magnetic resonance signal is traversed at low power level, to show that only the spin
packets at the resonance frequency for the saturating signal are affected. If the electron
resonance signal at this frequency is monitored at low level, an increase in signal is
observed when Endor transitions at either the donor or 29Si frequencies are induced. A is
the hyperfine splitting for the 81P donor (I = J) nuclei; the inhomogeneous line width
is due to interaction with the nuclear moments of 2flSi nuclei (/ = £) on neighbouring
lattice sites. The time scale for the traverse at low power level is indicated at bottom
left, and the magnetic field scale at the right. (After Feher 1959.)

--- Page 252 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 237
application of a strong oscillatory field at either v or V will cause a
n L
change in level. This will be of order <5/2 if the populations of the two
e
nuclear levels involved are inverted by an adiabatic rapid passage
experiment, or of order <5/4 if the populations are equalized through
e
saturation. The two alternatives are illustrated in Fig. 4.5.
FIG. 4.5. Level populations in an Endor experiment before spin-lattice relaxation can
act to restore thermal equilibrium.
(a) After the electronic transition (+£, -fj) <-> (— J, +J) has been saturated, (b) In-
version of the nuclear populations in the M = + i states following adiabatic rapid
passage through the Endor (+J, +4) <-> (+i, — J) transition, (c) Equalization of the
populations in the M = -f- \ states following saturation of the same Endor transition.
The levels are drawn for the system S = I = \. Similar effects are obtained by satur-
ating the other electronic transition followed by adiabatic rapid passage through or
saturation of the other Endor transition.
In the process of burning a hole in the line we are saturating just
those spin packets consisting of electron spins that experience a given
local field from the neighbouring silicon nuclei. When Endor transitions
are induced which change the orientation of these neighbouring nuclei,
the local field will be altered both for the saturated packets and also
for unsaturated spin packets consisting of other electron spins to which
the same nuclei are also neighbours. Effectively this transfers neighbour-
ing spin packets into and out of the hole, thus giving an increased
electron resonance signal again. This is known as a 'packet-shifting3
mechanism; from eqn (4.23) we see that an Endor transition
just changes the local field at a donor relative to which the29Si
nucleus occupies lattice site L by an amount

--- Page 253 ---

238 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
which is just the difference between the Endor frequency (4.26) V and
L
the ordinary nuclear resonance frequency (g^fiH/h, divided by (g^/h).
A typical Endor experiment of Feher (1959) is shown in Fig. 4.6,
the electron resonance being observed at 9000 MHz and T = 1-25°K.
FIG. 4.6. Change in the electron resonance signal at 9000 MHz and T = 1-25°K due to
phosphorus (31P) donors in silicon, upon application of power at the Endor frequencies,
(a) Traverse through the 31P Endor spectrum; the two frequencies correspond to those
in eqn (4.25). (b) Traverse through the high frequency side of the 29Si spectrum; the
frequencies correspond to those in (4.26) with the lower (—) sign before AL. Another line
is observed around 2-7 MHz, due to more distant 29Si for which AL is small (after
Feher 1959).
The upper diagram (Fig. 4.6a) shows the increase in electron spin
resonance signal obtained by traversing the Endor transitions for the
donor nucleus 31P, which also has / = J. These transitions are given by
eqn (4.25). Because the Endor line width is only 10 kHz, there is a sharp
rise at the front, due to the sudden increase in population difference
between the two previously saturated electron levels, followed by a slow
recovery towards a steady-state condition. The second Endor transition
is more intense for the following reason. From Fig. 4.5(b) it can be seen
that adiabatic rapid passage through one Endor transition gives a
population difference d/2 between the two electron levels for m = +£;
e
if this is followed quickly by adiabatic rapid passage through the other
Endor transition, the populations of the two M = — J levels will be
inverted, giving a net population difference between the m = + J levels
of <L. Thus the second Endor transition should be twice as intense as

--- Page 254 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 239
the first if they are traversed in a time too short for the populations to
recover towards steady state values.
The hyperfine parameters for the donor nuclei are given in Table 4.1,
and illustrate the accuracy that can be obtained in Endor experiments.
The ratio of the two values of A for the isotopes 121, 123 of antimony
is not quite equal to the ratio of the nuclear moments, and yields
a hyperfine anomaly (cf. eqn 17.91, § 17.7) of A = -(0-352 ±0-005) per
cent, where
The ratio of" the hyperfine constants was found to be 1-84012(1) in the
Endor experiments (Eisinger and Feher (1958)), while separate nuclear
magnetic resonance measurements gave 1-84661(1) for the ratio of the
g values.
I
The (/-values for the various donors were measured by comparison
with that g arising from magnetic resonance of conduction electrons
c
in a more heavily doped sample (3 X 1018 P/cm3), for which the value
of <7 — 1-99875(10) was determined separately by comparison with a
C
proton magnetic resonance signal. The value of \(g— g)\ increases with
c
the value of FI (see Table 4.1), where FI is the 'ionization potential5
required to lift the donor electron into the conduction band.
The Endor transitions due to 29Si lattice sites are shown in Fig.
4.6(b). Here it is possible to identify the lattice sites involved through
the anisotropy due to the A% term in (4.26) by plotting the line
frequency as a function of the orientation of the external field H, and
using the relative intensity variation arising from the number of
equivalent lattice sites giving an Endor transition at the same
frequency. These experiments form an important method of checking
the theory of shallow donors in semiconductors and measuring the
parameters involved, details of which may be found in Feher (1959).
From the values of AL A% determined for the various lattice
9
points by means of Endor, it is possible to calculate both the shape and
the width of the inhomogeneously broadened electron resonance line,
and good agreement was obtained (Feher (1959)).
4.5. Endor on donors in silicon—relaxation effects
We now consider briefly relaxation effects in Endor, starting in this
section with the experimental work of Feher and Gere (1959) on donors
in silicon, in particular 31P, which has / = |. Since the donor electron
has S = J, we are dealing with the smallest possible number of energy

--- Page 255 ---

240 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
levels, two electronic and two nuclear. The various relaxation processes
that are operative in such a system are indicated in Fig. 4.9(a). The
simple electron spin relaxation processes (AJf = ±1, Am = 0) follow
the broken vertical lines, with characteristic times r which are the
x
same for either hyperfine line. One broken sloping line represents a
process involving both an electronic 'flip' and a nuclear 'flop' such that
&(M+m) = 0, with a characteristic time r . The other two broken
x
sloping lines represent relaxation effects within the nuclear spin system
for which &M = 0, Am = ±1, with characteristic time r which is
n
essentially the same for either nuclear transition. The remaining path
for which A(Jf+m) = 2 is not allowed when the hyperfine interaction
is isotropic—see eqn (4.32).
In the experiments of Feher and Gere the level populations were
disturbed from the values appropriate to thermal equilibrium, either
by saturating one transition or more, or by adiabatic rapid passage
through one line or more to reverse the populations. The latter proved
more convenient when dealing with relaxation times longer than about
a second. Special methods were devised of disturbing the equilibrium
populations in different ways so as to disentangle the various relaxa-
tion processes (see below). The relaxation time was then determined by
observing the exponential recovery of the populations towards the
thermal equilibrium values, by monitoring the electron resonance
signal at low level.
The first experiments were simple electron magnetic resonance experi-
ments to determine r usually the fastest of all the relaxation times.
l9
It was found that the value of r was concentration dependent above
t
about 1016 P/cm3, and concentration independent below this level. In
the latter case r was proportional to (1/21), typical of a direct relaxation
x
process (see §1.11 and Chapter 10), below 2°K, the value of r lying in
l
the range 10+3 to 10+4 s (about 1 h). A much faster rate of change of r
±
with temperature set in above 2°K.
When the value of r is very much longer than that of r it is
x l9
necessary to adopt a method of measuring it that avoids the short-
circuiting effect of the r paths. This method is to saturate both
x
electronic transitions, so that all population differences of order <5 are
e
removed as shown in Fig. 4.7(a). If this situation is retained for a time
of order r , relaxation via the sloping relaxation path tends to re-
x
establish the normal population difference between the ( + £, — J) and
( —£, +i) levels, the saturating signal causing the populations of the
other two levels to follow, as in Fig. 4.7(b). If the saturating power is

--- Page 256 ---

ELECTRON.NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 241
FIG. 4.7. Illustrating the method of Feher and Gere (1959) for measuring r. (a) Both
x
electronic transitions are saturated thus initially equalizing all the populations, (b)
Saturation of both electronic transitions is maintained, but after a time J> r the sloping
x
relaxation path establishes the normal population difference between the (+J, —£) and
(—i, +J) levels, (c) Adiabatic rapid passage through the hv^ transition inverts the
populations of the M = +J, m = ±1 levels. The electronic transitions (at low level) now
have the normal intensity, except that the m = — J line is reversed in sign. If (c) is
carried out at various times after (a), the degree to which r has re-established the
x
population difference between the (+|, — J) and (—J, +J) levels can be found, thus
giving the value of r .
x
now removed, and the nuclear transition hv+ induced by adiabatic
rapid passage, the populations of the two M = +i nuclear levels are
inverted, as shown in Fig. 4.7(c). A quick sweep through the electronic
resonance spectrum then shows one normal line (m = +|) and one
inverted line (m = — J). By observing the strength of these last signals
after waiting various intervals to allow the r relaxation process to take
x
effect, values of r of order 30 h at H = 3200 G and 5 h at H = 8000 G
x
were estimated, both at T = 1-25°K.
To estimate r a different trick was employed, involving preferential
n
population of the two nuclear m = — \ levels. If the system is allowed
to reach thermal equilibrium in a high field (8000 G, for which
$e = hv'JkT), and then adiabatic rapid passages are performed, first
of the electronic line m = +| and then on the nuclear line M = + J,
the populations become as shown in Fig. 4.8(a) and 4.8(b). If the field
17

--- Page 257 ---

242 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
FIG. 4.8. Illustrating the method of Feher and Gere (1959) for measuring r . (a) After
n
thermal equilibrium is reached in a high field (H = 8000 G), adiabatic rapid passage of
the electronic transition m = -f- £ inverts the population of the two M = ± J, m = + J
levels, (b) Adiabatic rapid passage through the hv+ transition then inverts the population
of the Jf = + J, m = ±% levels, (c) In a lower field (H = 3200 G), relaxation through
the rapid TJ paths modifies the populations of upper and lower electronic levels by
factors (1— (5/2), (l-f-(5/2) respectively. This can be observed through the unequal
e e
strengths of the two electronic transitions which are in the ratio (1 —d'J2)l(l-\-d'l2). The
e
relative strengths of these two transitions then return gradually to equality through the
relaxation mechanisms r r . The quantities d' = (hv'/kT), d = (hv/kT) where v', v
X9 n e e e e e e
are the electron resonance frequencies in the higher and lower fields respectively.
is now dropped to H = 3200 G, for which d = hv lkT, relaxation
e e
through the more rapid TJ paths gives the populations shown in Fig.
4.8(c), and the intensity of the two electronic hyperfine lines is in the
ratio (l — d'e/2)l(l+d'j2). This difference is then progressively elimi-
nated as populations return to thermal equilibrium through the T , r
X n
processes. As r had been measured separately, a lower limit of
x
r & 10 h was established.
n
When free carriers are present, all these relaxation times are shorter
through collisions with the conduction electrons, a process in which a
mutual spin flip may occur between donor electron and conduction
electron.

--- Page 258 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 243
4.6. Relaxation effects in Endor—general
Endor experiments on donors in silicon have the unusual feature that
the spin-lattice relaxation times are extremely long; in most para-
magnetic systems relaxation times of a fraction of a second are the
rule. Effects due to adiabatic rapid passage (even if this is feasible) will
then vanish in a fraction of a second, and Endor experiments are carried
out under steady-state conditions. Signals are somewhat smaller than
immediately after a fast transient, but the analysis is rather complex
and depends on competition between the various relaxation processes
that are operative. An order of magnitude estimate can be obtained as
follows for the size of the Endor signal. The relaxation paths for a
system with S = I = J and an isotropic hyperfine interaction are shown
in Fig. 4.9(a). If saturating power is applied to the electronic m = +i
transition, as in Fig. 4.9(b), the net effect is to epump' spins from the
lower to the upper of the two m = + % levels; the spins can then return
to the lower state by phonon emission, either following the direct
vertical path T or by the indirect path via the ( + J, — ^) state which
I?
FIG. 4.9. Steady-state Endor signals, (a) Relaxation paths in a system S = I = £, with
an isotropic hyperfine interaction, (b) As in (a), but with an electron resonance signal
inducing transitions at a rate w on the AM = ± 1, m = + J line, (c) As in (b), but with
e
an Endor resonance signal also inducing transitions at a rate w^ on the M = -f-J,
line. In general, TI <^T <^, r , and to be effective in giving an Endor signal
X n
we need wT > 1, and not just wT > 1. The reason for this is that the relaxation path
n x n n
r is essentially 'short-circuited' by the much faster indirect paths through r and TJ
n x
(or w), for which the controlling rate is I/TJ..
e

--- Page 259 ---

244 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
involves both r and r and is therefore a very much slower process,
n x
controlled by r if this is the longer relaxation time of the two. If
n
power is now also applied to the transition hv*, transitions to the
(+ i, — 2) level are induced at a rate w , and if this is much faster than
n
1/Tg., the factor controlling return to the ( —J, +J) ground state will
become r . The net relaxation rate is thus changed from approximately
x
(VTi) + (l/Tn) ^° (VTi) + (VTJ> which is a change of order (rj/rj in the
effective value of TJ if r > r , i.e. (dr^r-^) = — (r^r^.
n x
We now use this relation to make an estimate of the change in the
electron resonance signal by using the macroscopic equations of
Chapter 2 (with our usual reservations as to their validity when dealing
with inhomogeneously broadened lines). From eqn (2.75) the electron
resonance signal is proportional to #"-\/(A)> or %"H where P is the
19 x
applied power producing an oscillatory field strength H^ From eqn
(2.49) we have
where for an inhomogeneously broadened line r is the true spin-spin
2
relaxation time appropriate to the width of a spin-packet. The change
in signal resulting from a change dr in T is
± X
which has its maximum value when Under this condition
we find readily that
The optimum condition y2Hlr r = 3 is somewhat higher than that
1 2
which gives the maximum electron resonance signal (see eqn (2.49)),
and HI should be adjusted to this optimum value.
So far we have considered cases where the only important cross-
relaxation path is r . This leads to a restriction on the number of Endor
x
signals that we can expect to observe, the reason for which can be
understood in two ways, (a) We consider the population differences of
order <5, and neglect relaxation paths whose times are of order r . Then
e n
under complete saturation of the electronic hyperfine transition for
we get the populations shown in Fig. 4.10(a), while if the
electronic transition is saturated, we get the populations
shown in Fig. 4.10(b). A population difference of order 6 exists in Fig.
e

--- Page 260 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 245
FIG. 4.10. Populations of the levels for the system S = I = J in the steady state
resulting from saturation of (a) the electronic hyperfine transition for m = + J, (b) the
electronic hyperfine transition for m = — J. On this simple model, Endor transitions can
be observed by applying nuclear power to the nuclear transitions between levels whose
population differences are of order <5, i.e. to the upper nuclear transition Jiv^ in (a) and
e
the lower nuclear transition /w~ in (b).
4.10(a) only between the nuclear levels for M = +-|, and not between
the nuclear levels for M = — \. Since application of nuclear power can
only promote equalization of the populations of the two levels between
which transitions are induced, it follows that an Endor signal will be
observed only from the transition hv+ in Fig. 4.10(a), and only from
Tiv~ in Fig. 4.10(b). (b) We consider the change in effective relaxation
rate. In Fig. 4.9, saturation of the hv~ transition instead of the hv+
transition can only influence the return flow towards thermal equi-
librium from the M, m = +|, +i to the — J, + J levels via the more
indirect path
where the controlling rate will be the slowest relaxation rate
Hence we can expect a fractional change in r only of order
x
It is found in general that both Endor transitions can be observed
(though often with unequal intensities) while saturating either hyper-
fine electronic line, showing that our model of the relaxation paths is

--- Page 261 ---

246 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
FIG. 4.11. Relaxation paths for a system S = I = ^, with the spin Hamiltonian
The continuous vertical line represents the strong (-f J, + i) ^ (— i» + i) electron
resonance transition. Relaxation via the path labelled r does not occur when the
xx
hyperfine interaction is isotropic. In general,
over-simplified. We now consider a number of ways in which it can be
modified.
When the magnetic hyperfine interaction is anisotropic, transitions
between the ( + ^, +|) and ( — £, — £) states are also partially allowed,
and correspondingly there is an additional relaxation path labelled
in Fig. 4.11. When electron resonance power is applied to the
line, as shown in Fig. 4.11, spins are 'pumped'
from the lower to the upper of these two states. In addition to the direct
return flow through T there are additional return flows of the type
I?
and
If the relaxation times are widely disparate, then the flow is controlled
by the longest relaxation times, which are normally r . If in the first
n
two return paths, saturating power (w r) > 1 is applied at either of
n x
the nuclear frequencies, the effective value of r is altered by an
x
amount of order or It is true that if both nuclear

--- Page 262 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 24*3
frequencies are applied simultaneously at saturating level, we can also
get a change through the third path, but the need for two frequencies
to be at the correct value obviously creates difficulties when searching
for an unknown Endor frequency.
We can obtain an estimate of the relative orders of magnitude of the
various relaxation times by assuming that
(a) relaxation takes place by a 'direct' process (see §1.11 and Chapter
10), involving the absorption and emission of phonons at the
magnetic resonance frequencies ;
(b) the only important mechanism is the interaction between the
electron spin and a thermal 'noise spectrum' producing oscillatory
magnetic fields of magnitude - — h^ such that |/&J2 is isotropic in
space, and independent of frequency at least over a band of order
(A/h), which includes all the hyperfine transitions in the vicinity
of the electron resonance frequency v.
On this basis the relative relaxation rates for different electronic
transitions vary in the same way as the transition probabilities in the
magnetic resonance spectrum. The sloping relaxation paths r , r
x xx
arise through transitions partly allowed by the terms in the static spin
Hamiltonian
where the primes indicate that we have chosen coordinate systems for
electron and nucleus such that the electronic Zeeman interaction and
(as far as possible) the magnetic hyperfine interaction are diagonalized
(cf. Chapter 3; for a typical example of such terms, see eqn (3.52)).
These terms admix states and into (M, m)
:
with amplitudes and respectively. The
transition probabilities are proportional to the squares of these
amplitudes, giving
Thus vanishes when the magnetic hyperfine interaction is
isotropic, and in particular cases such that A' = A'. There is also a
x y
different dependence on electron resonance frequency for r and
x
for the direct process in a Kramers doublet (1/rj) varies as
(see eqn (10.69)), and hence from (4.32) we would expect
vary only as H2.

--- Page 263 ---

248 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
In a more general spin Hamiltonian we may have terms of the form
which lend some electronic character to the
transitions. An effect of the same order of magnitude arises from the
effect of a thermal low-frequency oscillatory field (normal to H) in
driving the electronic magnetization, and hence producing an oscilla-
tory component in the hyperfine field H at the nucleus (see § 4.3).
e
These effects give matrix elements for the transitions AM = 0 whose
square is (A/hve)2 x the square of the matrix elements for the elec-
tronic transitions Am = 0. However in estimating relaxation times we
must also remember that the phonon density at the nuclear frequency
vn is smaller by a factor (vnjve)2 than that at the electron frequency v.
Hence we expect
which is of order
since and, from eqn
In addition to the relaxation processes considered above, which may
be regarded as by-products of the simple electron spin-lattice relaxation
mechanism, there are others that arise from thermal modulation of the
hyperfine terms. Thermal modulation of the magnetic hyperfine inter-
action (Abragam 1955) has been considered by Jeffries (1960), who
shows that it may contribute to all the relaxation paths shown in Fig.
4.11. Hence r may be finite even when the static Hamiltonian contains
xx
only an isotropic magnetic hyperfine interaction, since the thermal
vibrations distort the lattice and give rise to all terms of the type given
in eqn (1.62). Contributions to r"1, r~l and r~* may all be of the same
order, and unlike those in eqn (4.32), do not depend on the states being
admixed by the static Hamiltonian. Thus at high static fields, modula-
tion of the hyperfine interaction may make a more important contribu-
tion to r"1, r~* than that indicated by eqn (4.32); the same is likely to
be true for r"1. When I > ^, we may have a further contribution to r"1
through thermal modulation of the nuclear electric quadrupole coupling,
which will produce terms of all the types in eqn (3.40a), even though
the static quadrupole tensor vanishes (as for a Kramers doublet in
cubic symmetry). Such terms will produce relaxation paths corre-
sponding to the transitions and
Yet another mechanism arises through the effect

--- Page 264 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 249
of hyperfine interaction in breaking time reversal symmetry in a
Kramers doublet (cf. Fig. 10.9 and the reference given there).
We have so far assumed that the spin packet width is determined by
a true spin-spin relaxation time r . However the application of power
2
at the electron resonance frequency will shorten the lifetime of the
electron states, and we inquire now whether this will increase the
effective width of the spin packet. As before, we use the macroscopic
formulae to provide a convenient mode of analysis without implying
that exact numerical interpretation is possible in practice. From eqn
(2.51) the rate w at which electronic transitions are induced is (for spin
e
where H± is the amplitude of the oscillatory field at the electron
resonance frequency. For a narrow spin packet whose width is deter-
mined by a true relaxation time r we have, from eqn (2.65), at exact
2
resonance
so that we can write
We have seen from eqn (4.29) that the condition for optimum Endor
signal is y^H^r^r^ = 3, in which case (4.36) becomes
(Note that this is just the condition that makes the denominator in eqn
(1.134) equal to 4, so that the electron cspin temperature' for the
transition in question is raised to roughly four times the lattice
temperature.) The electronic transition rate w changes l/r by an
e 2
amount ~w . Hence if r > r we can satisfy (4.37) without increasing
e ± 2
the Endor line width, but if r is so short that it is the determining
x
factor in the spin packet width (r = T^), partial saturation of the
2
electron resonance line will increase the Endor line width.
We are now in a position to make some rough estimates of the signal
strength at the nuclear frequency needed to give an Endor signal. The
rate at which nuclear transitions are induced is given by eqn (4.19),
At the centre of a nuclear line the shape function

--- Page 265 ---

250 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
where 2Ai> is the overall width of the nuclear line at half intensity.
Hence at the centre, assuming / = \ for which
we have
and to approach saturation of the nuclear transition we need
assuming r to be the fastest relaxation time with which we have to
x
compete.
In measurements on a ligand hyperfine structure there is little
enhancement of the nuclear transition rate, and we may take g^ to
be roughly equal to g. If the nuclear signal strength is assumed to be
z
H = 1 G, and Ai> = 10 kHz, we find for a proton or an 19F ligand
ln
nucleus that
Thus this value of H is sufficient to produce appreciable saturation of
ln
the nuclear transition only if r > 10~4 s, which is appreciably longer
x
than the value of r = l/(Ar) ^ 10~5 s, assumed for the spin packet
2
width.
In considering Endor on the nucleus of the paramagnetic ion itself
we expect considerable enhancement of the nuclear transition rate
from 'stirring' the hyperfine field, as discussed in § 4.3. If for simplicity
we assume H to be along an axis of symmetry (the 2-axis) so that
we have first from eqn (4.32)
Second, from eqn (4.18) we must now replace by
so that for / = ^ we have, instead of (4.38),
and since hv = g \\ (5H we find that in this case
e
independent of both A± and of v , except that r may vary with v . If
e x e

--- Page 266 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 251
we take and we obtain
so that even with this value of H we can strongly saturate the nuclear
ln
transition provided that r > 10~5 s, a condition that must in any case
l
be fulfilled if we are to keep the value of Ar down to the region of
10 kHz.
In conclusion, we point out that saturation of the 'forbidden'
transitions such as A(J/ +m) = 0, which is a powerful tool in creating
dynamic nuclear polarization (see § 1.12), is not an efficient method for
Endor, since the nuclear transition rate w must then compete with the
n
fastest relaxation rate l/r in order to affect the intensity of the
x
electronic transition that is being saturated.
4.7. The hyperfine structure of europium
As a second illustration of the power of the Endor technique we shall
discuss the measurement of the hyperfine structure and nuclear
moments of europium. The europium atom has the configuration
4/76s2 and the dipositive ion Eu2+ has the configuration 4/7, so that
both contain half-filled 4/ shells and the ground spectroscopic state is
8 8 7 . The presence of the two extra electrons in the 6s shell of the atom
makes little difference to the 4/ electrons, but the magnetic hyperfine
structure is distinctly larger in the ion. This difference is ascribed to
core polarization, a conclusion that is supported by measurement of
the hyperfine anomaly.
Europium has two stable isotopes, of mass 151 and 153, of roughly
equal abundance. Each has nuclear spin -f , but the nuclear magnetic
dipole moments and nuclear electric quadrupole moments of the two
isotopes each differ by a factor 2, though in opposite directions. The
magnetic hyperfine anomaly is defined by the ratio
and A vanishes (see § 17.7) unless
(i) there is a finite density of magnetic electrons with a spatial
variation within the nucleus (in practice this means that s-electrons
must contribute to the magnetic hyperfine structure) ;
(ii) the nuclear magnetic dipole moment must be differently dis-
tributed within the nucleus for each isotope. (It was anticipated that
this might be the case in view of the large differences in the nuclear
moments quoted above.)

--- Page 267 ---

252 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
Obviously a hyperfine anomaly (A ^ 0) can be observed only if the
nuclear dipole moments and the magnetic hyperfine structure constants
can be measured for both isotopes. This has been carried out for the ion
by means of Endor in the solid state (Eu2+ in CaF ), and for the atom
2
by means of atomic beam triple resonance ; nuclear magnetic resonance
cannot be used to determine the nuclear moments because no con-
figuration is available which does not have a resultant electronic
angular momentum.
The atomic beam results for the atom are fitted to a Hamiltonian
where the first two terms represent the Zeeman interactions, the third
the magnetic hyperfine structure, and the last the electric quadrupole
interaction. The same Hamiltonian is used for the ionic spectrum with
some additional terms, which arise because of the cubic crystal field.
These will be discussed in §§ 5.9, 5.10 and here we shall consider only the
principal hyperfine terms.
The results of a number of measurements of the hyperfine constants
are given in Table 4.2. We consider first the magnetic hyperfine inter-
action constant A. This may be regarded as a sum of contributions from
TABLE 4.2
Comparison of hyperfine measurements for the europium atom by atomic
beam and for Eu2+ in CaF by Endor. In each case the ground state is 4/7,
2
8S, and the data are based on the work of Sandars and Woodgate (I960),
Evans, Sandars, and Woodgate (1965), and Baker and Williams (1962).
The values of g are uncorrected for diamagnetism, and are expressed in
z
Bohr magnetons (eqn (4.42)); the nuclear magnetic moments are positive
Eu atom Eu2+ in CaF
2
9 1-9934(1) 1-9926(3)
151A (MHz) — 20-0523(2) -102-9069(13)
151£ (MHz) -0-7012(35) -0-7855(52)
15l9i + 7-4921(13) XlO-4 + 7-4969(20) x
io-4
151A115SA + 2-26498(8) + 2-25313(15)
151JB/153J3 + 0-393(3) + 0-387(4)
15W153<7/ + 2-26505(42) + 2-2632(26)
A (%) -0-003(20) -0-53(2)

--- Page 268 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 253
the 4/ electrons, A, and from polarization of the core which we write
f
as A because the dominant contribution must be from s-electrons
s
through their finite density at the nucleus. Since only s-electrons are
expected to contribute to the hyperfine anomaly, we can write, follow-
ing Baker and Williams (1962),
where A is the measured anomaly and A that due to s-electrons. We
s
have two pairs of such equations, one pair for the atom and one pair
for the ion. In each pair there are three unknowns, A, A and A but
f S9 s
only two measured quantities, A and A, so that some further assump-
tions must be made to obtain a solution. These are: (1) that A is
s
independent of the principal quantum numbers of the s-electrons
involved (see Pichanick, Sandars, and Woodgate (I960)), so that Acan
s
be taken to be the same for atom and ion; (2) that A (ion) can be
f
plausibly related to A (atom).
f
We consider first the atom, for which the measured anomaly (see
Table 4.2) is essentially zero, showing that we must take ^4(atom) = 0.
s
We have then the problem of accounting for the observed value of
J.(atom), which on this basis must arise from the /-electrons. For a
pure 8S state A should be zero, since there is no orbital moment and
f
the spherical distribution of spin density gives no field at the nucleus,
provided there is no core polarization. However it is well known that
the spin-orbit coupling tends to break down iS-coupling, giving a
ground state that is of the form
The difference between the measured g- value and the spin-only value
can be explained on this basis, but it turns out that the contributions to
the hyperfine constants A, B are both positive (the best estimates are
+7-70 MHz for 151A and +1-87 MHz for 151£). It was suggested by
Sandars and Woodgate (1960) that the discrepancy might be due to
relativistic contributions. The theory of these effects has been worked
out by Sandars and Beck (1965), and for europium Evans, Sandars,
and Woodgate (1965) estimate that they could account for about half
the remaining discrepancy in A and nearly all that in B. It may be that
f
calculations with better wave-functions could remove the discrepancy
entirely, but the important point is that the relativistic effects give
contributions of the right sign, and that they involve the 4/ electrons
(not 5-electrons) and therefore give rise to no hyperfine anomaly.

--- Page 269 ---

254 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
Similar effects will be present in the ion, but in the absence of more
precise calculations we probably cannot do better than assume that the
value of A is the same for the ion as the measured value of A in the
f
atom. We then obtain 151^4(ion) = —83 MHz, A(ion) = —0-66 per
s s
cent, which agrees well with the best value from the optical spectrum
of A = —0-64(10) per cent deduced by Bordarier, Judd, and Klapisch
s
(1965) from the measurements of Mtiller, Steudel, and Walther (1965).
The theory indicates that no anomaly is to be expected in the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction, so that the ratio of 5(151)/J5(153) should
be the same for atom and for ion; reference to Table 4.2 confirms that
this prediction is fulfilled. However, as remarked above, the negative
sign for B can only be explained by relativistic effects. For a pure 8S
state the electronic charge distribution is accurately spherical and no
electric field gradient at the nucleus would be expected. The small
break-down of i/S-coupling which admixes 6Pj, etc., would give a
positive value of B, estimated as +1-87 MHz for the isotope 151
(Evans, Sandars, and Woodgate 1965), but these authors find that
relativistic effects contribute an amount —2-44 MHz, giving a total of
—0-57 MHz in reasonable agreement with the experimental value of
—0-70 MHz for the atom. Similar contributions would be expected in
the ion, and it is reassuring to find that the observed value of —0-78
MHz is reasonably close to that for the atom.
We have described the results of Endor measurements on Eu2+ ions
in CaF , and of atomic beam triple resonance measurements on the Eu
2
atom, in some detail because they illustrate the following points.
(a) They confirm that most of the contribution to the isotropic
magnetic hyperfine constant in the ion comes from core polariza-
tion, though relativistic effects are not negligible (and may be
expected to be increasingly important in heavier ions);
(b) they show that Endor measurements of hyperfine constants can
be made with an accuracy approaching that of magnetic
resonance experiments on atoms using conventional atomic beam
methods;
(c) they give measurements of the nuclear Zeeman interaction with
an accuracy comparable with atomic beam triple resonance
experiments.
The latter does not always mean that the nuclear magnetic moment
can be determined with comparable accuracy. Both in atoms and in
ions there may be an appreciable pseudo-nuclear Zeeman interaction,
but this can generally be calculated more accurately for atoms because

--- Page 270 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 255
more exact information on excited states is available, in particular
because crystal field interactions are absent. Obviously ions with
half-filled shells are exceptional in this respect, and in the following
section we discuss another type of ion where the interpretation of the
Endor results involves a number of correction terms.
4.8. The Endor spectrum of Nd3+ in LaCl
3
We consider now the Endor spectrum of an ion where a number of
important corrections must be included in the hyperfine structure
owing to the presence of nearby excited electronic states. This ion is
Nd34", 4/3, whose Endor spectrum has been analyzed very fully by
Halford (1962). The ground state of this ion, which has L = 6, S = f ,
is J = f , which is split by the crystal field (see § 5.6) into five doublets.
Resonance is observed in the lowest of these, and fitted to a spin
Hamiltonian of the usual form for effective spin S = J and axial
symmetry
This is essentially the same as discussed in Chapter 3 except that
primed coefficients have been used for A'^ and P{ to denote the presence
(
of correction terms, and the nuclear gr-factor (here expressed in terms of
nuclear magnetons) is allowed to be anisotropic because of contributions
from the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect.
The electronic (/-factor was determined from measurements on the
single strong line in the electron spin resonance spectrum due to the
even isotopes of Nd, the values obtained being
A large number of Endor measurements were made for the two odd
isotopes 143Nd, 145Nd, each of which has / = 1, and fitted by a least
squares procedure using computer diagonalization of the Hamiltonian;
the more accurate sets of results are shown in Table 4.3. The values of
-4JI and P| determined with the magnetic field along the crystal axis
(
are the more accurate, and were used in the subsequent analysis. As
pointed out in § 4.2, the relative signs of g\\ and ^[|n), and of A'\\ and P[,
f
can be determined from the Endor experiments. The crystal field
analysis shows g\\ to be positive, and that the sign of A'» is the same as

--- Page 271 ---

256 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
TABLE 4.3
Results of Endor measurements on Nd3+ in LaCl (from Halford (1962)).
3
Column 2 gives the orientation of the external magnetic field H relative
to the crystal axis
A'\\ I^J Pil
Isotope H (MHz) (MHz) (MHz) if l*(l}l
143Nd II -1272-1428(80) 499-568(42) + 0-0887(10) -0-543(3)
_L — 1273-036(240) 499-532(40) + 0-136(15) 0-874(7)
i45 Nd II -790-736(16) 310-682(140) + 0-0427(22) -0-347(18)
_L -790-810(300) 310-540(48) + 0-035(12) 0-538(9)
that of gr, thus establishing the signs given in the table, but only after
n
a complete analysis has been used to relate g^ to g .
n
To make full use of the high experimental accuracy a rather extensive
crystal field analysis is required to determine accurately the wave
functions | +) and | —) spanning the ground doublet, together with an
approximate determination of the energies of the excited levels. This
was carried out by Halford including contributions from the J = J2L
and -V3- manifolds (those from J = ^/- were shown to be negligible) as
well as the first-order contributions from J = f, and including correc-
tions due to intermediate coupling, from a fit to the optical spectrum by
Judd (1959a). The results were checked against the experimentally
determined electronic (/-values of the ground doublet, and a small
correction made.
To proceed further, we write out the parameters of the experimental
spin Hamiltonian in some detail, separating out the correction terms.
This gives
In eqns (4.46) the first term is the first-order magnetic hyperfine
parameter; N is the operator defined in eqn (17.48), and an extra factor
2 appears because the parameters A^ A refer to the effective spin
L
Hamiltonian (4.44) for which < + | S |+) = J. The term C was intro-
z
duced by Halford to allow for a possible contact hyperfine interaction

--- Page 272 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 257
from unpaired s-electrons which he incorrectly assumed (see below)
would give an isotropic contribution to the magnetic hyperfine structure.
The extra term t±A\\ is the second-order correction to the magnetic
hvperfine structure given by eqn (18.9),
which can be written according to eqn (18.8) for axial symmetry as
It is readily verified that the corresponding correction A^4 which
±
would involve terms
vanishes and for that reason was omitted.
The quadrupole interaction (4.47) can be written as
where P\\ is the true quadrupole interaction, here assumed to arise only
from the 4/ electrons. In fact matrix elements between states of
different J can be neglected, and the value of the matrix element is then
where each term in the summation is weighted by n2 the square of its
J}
amplitude in the ground state wavefunction.
The extra term AP| is the pseudo-quadrupolar interaction constant
(
which, from eqn (18.8), can be written in the case of axial symmetry as
Both &A1| and APy are second-order effects of the magnetic hyperfine
interaction, which admixes excited crystal field states into the ground
states and thus changes (in second order) the hyperfine interactions.
Finally, A^fn) and Ag^ are constants representing the pseudo-
(
nuclear Zeeman effect whose values are, from eqn (18.2),
18

--- Page 273 ---

258 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
Their interpretation is as follows: the electronic Zeeman interaction
mixes excited crystal field states into the ground states and thus
changes the magnetic hyperfine interaction by an amount proportional
to the external magnetic field.
The value calculated for t±A\\ is very small, being +0-0351(10) MHz
for isotope 143, and +0-0136(4) MHz for isotope 145. The value of C
can be found by comparing the ratio of A'» — &A\\ to A found experi-
L
mentally with that calculated for the ratio ofA^ to A from the crystal
L
field states. C is found to be zero within the experimental error, but this
does not imply that there is no core polarization effect. The matrix
elements describing this effect are proportional to those of the vector
S; if the ground state wave-functions are accurately described by states
belonging only to one manifold of given J, the matrix elements both of
S and of the Zeeman interaction L+<7 S are each proportional to those
S
of J, and a core polarization contribution will not change the ratio
A \\IA . In so far as we cannot neglect admixtures from states of different
L
J, this proportionality will break down, and the ratio A^A will be
L
affected, though the change cannot be represented by adding an
isotropic contribution (7. Since such admixtures in the present case are
fairly small, and the expected contribution to the magnetic hyperfine
structure from core polarization is probably only about 2 per cent
(Bleaney (19646)), the net effect is likely to be quite small.
We now consider the nuclear (/-factors. The fact that ^[jn) and g(^
are experimentally found to be quite different shows at once that the
pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect, which can be anisotropic, is playing an
important role. In fact Halford's analysis gives A0[n) = —0-235(18),
(
A</j_n) = —0-564(18) for isotope 143 which are of the same order as the
value obtained for g = —0-308(18). The latter gives a nuclear magnetic
n
moment of —1-079(60) n.m., in good agreement with the later result
of Smith and Unsworth (1965) of —1-063(5) n.m., obtained from
atomic beam triple resonance measurements on the free atom.
Halford's results also yield the values:
isotope
isotope
where only the more accurate values of PJJ obtained from measurements
with the magnetic field parallel to the crystal axis are used to find P \\.
The latter is the true quadrupole interaction, and its ratio for the two

--- Page 274 ---

ELECTRON.NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 258
isotopes is 1*90, in very close agreement with the ratio of the quad-
rupole interaction constants for the free atom (Spalding (1963)). The
pseudo-quadrupole effect AP|| is of considerable importance, and since
it is proportional to the square of the magnetic hyperfine constant and
not to the quadrupole moment, the ratio of the constants Pjj for the
two isotopes is quite different from that of the constants Py, which
should also be the ratio of the quadrupole moments. The values of the
quadrupole moments themselves, deduced by Halford are, however,
quite different from those obtained from atomic beam measurements
on the free atom, as follows:
Halford (Nd3+ in LaCl ) Smith and Unsworth (Nd)
3
isotope 143 Q = +0-0206(30) barns Q = —0-484(20) barns,
isotope 145 Q = +0-0105(20) barns Q = -0-253(10) barns.
In each case a value of (r~3) deduced from the magnetic hyperfine
constant and the nuclear moment is used, but that for the atom is only
a few per cent larger than that for the ion, as would be expected. We
must therefore look elsewhere for an explanation of the discrepancy.
Bleaney (19646) has suggested that there is an appreciable contribution
to P|j from the lattice, which, from the results of Edmonds (1963),
might well be of the order of +1 MHz for isotope 143. From the atomic
beam results we would expect the contribution from the 4/ electrons
for this isotope to be about —1-4 MHz in Halford's experiment, so that
his value of P^ = +0-06 MHz could be explained if the lattice
contribution were just over +1-4 MHz.
As discussed in § 5.5, the lattice contribution is enhanced by a large
anti-shielding factor, while that of the 4/ electrons is slightly diminished
by shielding. In the compound used by Halford, the ground state
wave-functions give an unusually small electric field gradient from
the 4/ electrons; in other cases the 4/ electrons generally provide the
dominant contribution to the electric field gradient. Nevertheless, the
complications introduced by the crystal field make it unlikely that
nuclear moment determinations by the Endor method in the solid state
will approach in accuracy (except for ions with half-filled shells) those
given by atomic beam methods for the free atoms of the 4/ group.
4.9. Endor measurements of ligand hyperfine structure
Magnetic hyperfine structure due to interaction of the magnetic
electrons with the nuclear magnetic moments of ligand ions is usually

--- Page 275 ---

260 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
fairly small, particularly in the rare-earth group, and it can be measured
only with limited accuracy in e.s.r. experiments. A further disadvan-
tage of such experiments is that the allowed transitions are usually
those in which the ligand nuclear magnetic quantum number does not
change, so that no measure of any electric quadrupole interaction (such
as may exist if the ligand ions are chlorine, with / = f) is obtained. If
transitions violating this selection rule are observed, the hyperfine
pattern is usually so complicated that accurate measurements are very
difficult. This is just the situation in which the Endor technique can be
used to good advantage, and as an example we shall discuss measure-
ments of the fluorine hyperfine structure in the Eu2+ spectrum in CaF
2
(Baker and Hurrell (1963)).
The crystal structure of CaF is outlined in § 5.1; the point symmetry
2
of the Eu2+ ion (substituting for Ca2+) is cubic O , while that of the
h
nearest neighbour fluorine is trigonal (7 about its bond axis (the line
3v
joining it to the Eu2+ ion), which is a (111) axis of the crystal. This
symmetry restricts the form of the magnetic hyperfine interaction to
where the z'-axis lies along the bond direction. Using the substitutions
this can be resolved into an isotropic term arid one that has the same
form as the point dipolar interaction. The complete spin Hamiltonian
for each nearest-neighbour fluorine nucleus is then
where the z'-axis is along the appropriate bond axis and there are
altogether eight such terms (with different bond axes, except that pairs
of fluorine ions have the same bond axis because of the inversion
symmetry about the Eu2+ site). The electronic Zeeman term is so large
that to a good approximation off-diagonal terms in S can be neglected,
and if H is applied along an axis (the z-axis) which makes an angle 6
with the z'-axis, the relevant terms in the Hamiltonian are
which can be diagonalized (cf. § 3.11) by choosing a z -axis for the
n
nuclear coordinates which makes an angle <f> with the z-axis, such that

--- Page 276 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 261
The energy then has the values ±%hv and the nuclear transition
V9
between these two states occurs at frequency r where
F
Essentially this formula reflects the fact that the nuclear transition
takes place in a net magnetic field which is the vectorial sum of the
external magnetic field and the steady component of the local magnetic
field due to the magnetic electrons; the terms that have been neglected
correspond to the rapidly precessing components of the electronic
magnetic field to which the fluorine magnetic moment cannot in a first
approximation react, owing to its gyromagnetic properties. The steady
magnetic field of the magnetic electrons has components both parallel
and perpendicular to the external magnetic field which are each propor-
tional to the value of S . As a result, the nuclear frequency given by
z
eqn (4.61) has terms involving the zero, first, and second power of S ,
z
and by making Endor measurements on different electronic lines there
is more than enough information to determine all the terms separately
even while working only at one particular value of 6.
In practice all accurate measurements of the Endor transitions were
made with H along a (100) direction where all eight nearest neighbour
fluorines are equivalent with eos20 = J. Other measurements to
confirm the sign of the interactions and the general form of eqn (4.58)
were made in a (110) direction where four nearest neighbours have
eos20 = 0 and four have cos20 = f. The advantages of such directions
were: (i) the e.s.r. spectrum of eighty-four lines was almost resolved so
that the line being saturated can be identified; (ii) the fluorine Endor
spectrum is greatly simplified owing to the high degeneracy; (iii) this
degeneracy enabled the crystal to be accurately aligned using the Endor
spectrum.
Using a value of H & 0-1 G for the nuclear driving field, the relative
t
intensities of different nearest-neighbour transitions were found to vary
by a factor of about 50, with a best signal/noise ratio of ~60 for a time
constant of 1 s. The average line width was about 40 kHz with no
resolved splitting, and this width could be explained by the accuracy
of about 0-1° in orienting the crystal. An analysis of thirty-seven lines
gave
(nearest neighbours).
The sign of A cannot be found from measurements in a (100) direction,
y
since (3 cos20 — 1) is then zero, but is found relative to that of g from
z

--- Page 277 ---

262 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
measurements in a (110) direction. Likewise the sign of A is obtained
s
only relative to that of g, but the latter is known to be positive. These
z
sign determinations are possible because S > % and the signs of S are
z
known, through the methods described in Chapter 3. The value of A
P
is somewhat smaller than the value of +5-7 MHz calculated for point
dipoles, and suggests that some bonding occurs, since the alternative
explanation of a reduction of 10 per cent in the bond length when Eu2+
is substituted for Ca2+ seems unlikely.
The analysis of twenty-eight next nearest neighbour lines gave
(next nearest neighbours)
which is consistent within the accuracy of the measurement and first -
order theory with a purely point dipole interaction, for which
Endor measurements have also been made of the fluorine hyperfine
interaction for two ions with the configuration 4/13 in CaF ; these are
2
Tm2+ (Bessent and Hayes 1965) and Yb3+ (Ranon and Hyde 1966).
In each case the ion has cubic symmetry, and the ground state is a
FIG. 4.12. Fluorine Endor spectrum for Tm2+ in CaF. The electron paramagnetic
2
resonance is observed at about 24000 MHz and H = 5000 G, directed along the (111)
axis, using magnetic field modulation at 115 kHz, giving an output after detection
at this frequency. This output varies as a nuclear resonance oscillator (modulated at
^100 Hz) is swept through the Endor spectrum. After detection, the 115-kHz signal is
amplified and passed to a synchronous detector at the second modulation frequency,
whose output feeds (through a smoothing circuit with a 10 s time-constant) a chart
recorder. The ordinate represents dz%"ldv 6H, the derivative with respect to frequency of
the derivative d%'/6H of the e.p.r. dispersion line. The lines labelled 1, 2, 3, 4 arise
from fluorines in the first, second, third, and fourth shells. (After Bessent and Hayes
1965.)

--- Page 278 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 263
F doublet with an isotropic ^-f actor close to 3-45. A typical Endor
7
spectrum is shown in Fig. 4.12 and the results are summarized in
Table 4.4. For Tm2+, as for Eu2+, the interaction with more distant
shells of fluorines is found to agree within experimental error with that
TABLE 4.4
Endor measurements of the fluorine hyper fine interaction of some rare-
earth ions in CaF . The actual signs are experimentally determined only
2
for Eu2+, but for the other ions (AJAV) is found to be positive. As, Av are
the parameters in the effective spin Hamiltonian (eqn (4.58)); J. is the
d
value that A^ would have (with A = 0) if the interaction were that between
s
two point dipoles situated in an undistorted CaF lattice
2
Second nearest fluorine
Nearest fluorine neighbours neighbours
A A. A& A Aj, A&
3 p s
(MHz) (MHz) (MHz) (MHz) (MHz) (MHz) Reference
4/7 Eu2+ -2-23(1) + 4-01(1) + 5-7 -0-007(5) +0-785 + 0-81 Baker and
Hurrell
(1963)
4/13 Tm2+ 2-584(10) 12-283(10) + 9-8 0-010(10) 1-386(5) + 1-40 Bessent
and
Hayes
(1965)
4/13 Yb3+ 1-67(5) 17-57(5) + 9-8 Ranon and
Hyde
(1966)
expected for a point dipole interaction; this is larger for Tm2+ than for
Eu2+ in the ratio of the electronic g-values 3-45:2'00. The interaction
with the nearest-neighbour fluorines is not point dipole, nor is it purely
dipolar in character, since some ^-character is found. The sign of the
interaction is not determined for the 4/13 ions where the electronic
ground state is a doublet, but is assumed to be positive for both A
s
and Ap (experimentally these are found to have the same sign), since
otherwise the difference between A^ and the point dipole value A^
appears to be implausibly large.
To make a proper comparison of the non-dipolar part of the inter-
action for the different ions we must allow for the fact that the inter-
action for the 4/13 ions is expressed in terms of the effective spin of |
for the electronic state, which is not the same as the true spin. The

--- Page 279 ---

264 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
F doublet states are (neglecting any admixture of J = i into J = 1)
7
where the last representation is in terms of \l, s). From this it can be
z z
verified that the expectation values of the true spin component s are
z
±T3T in the two doublet states, and are thus a factor (f) smaller than
the expectation values of the effective spin. Thus the non-point dipole
parts, A and (A^— J. ), of the hyperfine interaction for the 4/13 ions
s d
must be increased by a factor (!) for comparison with Eu2+. With
this change one finds that the isotropic interaction is larger for both the
4/13 ions than for Eu2+; so also is the adjusted value of A^—A^. The
signs are also probably different for A , as well as for A — A^\ (if the
8 v
signs of A are assumed to be all negative, the resultant value of
s
A —A becomes an order of magnitude larger for the 4/13 ions than for
p d
Eu2+, though of the same sign). The rather larger value of A for Yb3+
v
compared with Tm2+ (both assumed positive) could be partly due to a
larger point dipole interaction if the extra charge on the former ion
pulls the nearest F~ ions inwards by an appreciable amount.
The ligand hyperfine interaction discussed in this section and in
§4.10 is not essentially different from the interaction between the
nuclear moments of 29Si in the host lattice and the donor electron in
silicon (§4.4), as can be seen from a comparison of eqns (4.22) and
(4.58). If the magnetic electrons were wholly localized on the parent
ion (or donor), interaction with a ligand nucleus would be purely
'point dipole', i.e. the same as that for two magnetic point dipoles. The
additional ligand interaction comes from delocalization of the magnetic
electrons. In silicon their wave-function spreads widely, and the
resultant hyperfine interaction does not decrease monotonically with
distance. In the 4/ group bonding takes place only to the immediate
ligand ions, and the degree of electron transfer is usually small. In the
3d group the transfer is usually larger, and may not be confined to the
immediate ligand neighbours.
4.10. Endor line widths
2<? <?£<tesz? zzczsr&er 2Zyd&r 2&?<5W 6b<? KzJz& <?f 7%, £k<? fare spi7-jp&7
relaxation time, must be fairly long and in most cases this means that
the main cause of broadening of the electron paramagnetic resonance
line must be inhomogeneous. Then ideally one spin packet of width

--- Page 280 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 265
Ao> ~ l/r is saturated at the centre of the electron hyperfine transition
2
(M, m) <-» (M — 1, m), and only spins within this packet take part in the
Endor transitions
If r ~ 10~5 s, then the Endor line width parameter
2
should be of order 10 kHz. In practice the ideal situation is not always
attained, and we now consider three reasons for this: inhomogeneous
broadening, cross-relaxation within the electron spin system, and spin
diffusion within the nuclear spin system.
Inhomogeneous broadening
When the effective spin S > I it is frequently observed that the
electronic transitions are broadened owing to random variations in the
crystal field from site to site. The electron resonance energy may be
written
where A// is the random variation of local field due to magnetic dipole
moments of neighbouring ions or nuclei. The terms (hv) an(i (^e)hfs
e ts
represent the energy contributions from fine structure terms or 'initial
splittings' (see §§3.3 to 3.6) and hyperfine terms respectively. The
terms dgfiH, d(hv) and d(hv) represent respectively the effect of
e ta e hta
random variation in the crystal field giving rise to random variations in
g, and in the fine structure and hyperfine structure contributions. The
first of these may always occur, but the second is present only for
S ^ 1. As discussed in § 3.13, for S ^ f it is manifested in the electron
resonance spectrum by a narrower line width for the M = -f ^ <->• — J
transition than for the outer transitions, since changes in the fine
structure parameters affect the position of the central transition only
in second order but the others in first order.
If random crystal field effects are absent, a fixed value of v and a
e
fixed value of H allow the resonance condition to be satisfied only for
one value of AJf/. If, on the other hand, random crystal fields do
contribute to the line width, then even for fixed v and H, the term
e
gfi&H and those in (4.65) can vary at random so long as their sum is
constant. However the terms in (4.65) do not necessarily vary indepen-
dently of one another, as has been elegantly demonstrated by an Endor
experiment of Locher and Geschwind (1963) on 61Ni (/ = -f) in A1 0 ,
2 3
where the Ni2+ ion has an effective spin S = 1. The ion has axial
symmetry about the z-axis, and for a magnetic field directed along this

--- Page 281 ---

266 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
axis the diagonal parts of the spin Hamiltonian are
The electron resonance condition for the transition
is
from which it is clear that a variation dD in D due to random crystal
field effects must be compensated by a variation in H that will be of
opposite sign for the two allowed transitions for which (2M — 1) has
the values +1 and —1 respectively. Thus points within the electron
FIG. 4.13. Effect of inhomogeneity in the value of D for an ion such as Ni2+ (S = 1) in
A1O, with the spin Hamiltonian of eqn (4.66). The Endor transitions of energy hv
2 3 n
shown are for the isotope 61Ni (/ = f). (After Locher and Geschwind 1963.)

--- Page 282 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 267
resonance line associated with different values of H correspond to
different values of D, as illustrated in Fig. 4.13.
The Endor transition (M, m) 4-» (M, m —1) requires a quantum
and, in principle, the values of A \\ and Py, and also of g(*} if it contains
an appreciable 'pseudo-nuclear Zeeman' contribution, may all vary in a
manner linked to the crystal field, and hence to the value of D. In fact
only the variation in A\\ is significant in this case, and Locher and
Geschwind showed that as H was varied through the resonance lines
the value of hv varied linearly not just as —g(I)f)H but as
n
as shown in Fig. 4.14. Here the actual rates of change (6vn/dH) are
+0-13kHz/G for the M = +1 Endor transitions, and — 0-65kHz/G
when M = — 1, showing that the first term in (4.69) is comparable with
the second. The main change in A \\ arises from the variation in the
orbital contribution to the hyperfine field, which is linked to the
residual unquenched orbital momentum (g\\ = 2-195) and hence to
the splitting parameter D through the spin-orbit coupling.
In some cases such as ions with half-filled shells the hyperfine
interactions are mainly due to effects such as core-polarization and
relativistic effects (cf. § 4.7) which may be expected to be substantially
independent of the crystal field. Thus variations in the latter which
affect the fine structure parameters will have no corresponding effect
on the hyperfine parameters. However there may still be some in-
homogeneous broadening of the Endor line because of the inhomogeneous
width AH of the electron resonance line, since the Endor frequency is
not independent of H. For axial symmetry and an arbitrary direction
of H the width of the Endor line can be found by differentiation of eqn
(4.5) with respect to H, which is inherent both in G (see eqn (3.55))
z
and in G = gfiH. For the special case where H is along the symmetry
axis such a differentiation gives
This expression has a complicated dependence on M and m, but is
often smallest for the M = + J <-» — \ transition simply because A#
for the electron resonance line is also normally smallest for this
transition.

--- Page 283 ---

268 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
FIG. 4.14. The six Endor frequencies i> of 61Ni observed in A1O for H \\ c axis at the
n 2 3
jlf o <-» -f 1 e.p.r. line. H was varied within the broad e.p.r. line keeping the microwave
=
frequency fixed. The points and the solid lines give the experimental results whereas the
dashed lines indicate what would be expected if the hfs parameter, A n, were constant
throughout the line. Note that the Endor transitions in the M = — 1 states are also
observed (though much more weakly than those in the M = +1 states) while saturating
the M = +1 <-> 0 transition (see § 4.11). (Locher and Geschwind 1963)

--- Page 284 ---

ELECTRON.NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 269
Since the effects discussed above depend on g(I) and on the magnetic
hyperfine constant (either as A or A2), and possibly also on the nuclear
electric quadrupole parameter P, variation in these quantities will
cause the inhomogeneous contribution to the Endor line width to vary
from isotope to isotope of the same ion if the nuclear moments are
different. There may also be a variation with m (cf. eqns (4.68) and
(4.70)).
We conclude this discussion of inhomogeneous broadening of Endor
lines by giving some numerical values. Locher and Geschwind (1963)
deduced in their experiment on 61M2+ in A1 0 that on varying H by 200
2 3
G (going from A to C in Fig. 4.13) the variation in the hyperfine field H
e
was some 130 G. Since the total orbital contribution to H is estimated
e
as 170 kG, the change is fractionally very small though readily
measurable; it corresponds to a frequency change of some 34 kHz
whereas the half width at half intensity 2dv in the Endor lines was
n
23 kHz.
In contrast, the effect given by (4.70) can sometimes be quite small.
In their experiments on Eu2+ Endor in CaF (§4.7), Baker and
2
Williams (1962) found line widths of 7 and 8 kHz respectively for the
isotopes 153Eu and 151Eu, whose nuclear moments are in the ratio
1:2'27. In addition, the outer electron resonance lines gave the same
Endor width as the M = + |<-» — % transition. These two facts
indicate that inhomogeneous broadening of the Endor lines in this case
was only very minor. We note also from (4.70) that the second term
varies as i>~2 or H~2, and its effect can be reduced by working at a
higher electron resonance frequency. Thus Bessent and Hayes (1965)
found for i69Tm2+ in CaF that the Endor width was reduced from 500
2
to 75 kHz on increasing the electron resonance frequency from 10 to
24 GHz. The second term in (4.70) is more important in this case
because of the high value of A = 1100 MHz (isotropic), and the observed
Endor widths correspond to A# ~ 30 G, which is roughly the extent
of the fluorine ligand hyperfine structure in the electron resonance line
rather than the width of individual lines.
Cross-relaxation within the electron spin system
Cross-relaxation is due to the possibility of two nearby ions, some of
whose resonance frequencies coincide, exchanging a quantum of energy
and undergoing a 'flip-flop' transition. If one ion is subjected to an elec-
tron resonance driving field tending to equalize the populations of two
specific levels, while the other belongs to another spin-packet which is

--- Page 285 ---

270 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
not at resonance, the effect of cross-relaxation is partially to transfer
saturation to the second ion. Conversely, if a nuclear driving field
tends to diminish saturation (or merely change populations of levels)
in this second ion, the effect will also be felt by the first ion, and will be
manifested as an Endor signal for the first ion.
As a specific example we refer to Fig. 1.34, where the AJf = ±1,
ra = +1 hyperfine line is saturated in a system S = \, 1 = 1.
Normally we would expect to observe at most the m = +1 <-» 0 nuclear
transitions in such an Endor experiment. However, if the ions can make
a spin flip corresponding to the left-hand sloping transition
with other ions not undergoing saturation, both the m = +1 level
populations for the first set of ions and the m = 0 populations for the
second set will be changed. As a result, nuclear power applied to the
m = 0 to —1 transitions on the second set of ions may appear as an
Endor transition while saturating the m = +1 line of the first set.
The chance of such a cross-relaxation process occurring is greatly
increased if the concentration of paramagnetic ions is raised. In an
Endor experiment on 59Co2+ (/ = 1, S = J) in MgO, Fry and Llewellyn
(1962) found that at a concentration of 0-1 per cent Co they observed
just 16IS = 28 strong Endor transitions by saturating in turn each
of the eight hyperfine lines. However at 0-5 per cent concentration the
total number of Endor lines was close to 100; as a specific example, all
fourteen Endor transitions M = ±J, Aw = ±1 were observed (with
varying intensity) while saturating the ( + |, —I) <->( — £, —1) electron
resonance line. The higher concentration not only makes cross-relaxa-
tion more likely because on average the paramagnetic ions are closer,
but also because the greater line width makes it easier to satisfy the
conditions for mutual spin flips, which may involve any allowed
transition and not just the type quoted above. Obviously the greater
line width is not purely inhomogeneous in nature, and results in a
decrease in the value of r and an increase in the spin-packet width,
2
giving greater Endor line widths.
Cross-relaxation in the nuclear spin system
In addition to mutual spin flips involving electronic transitions we
may have spin flips involving nuclear transitions. The rate at which
these occur depends on the size of the spin-spin interaction between
nuclei and is thus obviously very much smaller than in the electronic
case. This is particularly true for the central nuclei of the paramagnetic

--- Page 286 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 271
ions themselves as they are comparatively far apart in a dilute crystal.
On the other hand, when a ligand hyperfine structure is present, we are
usually concerned with a number of nuclei of the same species separated
by distances & a few nm. For example, in CaF the F~ ions lie on
2
a simple cubic lattice of spacing 0-27 nm, and each Ca2+ is surrounded
by a cube of eight F~ ions at a distance of 0-235 nm. When all F~ ions
are equivalent, as in pure CaF , the spin-spin interaction between them
2
gives an r.m.s. line width 2dv for the 19F nuclear magnetic resonance
n
varying from 12 to 29 kHz with the orientation of the external magnetic
field (Van Vleck (1948), Pake and Purcell (1948)), which is partly due to
mutual spin flip processes. We may therefore expect a line width of this
order in the fluorine ligand Endor experiments discussed in § 4.9. When
H is along a (110) direction, the value of 2dv is 20 kHz in the n.m.r.
n
experiment, and Bessent and Hayes (1965) find a line width of 20±12
kHz in the F~ endor in Tm2+:CaF .
2
Although the n.m.r. line width should be equal to the Endor line
width for more distant fluorine ions, whose immediate environment is
similar to that in pure CaF , this is not necessarily the case for Endor of
2
the F~ ions immediately adjacent to a paramagnetic ion. There are two
reasons for this :
(a) such P~ ions experience a large local field from the paramagnetic
ion, which even for a purely dipolar interaction is of order ju/r3 = 103 G
if 8 = |, g = 2 and may be considerably larger. Hence the total field
at these F~ nuclei differs considerably from that at more distant nuclei,
thus eliminating the possibility of mutual spin flips except between the
smaller number of nuclei in identical fields. This should give. a smaller
Endor line width for the immediate ligand nuclei of the paramagnetic
ion:
(b) such F- nuclear dipoles can, however, interact with one another
indirectly via the paramagnetic ion, since terms of the form
and similar terms give an (I*' . F) interaction of order A^/(hv ). If
e
A ~ 10 MHz, v = 10 GHz, this interaction constant is of order
F e
10 kHz, and may be multiplied by an appreciable numerical factor for
larger values of S (e.g., S = I for Eu2+). This indirect interaction will
increase the Endor line width, accounting for the observed value
—40 kHz for P- in Eu2+:CaF (Baker and Hurrell (1963)). For a fuller
2

--- Page 287 ---

272 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
discussion of the effects of such interactions, reference should be made
to this paper.
4.11. 'Indirect' observation of Endor transitions
For an ion with 8 = J the populations of the two electronic levels are
both immediately affected by saturating an electronic transition. For
S > 1, we have three or more electronic levels but the microwave
power directly affects only two levels unless the resonance frequencies
for several transitions coincide accidentally. Nevertheless relaxation
proceeds between all the levels of a single ion at a rate ~1/T so that
1?
the populations of all levels are indirectly affected by the saturating
power after a time of order r . This is illustrated in Fig. 4.15 for S = 1,
±
FIG. 4.15. Level populations within an electron spin system S = 1. (a) Levels in thermal
equilibrium, with thermal populations according to their unequal spacing <5 = (hv/kT),
e e
(5 = (hv^/k^). (b) Populations when the lower transition hv is saturated, showing how
e e
the population of the top level is also changed following relaxation through the path
labelled T'I.
where there are two allowed transitions at different frequencies v and
e
v'. If the M = 0<-> — 1 transition for one hyperfine line I = m is
e z
saturated, the population of the M = +1, m state is altered through a
T! relaxation path, while those of the other M = +1 nuclear levels
depend on other relaxation paths that are usually less effective. It
follows conversely that nuclear power applied to nuclear transitions
within the M = +1 level can change the populations of the
M = 0, —1 levels and may thus give an Endor signal while the
M — 0 <-> — 1 transition is observed. The lower three Endor transitions
in Fig. 4.14 were detected 'indirectly' in this way; they belong to the
M = — 1 electronic state but are observed through the electronic

--- Page 288 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 273
M = + !<-» 0 transition. This is a result of population adjustments
within the levels of a single paramagnetic ion resulting from spin-lattice
relaxation processes.
We have already mentioned in § 4.10 how cross-relaxation processes
due to spin-spin interactions in the electron spin system may allow
Endor transitions to be observed indirectly for ions with 8 = J, and
such effects are equally possible for ions with S > 1. We now discuss
similar effects arising from cross-relaxation within a nuclear spin
system.
If we have a system of identical spins in which the level populations
at one point in the specimen differ from those at other points, the spin
flip process will act to make the population differences uniform through-
out the specimen. This process is known as 'spin diffusion'; essentially
it creates a uniform fspin temperature' throughout the specimen, and
without it the concept of a 'spin temperature' would be thermo-
dynamically meaningless, or at least trivial as in the case of a single
spin. It is particularly important in methods of dynamic nuclear
polarization (cf. § 1.12) for ligand nuclei. If the ligand nuclei in the
neighbourhood of a paramagnetic ion become polarized through inter-
action with this ion while a strong microwave field near its electron
resonance frequency is being applied, the polarization is gradually
transferred to more distant nuclei through spin diffusion. (There is of
course a barrier to this for the closest ligand nuclei, because they
experience different local fields due to their proximity to the para-
magnetic ion and are thus not at the same resonance frequency as more
distant ligand nuclei.) The process of polarizing more distant nuclei
involves a flow of energy, whose ultimate source must be the electron
resonance oscillatory field, through the paramagnetic ion. The electron
resonance intensity of the latter can therefore be sensitive to population
differences on quite distant nuclei (of which there are many), giving the
possibility of an Endor experiment on such nuclei. Clearly this type of
'distant Endor' process is closely linked with that of dynamic nuclear
polarization, as might be expected from similarities in the treatment of
§§1.12 and 1.13. It is also linked with the fact that the principal
agents in relaxing nuclear spins in a solid are very commonly para-
magnetic ions, which are in very much more intimate contact with the
lattice than the nuclear spin system.
A study of 'distant Endor' has been made for the system Cr3+: A1 0
2 3
(ruby) by Lambe, Laurance, Mclrvine, and Terhune (1961). Essentially
they found that
19

--- Page 289 ---

274 ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR)
(a) the behaviour of the electron resonance signal is complicated;
when nuclear power is applied to the 27A1 (/ = f) system, the dispersion
signal (%') is decreased at points away from the centre of the electron
resonance line, while the absorption signal (%") is increased at such
points;
(b) such effects are observed when the nuclear frequency was that
required for nuclear resonance on Al nuclei which are so far away that
their nuclear resonance frequency is not shifted through interaction
with the magnetic field of the Cr3+ ion;
(c) the recovery time of the electron resonance signal after removal
of the nuclear power was comparable with the nuclear spin-lattice
relaxation time (~10 s), whereas the Endor mechanisms discussed in
§§4.5 and 4.6 would lead to a recovery time of order of the electronic
spin-lattice relaxation time r ~ 0-1 s.
l
The authors concluded that the distant Al nuclei were being polarized
by the S±I±, S±I:f terms in their interaction with the paramagnetic ions
(the mechanism discussed at the end of § 1.12), which are effective
when the electron resonance frequency is on either side of its central
frequency. Depolarization of the Al nuclei occurs when nuclear mag-
netic resonance power is applied to them, and conversely this affects
the electron resonance signal in the wings, not in the centre, at the
points where the electron resonance frequency has the required value
to produce dynamic nuclear polarization (cf. Fig. 1.39).
4.12. Summary
We conclude the discussion of Endor by recapitulating some of the
salient features of this type of experiment.
(a) High sensitivity. Nuclear magnetic resonance transitions are
observed through their effect on the electron paramagnetic resonance
signal, in many cases aided by the considerable enhancement of the
nuclear transition probability brought about through 'stirring' of the
hyperfine field by the nuclear oscillatory field.
(b) Direct measurement of hyperfine frequencies with high accuracy.
For inhomogeneously broadened electron spin resonance lines, Endor
line widths lie in the region 10-50 kHz, so that Endor frequencies even
of order 103 MHz can be measured to a few kHz. This makes it possible
to observe high-order effects in the hyperfine structure of the para-
magnetic ion with its own nucleus, as well as ligand hyperfine structure
associated with electron transfer and bonding with ligand ions. How-
ever in solids the nuclear Zeeman interaction can be drastically changed

--- Page 290 ---

ELECTRON-NUCLEAR DOUBLE RESONANCE (ENDOR) 275
by the 'pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect'; thus g is often not determined
x
as accurately as is possible using triple resonance methods in atomic
beam measurements on free atoms, where the corrections are smaller
and can be calculated more accurately.
(c) At least three mechanisms for the Endor process are possible—'packet
shifting' (§ 4.4), change in rate of relaxation to lattice (§ 4.6), and 'distant
Endor' (§4.10).

--- Page 291 ---

5
THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
THE rare earth or 'lanthanide' series forms a distinctive group whose
chemical properties are remarkably similar. The valency is usually 3,
with occasional values of 2 or 4 which occur mostly for ions that
thereby achieve an empty, half-full, or full shell. The significant
feature of the lanthanide group is the filling of the 4/ shell, apart from
some exceptional cases where an electron enters the 5d rather than the
4/ shell. The closed shells of electrons correspond to an xenon 'core'
ls22s*2p«3s*3p«3dlQ4;S24:p«4:dw5s*5p«, which is the spectroscopic state
of La3+ and Ce4+. In the following ions electrons are added successively
into the 4/ shell, until this is full with fourteen electrons at Yb2+ and
Lu3+. Table 5.1 gives the basic information about the ground configura-
tion of the tripositive ions.
A striking feature of the lanthanides is that most compounds exhibit
sharp lines in their optical spectra, particularly at low temperatures,
and much detailed information has been obtained for both ground and
TABLE 5.1
Ionic radii (in nanometres) and values of (r2), (r4), and (r6) (in atomic
units). The ionic radii are from Evans (1964) and the other data from
Freeman and Watson (1962)
Ionic
radius <r*> <r4> <r«>
z
Ion. State (nm) (a.u.) (a.u.) (a.u.)
57 La3+ 4/° 0-115
58 Ce3+ 4/1 0-102 1-200 3-455 21-226
59 Pr3+ 4/2 0-100 1-086 2-822 15-726
60 Nd3+ 4/3 0-099 1-001 2-401 12-396
61 Pm3+ 4/4 0-098
62 Sm3+ 4/5 0-097 0-883 1-897 8-775
63 Eu3+ 4/6 0-097
64 Gd3+ 4/7 0-097 0-785 1-515 6-281
65 Tb3+ 4/8 0.100
66 Dy3+ 4/9 0-099 0.726 1-322 5-102
67 Ho3+ 4/10 0-097
68 Er3+ 4/11 0-096 0-666 1-126 3-978
69 Tm8+ 4/12 0-095
70 Yb3+ 4/18 0-094 0-613 0-860 3-104
71 Lu3+ 4 /u 0-093
63 Eu2+ 4f 0-938 2-273 11-670

--- Page 292 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 277
excited states by high resolution spectroscopy. An extensive discussion
of the theory of the spectroscopic properties is given by Wybourne
(1965), much of which is relevant to the paramagnetic resonance
properties with which this chapter is concerned.
5.1. Lanthanide compounds
Lanthanide ions enter many chemical compounds but we shall
confine discussion to a few types of compound where the local symmetry
is at least axial and in which a wide range of lanthanide ions have
been studied. The first of these is the series of lanthanide ethylsulphates,
Ln(C H S0 ) ,9H 0, whose X-ray crystallography was investigated by
2 5 4 3 2
Ketelaar (1937) and more recently by Fitzwater and Bundle (1959),
who examined the compounds of Pr, Er, and Y. The latter workers
show that all heavy atoms are found in the space group P63/m, and that
probably the hydrogen positions also conform to this space group.
The point symmetry at the lanthanide ion is C . This ion has nine
Zh
water molecules as nearest neighbours; six form a triangular prism
with three above and three below the mirror plane containing the
other three water oxygens and the lanthanide ion (see Fig. 5.1). In
the erbium compound the Er—0 distances to the prism are 0-237 nm,
and the remaining three distances are 0-252 nm. If all but the nearest
oxygen positions are neglected, the symmetry about the lanthanide
ion is almost D . This structure has a vertical threefold axis of
Zh
symmetry; if the structure were exactly D% there would also be both
h
a vertical and a horizontal plane of reflexion symmetry. The com-
pounds are isomorphous throughout the group from La3+ to Lu3+, and
also with Y3+. Since the ionic size of Y3+ is 0'093 nm, the later ions
of the group (see Table 5.1) probably fit better into yttrium ethyl-
sulphate as a diluent than into lanthanum ethylsulphate.
A second series, in which the paramagnetic resonance results are
remarkably similar to those in the ethylsulphates, is formed by the
anhydrous trichlorides, type LnCl . LaCl crystallizes in a structure
3 3
whose space symmetry (see Hutchison and Wong 1958) is (76 3/m,
the point symmetry at the La site being C . The La3+ ion is surrounded
3h
by nine approximately equidistant nearest neighbours (chloride ions).
Three of these are coplanar with the La3+ and at a distance of 0-297 nm;
the other six lie, three in a parallel plane above and three in a parallel
plane below, all six at a distance of 0-299 nm from the La3+ ion. All
the lanthanide series enter LaCl as a diluent with this structure, but
3
most of the undiluted anhydrous trichlorides of the heavier ions have

--- Page 293 ---

278 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
FIG. 5.1. Arrangement of the double triangular prism of water oxygen ions in the
lanthanide ethylsulphates, in a plan view as seen along the crystallographic c-axis. In
(R, 6, (f>) coordinates, the Ln3+ ion is at the origin; there are three O= ions in the same
plane at (0-252 nm, 7r/2, (/> = (2n + l)7r/3), and six O= ions (above and below) at
(0-237 nm, 6, <f> = 2n7r/3) and (0-237 nm, TT — 6, </> = 2n7r/3) with 0 approximately 40°.
The values of R, 6 vary slightly with ths lanthanide ion; the values of R given are for
Er3+. The radii of the circles denoting ions are drawn on about half scale relative to the
inter-ionic distances.
a different structure, similar to YC1 . The anhydrous bromides and
3
iodides form similar series, but less resonance work has been done on
these.
A third series with somewhat different symmetry is formed by the
double nitrates, formula type Ln Mg3(NO3) , 24H 0. The crystals are
2 12 2
rhombohedral, space group R3, and the hexagonal cell with
a = l-1004(6)nm,c = 2-4592( 12)nm (values for the cerium salt) contains
three formula units. The detailed X-ray crystallographic study has
been carried out by Zalkin, Forrester, and Templeton (1963). It shows
that the lanthanide ion is surrounded by twelve oxygen atoms at an
average distance of 0-264 nm; these atoms, belonging to six nitrate
ions, are at the corners of a somewhat irregular icosahedron. The
Mg atoms are of two kinds, each surrounded by six water molecules
whose oxygen atoms lie at the corners of an octahedron with an
average Mg—0 distance of 0-207 nm. Lanthanum is the usual diluent
(yttrium does not fit into this lattice); bismuth has also been used but

--- Page 294 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 27S
its crystals are not so stable chemically. Zinc or an ion of the 3d group
can replace magnesium.
The X-ray results confirm a number of conjectures made about the
structure from paramagnetic resonance studies. In particular, Judd
(1957a) had deduced that the crystal field resembled closely that of an
icosahedron. The presence of two types of sites for 3d ions, with
roughly 2:1 abundance, was observed by Trenam (1953), and the
spectra of these ions suggested they were octahedrally coordinated.
In the copper salt Bleaney, Bowers, and Trenam (1955) found that the
line width was reduced in the deuterated compound, suggesting that
the copper ligands are water molecules, while the rather small line
width in the spectrum of the lanthanide ion suggested that its immediate
neighbours are predominantly nitrate groups (Bleaney, Hayes, and
Llewellyn 1957). The site symmetry at the Ce ion found by Zalkin,
Forrester, and Templeton (1963) is (7 , but the spectroscopic and
3
resonance data have mostly been interpreted assuming the symmetry
to be C (see, however, Devine (1967)).
Bv
The arrangement of the nearest magnesium ions around a cerium
ion is shown in Fig. 5.2; the nearest cerium neighbours are three at
0-856 nm and three at 0-859 nm, so that this compound is magnetically
very dilute and very useful for magnetic cooling by adiabatic de-
magnetization. If the magnesium ions are replaced by paramagnetic
ions of the 3d group, the compound is not particularly dilute, as
can be seen from Fig. 5.2. The nearest neighbours to a Mg(l) site
include six Ce at 0-698 nm and six Mg(2) at 0-715 nm, but the nearest
neighbours to a Mg(2) site include another Mg(2) ion at only 0-499
nm.
In this series, and in the ethylsulphates and trichlorides, there is
for magnetic purposes only one lanthanide ion per unit cell, at a site
of threefold or sixfold symmetry. The ethylsulphates are also magneti-
cally rather dilute, the nearest lanthanide neighbours being two at a
distance of 0-71 nm along the c-axis. In the trichlorides the nearest
lanthanide neighbours are again two along the c-axis, but at the
much smaller distance of 0-43 nm.
Two other series of compounds have been examined in which three-
fold symmetry at the lanthanide site might be anticipated. These are
LaF and in contrast to this rather concentrated lanthanide compound,
3
an unusually dilute series, lanthanum hexa-antipyrene iodide (HAPI),
La(C H ON ) I , (Baker and Rubins 1961, Baker and Williams 1961),
n 12 2 6 3
doped with various lanthanide ions. The resonance results indicate a

--- Page 295 ---

280 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
FIG. 5.2. Positions of the magnesium ions (distances in nanometres) relative to a cerium
ion in cerium magnesium nitrate (Zalkin, Forrester, and Templeton 1963).
number of complexities in the crystal structure, including transitions
at low temperatures, and we shall not discuss them further.
A rather different host lattice that has been used for both 4/ and 3d
ions is CaW0 , and its isomorph, SrW0 . These crystals (see Zalkin
4 4
and Templeton 1964) are tetragonal, space group 74^/a, with lattice
constants a = 0-5243 nm, c = 1-1376 nm for the calcium salt. The
point group at the Ca site is $ ; there are two calcium sites in the unit
4
cell, but these are related by a reflection in the (001) plane, so that they
are magnetically equivalent. Both tripositive and dipositive ions
substitute for Ca2+, and provided that charge compensation in the

--- Page 296 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 281
former case is remote, fourfold symmetry about the c-axis is maintained
for the paramagnetic ion. The calcium ion has eight oxygen neighbours
at an average distance of 0-246 nm, while the tungsten has tetrahedral
coordination with a tetragonal distortion.
Paramagnetic resonance studies have also been made of lanthanide
ions subject to crystal fields of octahedral or cubic symmetry. The
former occurs in the compounds MgO and CaO, both of which form
crystals of the NaCl type (space group Ofy, with lattice constants
0-4203 and 0-4797 nm respectively. The cation lies at the centre of a
regular octahedron of six O2~ ions, and lanthanide ions with three
positive charges can be introduced as impurities in small concentration
on cation sites. Their spectrum is observed to have cubic symmetry,
and charge compensation must take place at remote sites. Divalent
ions such as Eu2+ can also be introduced, and the undiluted compounds
EuO, EuS, EuSe, EuTe have the same structure.
Trivalent lanthanide ions can be introduced into CdF , CaF , SrF ,
2 2 2
BaF , and SrCl , whose crystals also belong to the 0* space group,
2 2
with lattice constants as given in Fig. 5.3. The structure may be
FIG. 5.3. Crystal structure of CaF and isomorphous compounds. The Ca2+ ion is at the
2
centre of a cube of eight F~ ions, and the (x, y, z) axes are the fourfold cubic axes.
The lattice constants (twice the length of the cube edge in this diagram) are CdF,
2
0-540 nm; SrF , 0-586 nm; SrCl, 0-700 nm; CaF, 0-545 nm; BaF , 0-619 nm. The
2 2 2 2
numbers 1 to 4, and 5 to 8, label the apices of the two tetrahedra which make up the cube.

--- Page 297 ---

282 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
regarded as a simple cubic array of fluorine ions with calcium ions
at every other body centre. Each calcium is at the centre of a cube of
eight fluorine ions (see Fig. 5.3), the Ca—F distance being 0-236 nm,
and the lanthanide ions substitute for calcium. The tripositive ions
are observed with cubic symmetry, or with tetragonal or trigonal
symmetry. In the first case charge compensation must be remote; in
the second an extra F~ ion occupies the nearest vacant interstitial
site, and in the third it is presumed that an 02~ ion replaces an F~
ion on one apex of the immediate cube of fluorines (other possibilities
may occur). A number of dipositive lanthanide ions have also been
observed in CaF , occurring either naturally (such as Eu2^", Sm2+), or
2
produced by irradiation.
Another crystal of the same basic structure is Th0 or Ce0 , where
2 2
the cation is quadripositive and the anion dinegative. The lattice
constants are 0-559 nm and 0-541 nm respectively, and crystals have
been grown, both with four-valent lanthanide ions such as Tb4+ and
with the more common tripositive ions, in which the paramagnetic
resonance spectrum shows cubic symmetry.
5.2. The free ions
Outside the xenon core, the electrons in the lanthanide group of
ions nearly all occupy either the 4/ shell or the 6s shell. For the tri-
positive ions, the configuration is 4/n, where n = Z — 57 and Z is the
atomic number of lanthanum. For the dipositive ions the configuration
is 4/n+1, and for the neutral atoms the ground state is 4/n+16s2, except
for Lai which is 5d6s2 and Gdl which is 4/75c?6<s2. Since 6s2 is a closed
shell the spectroscopic ground states of the atoms and dipositive ions
are the same. For the few quadripositive ions measured the configura-
tion is 4/n~1, and hence in nearly all the cases with which we shall be
concerned the magnetic properties are decided by the number of
electrons in the /-shell. The coupling between these electrons is not
far from perfect LS-coupling, the ground state being determined by
Hund's rules. There are, however, some appreciable corrections that
arise from the fact that the spin-orbit coupling energy is not negligible
in comparison with the Coulomb energy. For example, the splittings
within the ground multiplet do not obey the Lande interval rule and
corrections must be applied in deriving the value of the spin-orbit
coupling parameter. These are summarized in a paper by Judd and
Lindgren (1961) (see also Conway and Wybourne 1963), and their
magnitude can be seen from Table 5.2, which gives the energy levels

--- Page 298 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 283
for the configuration 4/6. This table shows the energy levels calculated
first, on pure £$-coupling, and second, after being corrected for
second-order effects of the spin-orbit coupling, the spin-orbit parameter
being chosen to give the best fit to the experimental values, for the
TABLE 5.2
Energy levels in the ground multiplet of 4/6, 7F, (L — 3, S = 3,J =
to 6), in cm~l relative to J = 0
Eu3+
in
SmI (free atom) Sm2+ europium
Pure LS- in Sm2+ ethyl- Eu3+
J coupling Corrected Experiment SrF (calc) sulphate (calc)
2
6 3724 4021 4021 ( ) 3981 5000 5022
5 2660 3127 3125 (3100) 3099 3920 3921
4 1773 2275 2273 (2300) 2257 2880 2866
3 1064 1490 1490 1506 1481 1911 1888
2 532 812 812 805 808 1046 1063
1 177 291 293 263 291 376 374
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
The first three columns are for SmI; the first two are calculated by Conway and Wy-
bourne (1963) using a value of £ = 1064 cm"1 chosen to fit the experimental values of
Albertson (1937) in. column 3. The effect of the second-order spin-orbit terms is shown by
the difference between column 1 (pure Z^S'-coupling) and column 2 (corrected for second-
order terms). Column 4 gives values for Sm2+ (SmIII) in SrF , estimated from Wood
2
and Kaiser (1962). Column 6 gives values for Eu3+ (EuIV) in europium ethylsulphate
estimated from the analysis of Judd (19596). Columns 5 and 7, calculated values for
Sm2+ and Eu3+, are from Ofelt (1963).
SmI spectrum. The corrections are quite considerable, especially for
the intermediate levels. This table shows also estimated values for
Sm2+ (in SrF ) and for Eu3+ (in europium ethylsulphate). Both these
2
ions are isoelectronic with neutral Sm, and a comparison of Sm and
Sm2+ shows that the removal of the 6s2 electrons in the latter has only
a small effect, considerably less than that of the extra nuclear charge
in the case of Eu3+.
The values of the spin-orbit coupling parameter £ have been calcu-
lated using Hartree-Fock wave-functions by Blume, Freeman, and
Watson (1964); the results are rather higher than the experimental
values, as can be seen from the comparison in Table 5.3. This table
gives also the ground term of the multiplet, and its value of gj from
a simple Lande formula, together with the energy of the first excited
state of the multiplet. The values of gj need a number of corrections.
Besides the Schwinger electrodynamic correction for the spin gr-factor

--- Page 299 ---

284 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
TABLE 5.3
Values of the spin orbit coupling parameter £for the tripositive ions of the
4/ group, together with the Lande value of gj for the ground state and the
energy of the first excited state of the multiplet. The values of £ are from
Blume, Freeman, and Watson (1964). More accurate values of £ and the
energy of the first excited state, which vary slightly from salt to salt, are
obtained from analyses of the optical spectra
£ £ Energy
Z Ion (exp) (calc) Term gj (cm"1)
58 4/1 Ce3+ 640 740 *F% f 0
*F% 2200
59 4/2 Pr3+ 750 878 3#4 * 0
3# 2100
5
60 4/3 Nd3+ 900 1024 4*f A o
4/i_i 1900
61 4/4 Pm3+ */* f 0
4
5/ 1600
5
62 4/5 Sm3+ 1180 1342 6#f f 0
6#J 1000
63 4/6 Eu3+ 1360 7F 0 0
0
7F f 400
t
64 4/7 Gd3+ 1717 8£| 2 0
6P 30000
65 4/8 Tb3+ 1620 1915 7^ f 0
6
7F § 2000
&
66 4/9 Dy3+ 1820 2182 •H^ t 0
Jis.
67 4/10 Ho3+ 2080 2360 5' 2 4 o
8
68 4/11 Er3+ 2470 2610 4/L f o
4Jis. 6500
69 4/12 Tm3+ 2750 2866 *H 6 i o
3#5 t
70 4/13 Yb3+ 2950 3161 2|pj | 0
2^j f 10000
•f This level lies above 3H^.
(which requires the use of 2-00232 for g instead of 2), and relativistic
8
and diamagnetic corrections (usually of order 0-1 to 0-2 per cent),
there are somewhat larger corrections due to admixtures of excited
states through the spin-orbit coupling. For example, this makes the
ground state of Hoi (see Judd and Lindgren 1961)

--- Page 300 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 28fi
but fortunately the admixture only effects the Zeeman splitting in the
square, i.e.
^(corrected) = (0-9860)2gr(4/ )+(0-1669)2^(2^i5) + ...., (5.2)
¥
so that the effect is fairly small (usually less than 1 per cent). The
overall effect of the various corrections can be assessed from Table 5.4,
which summarizes some experimental results for the neutral atoms,
mostly obtained by atomic beam measurements.
5.3. Crystal field theory—C symmetry
3h
Early measurements of the susceptibility of rare-earth salts in the
vicinity of room temperature showed that it was generally rather
close to that expected from an assembly of free ions. Curie's law was
fairly well obeyed, and the magnitude of the susceptibility was close
to that expected from values of gj and J appropriate to the ground
term of the multiplet. Since the energy of the first excited state of the
multiplet is generally a few thousand cm-1, which is large compared
with room temperature (300& = 200 env1), contributions to the
susceptibility from the excited states are negligible except for the ions
4/5 (Sm3+) and 4/6 (Sm2+, Eu3+) where the first excited state is unusually
low in energy (see, for example, Van Vleck (1932)).
The inference from these results is that the magnetic electrons are
but little affected by the surroundings of the magnetic ion in a crystal,
and since the 4/ electrons form an 'inner shell' this is not surprising.
(In fact 4/ electrons have about the same radial extension as 3d
electrons, but the diffuse outer electron shells 55, 5p keep the ligand
ions away.) At temperatures well below room temperature departures
from Curie's law appear, which are attributed to interactions with the
ligand ions with energies of the order 10-100 cm"1. Since bonding effects
are expected to be very small or negligible for 4/ electrons, the inter-
action with the ligands is treated by the approximation of a crystal
potential F, set up by the electric charges on the ligands, in which
the magnetic electrons move. Numerical calculation of this potential
is difficult, but it must reflect the symmetry of the crystal at a rare-
earth ion site. If, further, we confine ourselves to potential terms that
have matrix elements within the manifold of 4/ states, terms of odd
parity can be omitted. Further it can be shown from the properties of
spherical harmonics that terms of higher degree than the sixth need
not be considered, since their matrix elements are zero for /-electrons.
To illustrate the theory it is convenient to take a concrete example,
and for this purpose we choose a crystal potential appropriate to

--- Page 301 ---

TABLE 5.4
Spectroscopic data for the neutral atoms with 4/n configurations from atomic beam measurements. A, B are the
magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole hyper fine constants. The isotopes marked | are radioactive. For the nucl
moments, some data from other experimental methods are included (values marked J include the diamagnetic correction]
Pi
A B (nuclear Q
Atom State gj Isotope / (MHz) (MHz) magnetons) (barns)
4/3 Pr 4/|» 0-731044(33) 141 5 2 + 926-20894(27) -11-87375(543) + 4-25(5) -0-0589(42)
142t 2 67-5(5) 7-0(20)
4/4 Nd 5/ 4 0-6032(1) 143 \ — 195-649(9) + 122-25(28) f \ t - — 1- 1 0 - 6 08 3 5 ( ( 5 6 ) 0) -0-484(20)
h -0-654(4)
145 7 2 -121-627(27) + 64-60(37) ( -0-675(40) -0-253(10)
147J 1 -95-531(19) + 60-65(70)
4/5 Pm «Hf
*HI 0-831(5) 147| 7 Z 447(9) 267(70) + 2-58(7) + 0-74(20)
151f 358(23) 777(94)
4/6 Sm 'Fo (f)
IF ! 1-49840(5) 147 7 2 -33-4971(1) -58-7543(5) — 0-8074(7) -0-20(2)
149 7 2 -27-6139(1) + 16-9195(2) -0-665 + 0-058(6)
153f " 3 2 -2-100(5) + 289-042(4) -0-021(1) + 1-1(3)
4/7 Eu 8S^\ 1-99340(7) 151 5 2 -20-0523(2) -0-7012(35) i +3-4630(6) + 1-16
152t 3 9-345(6) 1-930(165) 1-912(4)
153 f -8-8532(2) -1-7852(35) J +1-5292(8) + 2-9
Gd 155 _8 -0-2567(6)
2
J -0.2584(5) + 1-59(16)
157 f -0-3363(12) + 1-70(16)
4/9 Tb 6flri5 1-3225(30) 159 i + 667-9(16) + 1381(19) + 2-000(12) + 1-12(10)
2
2 + 1-994(4)
4/io D y 5/ E, 1-24166(7) 161 5 2 -115-8(10) + 1102(15) -0-47(9) + 2-36(40)
163 5 + 162-9(6) + 1150(20) + 0-66(13) + 2-46(40)
2
4/11 Ho 4/ii 1-1951540(36) 165 7 + 800-5844(4) — 1667-957(15) + 4-03(5) + 2-4
2
4/12 Er 3#' 1-16377(17) 167 7 -120-4864(5) —4552-959(23) J -0-5647(24) + 2-827(12)
6 2
169f 725-46(31) — t 0-513(25)
4/13 Tm *Fj 1-1411891(32) 169 i — 374-137641(10) — J -0-2310(15)
i
170t 1 200(3) 1010(15) 0-2448(36)
171| 372(4) 0-2277(36)
i
Yb 171 J +0-49188(2)
t
173 J —0-67755(2) + 2-8(2)
f

--- Page 302 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 287
a site of C symmetry. In many ways this is one of the simplest, and
3h
historically it is the most important because of the experimental and
theoretical work on the rare-earth ethylsulphates. Single crystals of
these salts can be grown from aqueous solution for all the rare-earth
ions, and were used for most of the early susceptibility measurements
at low temperatures and for magnetic resonance work. The existence
of experimental results for a homologous series was a vital touchstone
in the development of a successful theoretical approach by Elliott and
Stevens. The anhydrous chlorides, on which work was initiated later
by Hutchison, have the same site symmetry, and the resonance results
for this series are remarkably similar to those for the ethylsulphates.
It is therefore convenient to consider them together.
For a site of C (or Z> J symmetry the crystal potential takes the
Bh 3
form (omitting terms whose matrix elements are zero for /-electrons)
This can be written in the abbreviated form
by using the functions P^ listed in Table 15. (The terms P| and P* are
proportional to odd powers of z and are missing because of reflection
symmetry in the xy plane for C ; they will be needed when dealing
3h
with the double nitrates, which have C symmetry). The first three
3v
terms are independent of x, y and are axially symmetric about the
2-axis; the fourth term has sixfold symmetry about this axis. Its form
depends on a particular choice for the #-axis relative to the crystal,
and there are six such choices, related by rotations of 60° about the
z-axis.
The effect of this potential can be found by integrating over the
wave-function of each electron and then summing over all the magnetic
electrons. As, however, neither the coefficients AQ nor the radial parts
k
of the atomic wave-functions are known with any accuracy, only
relative values due to the different angular dependences of the wave-
functions are known precisely. The calculation of the latter is greatly
simplified by use of the simple relations between the matrix elements
of the potential operators and the appropriate 'spin' operators, as
discussed in Chapter 16. Within a manifold of states for which / is

--- Page 303 ---

288 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
constant the potential (5.3), for example, can be replaced by
Here (rk) is the mean value of rk averaged over the atomic wave-
functions; some calculated values are given in Table 5.1. (J|| a ||J),
etc., are numerical coefficients listed for each ion in Table 20, and the
Oq are the spin operators listed in Table 16 whose matrix elements
k
are given in Tables 17. Thus the whole calculation is reduced to a
matter of looking up numerical values in the appropriate Tables,
apart from the Aq(rk) which are regarded as adjustable parameters.
k
The theory outlined above is based on the work of Stevens and Elliott
(Stevens 1952a, Elliott and Stevens 1952, 1953a, 19536), who attempted
a systematic treatment of the rare-earth ethylsulphates. Within a
manifold of given J the results can be illustrated rather simply. Spin
operators of the type 0^ contain only J and hence have only diagonal
z
matrix elements for the 2J + 1 states characterized by different values
of the magnetic quantum number J or M. These diagonal matrix
z
elements are the same for the states + J and — J since the operators
z z
contain only even powers of J. Since states with different values of
z
\J \ will in general have different energy, a crystal potential containing
Z
only such terms will produce a series of doublets characterized by states
of the type | ±Jfef), with one singlet state, |0), if J is integral.
Spin operators Oq for which m is not zero have only off-diagonal
k
elements and therefore admix states of different M to give a resultant
state of the type
with, of course, 2 CM = 1 ^° satisfy the normalization condition. In
any given admixture the values of M are those with successive differ-
ences equal to q. Thus inclusion of the last spin operator 0^ in (5.5)
produces states of the form
where the number of states admixed is not more than three because
the maximum value of J in the ground state is 8.
So far we have considered just a first-order perturbation approach
in which only matrix elements within a manifold of given J are included.
In a second-order approach it is necessary to include matrix elements
between states of different J and these can again be obtained by the

--- Page 304 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 289
method of operator equivalents. The most important elements are
those between values of J which differ by unity, since these are adjacent
in energy; they are given in eqns (16.33)-(16.36) for C symmetry,
3h
from which it can be seen that they produce states of the form
where the values of M in J' are the same as those in J except that if
Jf > J there may be an additional value of M which is greater than J.
For the sake of simplicity admixtures of states of different J will be
mostly ignored in the following general discussion; their inclusion
alters the numerical values, but (with a few exceptions) does not affect
the basic properties.
In this discussion it is convenient to treat first the ions with Kramers
degeneracy (half-integral values of J), for which the energy levels are
degenerate in pairs, with states linked by time reversal. We shall,
however, leave the ions with a half-filled shell until later, since their
ground state is 8$?, which is split by the crystal field only through
higher-order perturbations. Secondly we shall discuss the position for
non-Kramers ions, with integral values of J.
Ions with Kramers degeneracy
For ions with an odd number of electrons (half integral values of J),
the crystal field lifts the degeneracy completely except for the necessary
twofold degeneracy imposed by Kramers theorem, so that the levels
consist of (</ + !) doublets. Since for such ions the maximum value of
J in the ground state is --f-, the wave-functions of the Kramers doublets
are linear combinations of states | ±M) of the form
The actual energy levels and relative admixtures of the states depend
of course on the size of the various parameters of the crystal field.
In general, the doublets are separated in energy by 10-100 cm"1, so
that a magnetic resonance transition is observable in the microwave
region only between the two components of a doublet. At temperatures
where excited doublets are populated the lifetimes of the excited
states are generally so short because of relaxation to the lattice that
transitions between them are too broad to be observable, so that in
practice resonance is almost always restricted to the ground doublet.
20

--- Page 305 ---

290 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
To find the resonance condition we must calculate the Zeeman effect
for each doublet. In a first approximation, where we consider only
matrix elements within the ground manifold of a given value of J,
the Zeeman operator L+2S reduces to the simpler form gjJ or, in
the notation of Elliott and Stevens and Chapter 16, <J|| A ||J)J. Thus
calculation of the first-order Zeeman effect is reduced to finding the
matrix elements of J, J, J within each doublet. Since we have axial
x y z
symmetry, the matrix elements of J J are equal, but in general
x) y
different from those of J so that the Zeeman effect within each doublet
z)
is described by a spin Hamiltonian with an effective spin S = % and
an anisotropic (7-'tensor' with axial symmetry of the form
where
Here |+), | —} are the two components of the doublet given by one
of the combinations (5.8). To preserve the correct sign of g^ which is
9
important for some purposes, the two states | + J), | — i) of the effectiv
spin should be chosen to satisfy the correspondence
Physically this correspondence is required in order that the spin Hamil-
tonian shall give the correct transition intensities when circularly
polarized radiation is used (see Chapter 3).
It is readily seen that there are no matrix elements of the operators
J , e7_ between the two states of the first doublet listed in (5.8), so
+
that 01 = 0 and no transition is allowed within the doublet (cf. §§ 1.
3.2). For the other two doublets g± is finite and transitions are allowed;
values of g\\ and g can then be measured in a resonance experiment
±
with the external field parallel and perpendicular to the z-axis respec-
tively. For the second doublet in (5.8) this means that all the admixture
coefficients can be determined, since we have two pieces of experimental
information and the normalizing relation for the coefficients means
there are really only two unknowns though there are three coefficients.
For the third doublet, which can be written in the form
we have

--- Page 306 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 291
This gives a relation between g^ and g± which is exact only in so far
as we can neglect admixtures of states of different J, and experimental
measurement of the two </-values gives a simple test of the validity of
this approximation.
In more accurate measurements it may be necessary to take account
of the corrections to (J|| A ||J) discussed in § 5.2. The most important
of these are the use of 2-0023 for g instead of 2, and the correction for
s
the breakdown of LS-coupling, which for most purposes can be
adequately allowed for by the use of a modified value of (J|| A ||J) or
gj such as that given by eqn (5.2) for a special case. However in genera
the important corrections to the Zeeman energy calculation arise
through the admixture of states of different J (principally J±l, the
state adjacent in energy); if these admixtures are known the corrections
to the Zeeman energy can be found using §§ 16.3, 16.4 and the values
of (J + l || A ||J) listed in Table 20.
For smaller values of J not all the values of M shown in eqns (5.6)
may appear. Thus for J < -V- the second doublet is just |±J), for
which the values of both g \\ and g are completely defined
L
if admixtures of different J are negligible. Similarly in this case the
first doublet will span just the values |±f) and iTf) s° that it can
be written in a form similar to (5.11). Obviously for every doublet
whose states involve two values of J there is another doublet with
z
orthogonal states given by changing 6 to 0+77/2, which has a different
energy due to the crystal field. Similarly, when three values of J
z
are admixed there are three orthogonal doublets, all with different
energy.
At field strengths where the Zeeman energy is not small compared
with the crystal field splittings it may be necessary to include Zeeman
effects of higher order than the first. The second-order Zeeman effect
generally results in both levels of a doublet being displaced equally
by an amount proportional to H2', this does not change the frequency
of a transition between the two states of a doublet as far as terms of
order H2 are concerned. The third-order Zeeman effect does affect the
transition frequency, since it may be of opposite sign for the two com-
ponents of a doublet and displace them in opposite directions. This
can be seen in another way, as a by-product of the second-order
Zeeman effect. This modifies the wave-functions of a doublet in such

--- Page 307 ---

292 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
a way that instead of | +}, | —} they take the form
where a, the admixture coefficient for the other states, is proportional
to H . If we now calculate the first-order Zeeman effect using the new
states, its energy, which is proportional to H, will be modified by a
fraction of order a2, so that we have a correction to the energy separa-
tion of order H3. This effect is most striking for a doublet for which
g = 0, which is not split by a perpendicular magnetic field in first-
±
order, but which may be split in third-order and give a weakly allowed
transition at high magnetic fields. In the case of the first doublet
listed in (5.8) this can be regarded as a result of admixing of states of
the other two doublets by off-diagonal matrix elements of the Zeeman
interaction.
Non-Kramers ions
For the rare-earth ions that have an even number of electrons in the
4/ shell, the values of J are integral, with a maximum value of 8 in
the ground state. Since the crystal potential for C^ symmetry (eqn
h
(5.4)) admixes states whose values of J differ by 6, it is readily found
z
from the spin operators that its effect on a manifold of 2J + 1 states
is to give a series of doublet and singlet energy levels. The doublets
are of the form
while the singlets have admixtures of the form
or a linear combination of the form
The singlets (5.16) arise in the following way. The states M = ±3
are degenerate except through the action of the VI term in the crystal
field, which has a matrix element between them ; this splits them by an
amount directly proportional to the magnitude of the V\ term, with
states of the simple symmetrical and antisymmetrical form given in
(5.16). It can be seen that the operator J then has a matrix element
z

--- Page 308 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 293
and it follows that an oscillatory magnetic field along the z-axis can
produce transitions between them. Because of the magnitude of the
Fg term, this transition will usually be in the infrared.
Similarly, the states M = ±6 are degenerate except through the
action of the F6 term which has matrix elements
The energy matrix will thus be a 3 x 3 matrix, but we can simplify
it by choosing as the basic states the linear combinations
since the second state |6a) then has no matrix element with |0) and is
thus an eigenstate. The other eigenstates are found from the energy
matrix
where d and The eigen-
states are clearly of the form
When c < d the state that lies close to |6°) in energy has approximately
and is depressed below |6a) by an amount A = 2c2/d.
The basic states for the ground doublet are thus
where q is small and p is close to unity. In the presence of a magnetic
field it is convenient to replace these states by the linear combinations
The Zeeman interaction Z = — [Ji. H = A/?J . H has no matrix elements

--- Page 309 ---

294 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
between |f) and [77} and opposite expectation values in either state:
Using a fictitious spin S = J the spin Hamiltonian can be written as
where approximately
The individual values of A , A have no significance. Transitions occur
x y
at
and are allowed when the oscillatory magnetic field is along the z-axis.
The square of the magnetic dipole matrix element for the transition is
and grows progressively smaller as the frequency increases. This
corresponds to a change from the states II'}, |?/} which are correct in
zero magnetic field through intermediate states in a finite magnetic
field to the states |f), (77) of eqn (5.19a), which are correct when the
Zeeman interaction is very large compared with A.
We return now to the doublet levels whose states are of the form
(5.15). Their behaviour is considered in detail in § 18.5 (see also § 3.14)
and we give here only an outline. Operating with J gives diagonal
z
matrix elements of opposite sign for the two states of a doublet so
that they have a linear Zeeman splitting when a magnetic field is
applied along the 2-axis. There are no matrix elements between the
two states, so there is no Zeeman splitting with a perpendicular magnetic
field, nor will transitions be allowed between them through the action
of an oscillatory perpendicular magnetic field. However the fact that
we are dealing with non-Kramers ions means that the doublets can be
split by a crystal field of lower symmetry, such as might arise through
the Jahn-Teller effect or through crystal imperfections. Any such
splitting that arises from a matrix element of the distorted crystal
field between the two states of the doublet will admix the two states,
so that a transition is now allowed between them with an oscillatory
magnetic field along the z-axis, in the same way as for the levels con-
sidered earlier in this section. An appropriate cspin Hamiltonian' for

--- Page 310 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 295
such a doublet (S = J) is again (5.20), but now A^, A are allowed to
y
have a distribution of values and A does not have just one value.
The quantum of energy required for a transition is given by (5.21) and
involves A, so that it will have a spread of values ; the transition intensity
also depends on A (eqn (5.22)) and vanishes for A = 0, so that we
expect a broad line, asymmetrical in shape. (This contrasts with the
situation considered above, where the transition was allowed without
any distortion of the crystal field, and therefore is narrow and normal
in shape.)
When the point symmetry at the lanthanide site lacks a plane of
inversion symmetry, a non-Kramers ion can have an electric dipole
moment normal to this plane, as discussed in §§ 15.10, 18.5. In C
3h
symmetry, there is only one plane of reflection symmetry, normal to
the c-axis, so that an electric dipole moment can exist in a non-
Kramers ion normal to, but not parallel to, the c-axis. If the effect of
an electric field on this dipole moment is represented by an additional
term (cf. eqns (3.108) or (18.67))
in the spin Hamiltonian, transitions will be allowed for an oscillatory
electric field (E^)^ normal to the c-axis, whose intensity depends on
(g^EJ*. The transition rate is now given by eqns (3.109), (3.110).
If resonance is observed at constant frequency and variable magnetic
field it will lie wholly at field strengths below the value H = (ftco/g^p)
0
corresponding to A = 0, and will be asymmetrical in shape. The exact
line shape will depend on the fraction of ions with a given value of A2
(see § 3.14), and will be different according to whether transitions
are induced by (//i)|| or by (E-^^. In particular, if the transition is
due to (Hi) || it will have zero intensity at H = H while if it is due to
z 0
(Ei)± it will have a finite intensity (in fact the maximum intensity)
at H = H (see Fig. 3.26).
z 0
Although we have not yet considered hyperfine structure in this
chapter it is convenient to point out here that for a non-Kramers
doublet the hyperfine Hamiltonian will have the simple form
and the only change required above is that for each hyperfine compo-
nent g\\fiH must be replaced by (g\\ftH+A\\m) in eqn (5.21), where
z z
m = L.

--- Page 311 ---

296 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
5.4. Magnetic hyperfine structure
A general expression for the hyperfine interaction is given in eqn
(17.61). We shall consider first the magnetic interaction where the
nuclear magnetic moment can be considered as interacting with a
local magnetic field due to the surrounding electrons. This field, H ,
e
arises partly from the orbital motion of the electrons and partly from
their spin magnetization. For a free ion in L$-coupling this resultant
electronic field precesses rapidly about the angular momentum vector
J, and to a good approximation only that component of the field that
is parallel to J and hence a constant of the motion need be retained.
This makes it possible to reduce the magnetic hyperfine Hamiltonian
to the simple form
where
In these formulae g is the nuclear magnetogyric ratio appropriate to
n
the nuclear magnetic moment expressed in nuclear magnetons, and
(J|| N ||J) is a numerical factor given by eqns (17.51), (17.52) and
listed for each ion in Table 20. A' is discussed below.
s
In the ground states of the rare-earth ions (with the exception of
the half filled shell 8$7) the magnetic hyperfine structure is due mainly
to the orbital rather than the spin contribution. To illustrate this we
carry out the numerical calculation of <J|| N ||J) for the ground state
of the Tb3+ ion, 7F (L = 3, S = 3, J = 6). From eqn (17.51) we have
Q
(orbital contribution)
(spin contribution)
where from eqn (17.52) for this ion, (L . J) = (S . J) = JJ(J + 1) and
(L . S) = &J(J + 1) and from eqn (17.46) f = - ir. Hence
T
where \ represents the orbital contribution and -^ the spin contribu
tion. The reason why the former dominates is that we have quite a

--- Page 312 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 297
large orbital momentum making its full contribution, while the spin
magnetization is rather uniformly distributed at any given distance
so that the net field it produces at the nucleus is small (for a distribution
with spherical symmetry it would vanish).
For an ion with a half-filled shell (8S ground state) the spin magneti-
7
zation has spherical symmetry, and the orbital momentum is zero;
we should therefore expect the magnetic hyperfine constant A to be
zero. In practice a finite value is obtained (see §§ 4.7, 5.9), and this
is attributed mainly to the 'core-polarization' effect (see §§ 17.5, 17.6)
which produces a non-zero spin density at the nucleus. This is repre-
sented by a term similar to that in eqn (17.60).
In addition we have a contribution from relativistic effects (see below)
which is also of the form (S . I) so that it is simplest to lump the two
effects together in a term A (S . I). As above, we must project S
8
onto J using eqns (17.52), (17.53) so that we obtain for the contribution
A' in eqn (5.26)
s
We consider now an ion subjected to a crystal field. Within the
approximation where we need include only matrix elements within a
given manifold J, the magnetic hyperfine calculation is simple because,
like the Zeeman interaction, it requires only the matrix elements of
the operator J. There is therefore a linear relation between the hyper-
fine and the Zeeman interaction. For any sub-space of the 2J + 1
manifold which we can represent by a fictitious spin S, and for which
the Zeeman interaction takes the form /?H . g . S, the hyperfine
interaction will have the form S.A.I., where A is a 'tensor' which
obviously has the same principal axes as the gr-ctensor'. The principal
values of these tensors are connected by the relation
where gj — (J|| A ||J). In measurements at constant frequency and
varying field, this relation means that the hyperfine separation will be
the same in field along each of the principal axes; except in the case
of no anisotropy, this will not be true in other directions because of the
different transformation properties of g and A as expressed in eqns
(3.5) and (3.44). It follows also that we can find the value of Aj from

--- Page 313 ---

298 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
a magnetic resonance experiment by using the experimental values of
g, A along the principal axes without any knowledge of the crystal
field.
These simple results no longer hold when the crystal field admixes
considerable amounts of states of different J. The reason for this is
that, although the matrix elements of the hyperfine operator can
always be related to those of the Zeeman operator (see § 17.4), the
constant of proportionality does not vary in the same way for the two
operators, as can be seen from eqns (17.56), (17.57). Thus in practice
the extent to which the relation (5.30) is satisfied serves as a measure
of the validity of the approximation in which matrix elements with
states of different J are neglected.
In the absence of direct measurements of the hyperfine interaction
for a free tripositive ion the value of Aj can be deduced from measure-
ments on salts if allowance is made for the admixture of states of
different J through the action of the crystal field. A list of the values
obtained in this way for the ground state J of the stable isotopes is
given in Table 5.5. Before any direct measurements of the nuclear
TABLE 5.5
Values of the magnetic hyperfine constant Aj for the free tripositive ions,
calculated from magnetic resonance measurements on salts. The con-
tribution from core polarization is assumed to be given by the formula
A' = -(63±10)«J|| A ||J}-% (MHz), while A' is similar but
c n s
with the parameter —(85^10). The value of Aj for Tm3+ is estimated
from measurements of Tm and Tm2+ (Bleaney 1964b)
Nuclear
Abundance spin Aj < A' 8
Ion Isotope (%) (1} (MHz) (MHz) (MHz)
59 Pr3+ 141 100 5
2
+ 1093(10) + 20(3) + 27(3)
60 Nd3+ 143 12-3 -220-3(2) -5-3(8) -7-2(8)
1
145 8-3 -136-9(1) -3-3(5) -4-5(5)
I
61 Pm3+ 147 radioactive ( + )599(6) ( + )20(3) ( + )27(3)
I
62 Sm3+ 147 15-0 7 -240(3) — 10-7(17) -15(2)
-2
149 13-9 -194(3) -8-6(14) -11-7(14)
I
65 Tb3+ 159 100 + 530(5) -39(6) -54(6)
f
66 Dy3+ 161 19-0 — 109-5(22) + 3-4(6) + 4-6(6)
f
163 24-9 + 152-4(30) -5-0(8) -6-8(8)
f
67 Ho3+ 165 100 + 812-1(10) -17-5(27) -24(3)
I
68 Er3+ 167 22-9 7 -125-3(12) + 2-0(3) + 2-7(3)
2
69 Tm3+ 169 100 (-393-5) + 4-8(8) + 6-5(8)
1
70 Yb3+ 171 14-4 + 887-2(15) -9-0(15) -12(2)
k
173 16-2 -243-3(4) + 2-5(4) + 3-4(4)
f

--- Page 314 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 299
magnetic moments of the lanthanides were available, such values of
Aj were used to calculate the nuclear moments by making estimates
of (r~3) and neglecting the core polarization effect. However, such
estimates obtained in different ways showed as much as 25 per cent
variation for the lighter rare earth ions. Following the introduction of
Endor and atomic beam triple resonance methods, a number of the
nuclear moments have been directly determined, thus affording a
check on the estimates of (r~3), if the contribution from core polariza-
tion is known. There is no experimental evidence about the magnitude
of this contribution except from measurements on ions with the 4/7
configuration. If it is assumed that the magnetic field at the nucleus
produced by core polarization is constant per unit of electron spin
throughout the 4/ group, as seems to be roughly true for the 3d group
if bonding effects are small, we can estimate the contribution to the
other ions from measurements on the 4/7 ions. On this basis one obtains
(Bleaney 19646)
for the tripositive ions, where the factor ((J\\ A ||J) —1) allows for
the projection of S onto J (see eqn (5.29)); this corresponds to a
magnetic field of — (83 ±13)$ kG at the nucleus.
It has been suggested (see Bleaney 1967) that the relativistic contri-
bution to A may also be roughly constant per unit of spin in the field
s
it produces at the nucleus, and if this is included we obtain
for the tripositive ions.
The values of ^ore an(^ ^s given by eqns (5.31), (5.32) are listed in
Table 5.5. Obviously they may not be very accurate, but they represent
a comparatively small correction in most cases, the largest being about
7 and 9 per cent respectively for Tb3+. Subtraction of these from the
value of Aj gives a hyperfine parameter from which (r~3) can be
calculated using eqn (5.26) if g is known. A list of such values (based on
n
the quantity Aj—A' , with A' given by eqn (5.32)), is given in Table
& s
5.6 for comparison with calculated values. Three sets of the latter are
given: the Hartree-Fock values of Freeman and Watson (1962); the
values of Judd (1963a), which are a modification of the former to allow
for the effect of configuration interaction; and the values of Lindgren
(1962) (see also Judd and Lindgren (1961)) obtained from the observed
spin-orbit constants. The values of Judd give the best fit with the

--- Page 315 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
300
TABLE 5.6
Values of (r~3) in atomic units for the tripositive ions (after Judd 1963a).
Experimental values marked *(" are calculated from (Aj—A' ) in Table
3
5.5 and the value of g^ (where known). The last column gives the
experimental values after including the correction for the break-down of
LS-coupling. Values in parentheses are interpolated
Values of (p~3> in atomic units
Experimental
Ion Lindgren Hartree-Fock Judd Experimental (corrected)
58 Ce3+ 3-66 4-72 4-17
59 pr3+ 4-26 5-37 4-76 f5-0
60 Nd3+ 4-86 6-03 5-35 5-64(6) 5-49(6)
61 p m s+ 5-46 — (5-95)
62 Sm3+ 6-07 7-36 6-56 t6-5
63 Eu3+ 6-70 — (7-22)
64 Gd3+ 7-35 8-84 7-92
65 Tb3+ 8-03 — (8.60) f8-3
66 Dy3+ 8-74 10-34 9-32
67 Ho3+ 9-50 — (10-18) f9-7
68 Er3+ 10-32 12-01 10-89 10-60(12) 11-07(12)
69 Tm3+ 11-20 — (11-73)
70 Yb3+ 12-18 13-83 12-63 12-50(8)
experimental values; here it must be remembered that the values of
Aj in Table 5.5 have not been corrected for deviations from LS-
coupling, which may be as large as 4 per cent (see Judd 1963a) in some
cases.
The magnetic hyperfine constants for the tripositive ions given in
Table 5.5 may be compared with those measured for the free atoms
(Table 5.4) to find how great is the difference in {r~3} for the two cases.
In this comparison it must be remembered that the spectroscopic state
is different in the two cases, but this involves just the extraction of the
factors (J\\ N \\J). Allowance should also be made for a contribution
from core polarization and relativistic effects in the free atom, but
these appear to be rather small. If they are neglected, the value of
(r~~3)ion/(r~3)atom can ^>e easily calculated and appears to fall smoothly
from about 1-17 for Pr to 1-05 for Yb; the ratio appears to be close
to the ratio of the values of (r~3) for ion and atom calculated by Judd
and Lindgren (1961), though the values of (r~3) themselves are higher.
Few experimental results are available for the hyperfine structure
constants of the dipositive ions, but it seems likely that these are close
to those of the free atoms which are in the same spectroscopic state.
After allowing for core polarization Bleaney (1964a) has estimated

--- Page 316 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 301
that (r~3) is (1-4^0-3) per cent larger for Ho2+ than for Ho, and
(2-2 ±0-5) per cent larger for Tm2+ than for Tm.
5.5. Nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
This interaction is normally so small that we need consider only
matrix elements within a given manifold J. Hence we can use the form
of the interaction Hamiltonian appropriate to a free ion
Furthermore, the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction is normally
so small that, except in rather precise Endor experiments, we need
consider only matrix elements that are diagonal within the electronic
states left as groups of sub-states by the crystal field. If the latter has
threefold or higher symmetry about the 2-axis, a given electronic
state will consist of admixtures of J = M differing by 3 or more. In
z
eqn (5.33) only the operator {3J2— J(J + 1)} will have non-zero matrix
elements, so that the nuclear electric quadrupole operator will have
axial symmetry and be of the form
where
and ( | 3J^—J(J + 1) | ) is the matrix element of this operator
computed for the given electronic state. Clearly P\\ has the same value
for any pair of states differing only in the sign of J, and which form
z
a degenerate doublet (Kramers or non-Kramers) in such a crystal field.
If the crystal field has only rhombic symmetry, so that the z-axis is
only a twofold axis, then the crystal field states will contain values
of J differing by 2, so that the terms J^, J^ in eqn (5.33) will also have
z
diagonal matrix elements, and the quadrupole interaction will be of
the more general form (cf. eqn (3.40c))

--- Page 317 ---

302 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
where, since the value of r\ is given by
The matrix elements of the operator 3J2— J(J + 1) are given in
Table 17. Thus for the states cos 6 |±|) + sin 6 |=Fl) of eqn (5.11)
belonging to a manifold with J = f we have
This result is sharply dependent on the value of 6 (it changes sign at
tan 6 = \/2), and is always small compared with the maximum value
of 3J2— J(J + l) which is obtained for a pure state |±J ) = |J) and
Z
equals 36 for J — f . It follows that the quadrupole term may often
be rather small for the ground doublet of a rare-earth ion, and also
that to evaluate the quantity Q(r~*) from an experimental result we
are dependent in first order on a knowledge of the crystal field.
To proceed further, and estimate Q, we need to know what value to
use for (r~3). The simplest assumption is that it has the same value as
the (r~3) that appears in the magnetic hyperfine structure, and hence
can be determined from the latter if the value of the nuclear magnetic
moment is known. However distortion of the charge cloud of the
inner closed shells of electrons produces an appreciable change in the
electric field gradient at the nucleus (Sternheimer shielding), which
may be represented by writing (r~3) = (1— R)(r~*). The contributions
to R are both positive (shielding) and negative (anti-shielding), but it
seems probable that the net effect is a small amount of shielding.
In addition to the electric field gradient at the nucleus due to the
4/ electrons, there will be a contribution in the solid state from the
lattice, associated with the term A^(3z2— r2) and other second-degree
terms in the crystal field. Here again a shielding (anti-shielding) facto
must be introduced, which is generally written as a multiplicative
factor (1— 7oo). In the case of axial symmetry the contribution to P\\
from the lattice or crystal field is then
which must be added to (5.35). The size of the lattice contribution has
been measured directly by Edmonds (1963), using nuclear magnetic
resonance for three lanthanum salts, where the La3+ ion has no 4/
electrons. Using calculated values of A® and Q = 0-27 barns for 139La,

--- Page 318 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 303
an estimate of around 20 was obtained for (1—y^), the sign being
probably positive. A number of theoretical calculations give even
larger negative values; for example, Ghatikar, Raychaudhuri, and
Ray (1965) find (1-yJ to be +81 for Pr3+ and +75 for Tm3+. On
the other hand, their values of R are quite small (+0-20 and +0-15
for these two ions respectively). The large anti-shielding factors for
the lattice contribution mean that this may predominate over the
gradient from the 4/ electrons in cases when the latter is exceptionally
small (see § 4.8 for Nd3+ and below for Eu3+). The relative importance
of the two contributions has been measured directly in Mossbauer
experiments on two salts of thulium by Barnes, Mossbauer, Kankeleit,
and Poindexter (1964). A more general analysis is given by Blok and
Shirley (1966).
In cases of cubic symmetry there is no lattice contribution but the
appropriate form of the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction due to
the 4/electrons is more complicated; it is discussed in §§ 4.7, 5.9, 5.10
and Chapter 18.
5.6. Experimental results for ethylsulphates and anhydrous
chlorides
These two salts have C point symmetry at the rare-earth site and
ah
it is convenient to consider them together; in fact the electron spin
results in the two salts are remarkably similar. The ethylsulphates were
the first rare-earth salts to be measured by resonance, and the theoreti-
cal interpretation by Elliott and Stevens was based mainly on the
resonance results; with this limited range of experimental data they
succeeded in making remarkably good estimates of the crystal field
parameters. The application of high resolution optical and infrared
spectroscopy has greatly changed the situation, giving directly and
accurately many of the crystal field splittings in the ground state and
in some of the excited states. From these the crystal field parameters
have been derived for almost all the ethylsulphates and anhydrous
chlorides, and these are quoted in Tables 5.7 and 5.8. In each case the
F|j term is much the largest; the general trends are that V\ and F°
fall as we proceed along the series to the heavy end, F° varies little
(with perhaps a slight drop in the middle of the series), while F°
increases noticeably in the ethylsulphates (less so in the chlorides).
If the crystal field potential were the same throughout a series, the
changes in F£ would be entirely due to changes in (rk), which we should
expect to diminish steadily towards the heavy end because the

--- Page 319 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GKOUP
304
TABLE 5.7
Crystal field parameters in cm~l for the rare-earth ethylsulphates; the
crystals are undiluted except where the symbol (La) occurs, meaning
diluted in the lanthanum salt
A\(r*} Al(r*} A\<!*) \A\\ <r«>
(cm-1) (cm-1) (cm-1) (cm-1) Reference
Ce + 9 -42 -45 680 see Birgeneau (1967a)
Pr(La) + 15 -88 -49 548 Gruber (1963)
Pr + 23 -80 -44 695 Hiifner (1962)
Nd + 58 -68 -43 595 Gruber and Satten (1963)
Pm
Sm + 60 -64 -40 575 Hill and Wheeler (1966)
+ 78 -53 Hufner (1962)
Sm(La) + 45 -25 -30 450 Larson and Jeffries (1966a)f
Eu + 80 -63 -39 510 Judd (19596)
Gd
Tb + 110 -75 -34 465 Hufner (1962)
Dy + 124 -79? -31 492 Powell and Orbach (1961)
+ 144 -85 -33 535 Hill and Wheeler (1966)
Ho + 125 -79 -30 391 Hufner (1962)
Er + 126 -81 -31 387 Erath (1961)
+ 119 -74 -30 376 Hill and Wheeler (1966)
Tm(La) + 130 -71 -29 433 Wong and Richman (1961)
Yb
f Estimated values, which with -4j(r4) 360 cm"1, fit the gr-values and splittings for
the J = f manifold.
J Corrected value, Hufner (1962).
increasing nuclear charge pulls the electron orbits into smaller radii.
As can be seen from Table 5.1, Hartree-Fock calculations suggest
that as we go from Ce3+ to Yb3+ the values of (r2), (r4), and (r6) fall
by factors of (roughly) 2, 4, and 7 respectively. The experimental
results show that the crystal potential cannot be assumed to remain
constant, presumably because the positions of the ligand ions change
as the size of the central ion is reduced (small angular displacements
may well be more important than small changes in distance). It is
also possible that there are important shielding or anti-shielding effects
due to distortion of the outer closed shells of electrons by the crystal
field, which will vary throughout the series. The importance of shielding
effects is a vexed question; Burns (1962) has argued that shielding
effects are quite small, while Freeman and Watson (1964) take the
opposite view. They also suggest that non-linear shielding may occur,
i.e. that shielding effects are different for wave-functions with different
angular distributions of the electronic charge (if this were appreciable,

--- Page 320 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 305
TABLE 5.8
Crystal field parameters in cm~l for the anhydrous rare earth chlorides
(LaCl structure, hexagonal}. The symbol (La) indicates that the measure-
3
ments were made in a sample diluted with LaCl . The energy levels in the
3
ground manifold and the corresponding wave-functions are listed for most
of the ions by Mikkelson and Stapleton (1965)
>
(cm-1) (cm-1) (cm-1) (cm-1) Reference
Ce + 65 -41 -64 399 Hellwege, Orlich and Schaack (1965),
Bagguley and Vella-Colleiro (1969)
Pr(La) + 50 -40 -39 397 Judd (19576)
+ 47 -41 -40 405 Margolis (1961) (see also Hatchings
and Ray 1963)
Nd(La) + 104 -36 -45 426 Judd (1959a)
+ 98 -39 -44 443 Eisenstein (19636)
Pm
Sm + 81 -23 -44 426 Axe and Dieke (1962)
Eu(La) + 89 -38 — 51 495 de Shazer and Dieke (1963)
Gd(La) + 97 -42 -30 290 Piksis, Dieke, and Crosswhite (1967)
Tb(La) + 92 -40 -30 290 Thomas, Singh, and Dieke (1963)
Dy(La) + 90 -40 -23 253 Crosswhite and Dieke (1961)
Ho(La) + 122 —45 -28 280 Dieke and Pandey (1964)
+ 114 -34 -28 277 Rajnak and Krupke (1967, 1968)
Er(La) + 94 -37 -27 265 Eisenstein (1963a)
it would not be possible to fit the crystal field levels observed experi-
mentally with a single set of parameters F£). Further calculations
have been made by Sternheimer (1966) and Sternheimer, Blume, and
Peierls (1968), which suggest that shielding may be much more
important for V than for V± or V . Finally, we note that some attempts
2 6
have been made to compute the crystal potential and hence to find
effective values of (rk) by comparison with the spectroscopic crystal
field parameters. A detailed calculation of this kind has been carried
out for PrCl and PrBr by Hutchings and Ray (1963), with the surpris-
3 3
ing results that the effective values of (r2) are a good deal smaller (a
factor of 10 to 30) than the Hartree-Fock values; on the other hand
the effective value of <r4} is somewhat larger, and that of (r6) is about
10 times larger than the Hartree-Fock value. A similar result has been
obtained for (r4), (r6) by Bleaney (1964a) for Tm2+ in CaF ; Axe and
2
Burns (1966) suggest this may be partly due to covalency and overlap
effects (see also Ellis and Newman (1966), Watson and Freeman
(19676)).
The paramagnetic resonance data for the ethylsulphates are sum-
marized in Table 5.9, and for the anhydrous chlorides in Table 5.10.
21

--- Page 321 ---

TABLE 5.9
Paramagnetic resonance data for the diluted ethylsulphates Ln(C H S0 )3, 9H 0
2 5 4 2
T A\\ l^ll P\\
Ion Diluent (°K) Isotope (cm-1) (cm"1) (cm-1)
*\\ I0J
Ce La 4-2 ( + )0-955(5) 2-185(10) ground state
(-)3-72(l) 0-20(5) excited doublet at 3(1) cm-1
Pr Y 20 1-525(20) 141 0-0755(20)
Nd La 20 (+)3-535(l) 2-072(1) 143 (-)0-03803(1) 0-01989(5) <10~*
145 (-)0-02364(1) 0-01237(5) <10~4
Pm La 0-432(4) 147 0-01655(13)
Sm La 4-2 ( + )0-596(2) 0-604(2) 147 (-)0-0060(1) 0-0251(1) <4X10-4
149 (-)0-0049(1) 0-0205(1)
Tb Y 12 17-72(2) 159 0-209(2)
Dy Y 14-4 (10-8) (0) ground state — no resonance
( + )5-86(10) 8-4(5) excited doublet at 15(4) cm-1
Ho Y 13 15-41(1) 165 0-3354(4)
excited singlet at 5-5(1) cm"1
Er La 4 ( + )l-47(3) 8-85(20) 167 (-)0-0052(1) 0-0314(1) 0-0030(3)
Tm Y 13 no resonance
Yb no resonance

--- Page 322 ---

TABLE 5.10
Paramagnetic resonance data for the diluted trichlorides LnCl (Hutchison and Wong 1958)
3
T A\\ l^il P\\
Ion Diluent (°K) g\\ \g ± \ Isotope (cm-1) (cm-1) (cm-1)
Ce La 4-2 (-)4-0366(15) 0-17(8)
Pr La 4-2 1-035(5) 141 0-0502(3)
Nd La 4-2 ( + )3-996(l) 1-763(1) 143 (-)0-0425(2) 0-0167(1) <10~4
145 (-)0-0264(2) 0-0104(1)
<io-4
Sm La 4-2 ( + )0-5841(3) 0-6127(6) 147 (-)0-00607(2) 0-0245(1)
149 (-)0-00499(2) 0-0202(1)
Tb La 4-2 17-78(1) 159 0-212(3)
Dy La 4-2 no resonance
Ho La 4-2 16-01(2) 165 0-351(7)
Er La 4-2 (+)1-989(1) 8-757 167 (-)0-00664(3) 0-0304(2) ( + )0-00086
Tm La 4-2 no resonance
Yb La 4-2 no resonance

--- Page 323 ---

308 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
These tables include both the non-Kramers and the Kramers ions, with
the exception of the half-filled shell, Gd3+, 4/7, 8$7, which will be
considered separately. In most cases resonance data are available only
for the ground state, and we shall discuss briefly the interpretation
for each ion on the lines adopted in the original theoretical papers,
since this illustrates the way in which the problem would be tackled
in the absence of detailed knowledge about the crystal field, apart
from its symmetry.
Ce3+, 4/1, *F (S = i, L = 3; ground state J = |, (J\\ A \\J) = -f)
In the free ion the first excited state 2F lies some 2200 cm"1 above
7
the ground state 2F&, which is very much greater than the splittings
produced by the crystal field, so that in first approximation we take J
as a good quantum number. Inside the manifold J = -f the sixth-
degree terms in the crystal potential have no matrix elements, so that
effectively we have just the simple operator
where the matrix elements of 0°, 0° are given in Table 17 and the
values of (J|| a ||J>, <J|| p ||J) in Table 20. The matrix elements are all
diagonal in J, so that the crystal field would give three Kramers
z
doublets whose wave-functions are just
for which the principal (/-values are, since (J|| A || J) = f for the ground
state J = f,(cf. eqns 1.80)
Comparison with the experimental results in Tables 5.9 and 5.10
shows that there is no exact fit, but that the first-order theory is
qualitatively correct if we assume that the ground doublet in the
chloride and the low-lying excited doublet in the ethylsulphate are
approximately |±f), and the ground doublet in the latter salt is
approximately |±^). We therefore look to see whether quantitative
agreement with experiment can be obtained if contributions from the
state J = % are taken into account.
At this point we must use the more general potential operator (5.4)
or (5.5) rather than the truncated operator (5.39) which suffices within

--- Page 324 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4f) GROUP 309
the J = f manifold. For the case of J = ±£, the terms F° have matrix
z
elements between |J, J) = |f, i-J) and |-J, ±i) but FJ has no matrix
z
elements so that the most general form of the states is
However, since we are dealing with a one-electron system, this doublet
is spanned in the \l, s) representation by the wave-functions
z z
which is simpler to handle. We can use real admixture coefficients,
cos 6 and sin 6, because, in the expansion (equ (16.1)) of the crystal
potential, all the jB£ and therefore all the matrix elements of the
crystalline field can be chosen real for symmetry C as explained in
3h
§ 16.1 (which incidentally justifies the use of the expansion (16.10)
with the P*, rather than the more general expansion (16.1)). The
admixture coefficients cos 99 and sin (p in (5.41) are also real because
the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients relating the representations \1 s) and
Z9 z
\J,J ) are all real.
Z
From (5.42) we find
from which we can check that the first-order approximation in which
99 = 0 in (5.41) and sin 6 = (y)^ in (5.42) gives the same ^-values as
in (5.40). If we eliminate 6 between the two eqns (5.43) we find that
</H and g± should satisfy the relation
The experimental values give 0-82 for this ratio, showing that no value
of 6 in (5.43) will give exact agreement with experiment.
For a pure J = if doublet, g is zero and no resonance is observ-
z ±
able. The finite value of g here arises solely because of the admixture
L
of the J = | states, which gives the wave-fun
or, in the \1 s) representation,
Z9 z

--- Page 325 ---

310 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
with, of course, p2+q2+r2 = 1 in each case. (Note that p q^ r± can
l9
be related directly to p , q , r by using the expansions for |J, J) in
2 2 2 z
terms of \1 s) which give r = r and
Z9 z 9 1 2
these formulae can be used to check those for the g-values given below.)
In both (5.45) and (5.46) we have chosen as the |+) state that which
requires operation by l_~\-s_ to generate the | —) state, so as to preserve
the correct handedness in the effective spin Hamiltonian if circularly
polarized radiation is used; the correct signs in the | —) state are related
to those in the | +) state by the time reversal formula (15.29).
The formulae for g^ and g are found, using <||| A |||-} = f, eqns
±
(16.39), (16.40), and Table 20 applied to (5.45), to be
while from (5.46) we have
It is clear that when r is small compared with the other coefficients,
(7H will be negative, because the | +} state will have a negative Zeeman
energy; we have therefore inserted a negative sign in parentheses before
the corresponding entries in Tables 5.9 and 5.10, although these signs
have not been verified experimentally.
For (La, Ce)Cl all the 4/ levels have been observed by optical
3
spectroscopy, and are shown in Fig. 5.4. The calculated best fit to
these levels with a single set of crystal field parameters (those given in
Table 5.8) is also shown, a value of £ = 626-5 ±1-6 cm"1 being used
for the spin-orbit coupling parameter. This value is smaller by a factor
0-9745 than that for the free Ce3+ ion, and Hellwege, Orlich, and
Schaak (1965) find that a slightly better fit to the resonance value of
<7|l for the ground doublet is obtained by using an orbital reduction
factor k assumed equal to 0-9745. The calculated value of \g\\ \ is thereby
reduced from 4-222 to 4-078, the measured value being 4-0366 (but see
below).
We return now to the question of the g-values of the ground doublets
in cerium ethylsulphate. Elliott and Stevens (1962) pointed out that,

--- Page 326 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 311
FIG. 5.4. Levels and allowed optical transitions for (Ce, La)Cl. The states are charac-
3
terized by their values of ±«7 , the lowest having an admixture of (Tl) from the J = -J
Z
manifold. The measured energy values are compared with those calculated from the
crystal field parameters given in Table 5.8 together with a spin-orbit coupling parameter
£ = 626-5 ±1-6 cm-1. (After Hellwege, Orlich, and Schaack 1965.)
because of the proximity of the two low-lying doublets, the theory is
very sensitive to any small departure from reflection symmetry in
the xy-pl&ne. This would introduce terms F^3, F^3 into the crystal
potential which couple into the ground doublet \J = ± J) admixtures
Z
(which may have complex amplitudes) of \J = Tf >• It is then possible
Z
to fit simultaneously the g-values for both the low-lying doublets, and
the temperature variation of the susceptibility. The latter is for the
undiluted salt, where the two low-lying doublets are inverted in energy,
the \J = ±f) doublet being in this case the lower of the two. This
Z
change requires, however, only a small alteration in the crystal field
coefficients, since the two doublets lie so close together only through
the accidental cancellation of large terms.
If this hypothesis were correct, it would lead to gr-values that are

--- Page 327 ---

312 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
very sensitive to the splitting between the two doublets, as pointed
out by Birgeneau (1967a), since this splitting appears as an energy
denominator in the perturbation theory for the admixtures. In fact,
experiments with different host lattices (La, Ce, Sm, and Y ethyl-
sulphates) in which the energy splitting W±i— W * varies from —3-9
±
to +17-4 cm"1 show only very small changes in the g-values for the
| it I") doublet. The value of g is constant within the experimental
±
error; g\\ increases only from 3-70 to 3-81, whereas the theoretical
values for g^ are all close to 4-14.
Since the correction to g\\ for the | ±f} doublet is proportional to
the square of the admixture of the |±|) states, it should vary as
(W±i — W &)~2 on a static crystal field theory. If the admixture is due
±
to a dynamic crystal field in which lattice vibrations introduce crystal
field terms of the necessary lower symmetry, the energy denominator
in the admixture contains a phonon energy as well as the static crystal
field splitting. The admixtures and the corrections to the g-values will
thus be much less dependent on (W i — W±s) if the main phonon energies
±
involved are large compared with this splitting. In this way Birgeneau
(1967a) has succeeded in explaining quantitatively the low values of
<7n for the |±f) doublet in the ethylsulphate. Bagguley and Vella-
Colleiro (1969) have applied a simple correction of the same kind to
the value of g\\ for the analogous doublet in (Ce, La)Cl , as well as to
3
the | ±i> doublet of the J = % level (see Fig. 5.4).
As pointed out by Birgeneau, corrections of this type (which may
be positive or negative), originally proposed by Inoue (1963), give a
clear-cut explanation of the rather large corrections to the g-values,
whereas a covalent orbital reduction would here require overlap and
covalent contributions to the static crystal field far larger than the
actual crystal field.
Pr3+, 4/2, 3# (8 = 1, L = 5; ground state J = 4, <J|| A ||J> = |)
4
With two electrons in the 4/ shell we have a non-Kramers ion whose
ground state is J = 4. In (7 symmetry we see from eqns (5.15)-(5.17)
37l
that the crystal field splits the ninefold J = 4 manifold into three
singlet states and three doublets, the latter being of the form |4, ±1),
and

--- Page 328 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 313
the two states in each case being conjugated by time reversal. The two
sets of states are mutually orthogonal, and (5.51) can be derived from
(5.50) by replacing 6 by 0+^/2. In each case the Zeeman Hamiltonian
has opposite expectation values in the two conjugate states, separating
them by an amount g\\/3H which for (5.51) has the value
z
with (J|| A || J) = -f- for this ion. In the ethylsulphate the value of
<7ll = l-52 observed for the ground state can be fitted using 0 = 24°
5
in (5.51), with an appreciable correction from admixture of the next
excited state J = 5; the rather smaller value of g\\ = 1-03 in the
5
anhydrous chloride requires a somewhat larger value of 6.
From the resonance results alone we have no means of telling whether
the state |f'} or |f) has the positive Zeeman energy, and clearly the
experimental results could be fitted by a different value of 9 if g\\ were
taken as negative in (5.52); it is easily seen that this alternative does
not correspond to using (5.50) instead of (5.51). In any given case the
choice between the two alternatives must be made on other evidence;
usually thermal, magnetic, or spectroscopic experiments will give some
information that makes one choice plausible, if not decisive.
Since we are dealing with a non-Kramers doublet for which g = 0,
L
resonance is observed only through distortions of the crystal field
which admix the two conjugated states, giving an asymmetrical line
whose intensity is greatest when the oscillatory magnetic field is also
along the crystal axis. The theory of this is given in detail in § 18.5
and summarized in §§3.14, 5.3. The value of A or h (eqns (3.103),
0 Q
(3.105)) deduced from the experimental results on the assumption of
magnetic dipole transitions varies considerably. For Pr3+ in yttrium
ethylsulphate Baker and Bleaney (1958) found A = 0-11 ±0-04 cm"1,
0
with a larger value (0-19 cm"1) in the lanthanum ethylsulphate; in
the undiluted praseodymium ethylsulphate it is much larger still. For
Pr3+ in LaCl Hutchison and Wong (1958) find the much smaller value
3
A & 0-02 cm"1, or h & 37 G. A detailed comparison of the experi-
0 0
mental and theoretical line shapes has been made by Williams (1967),
and shows (see Fig. 3.27), that a much better fit is obtained for (Pr, Y)
ethylsulphate using (3.111) assuming A = 0-15 ±0-04 cm"1 and that
0
the transitions are primarily due to the perpendicular component of
the oscillatory electric field.
Inside the ground manifold J = f, for C% symmetry, the possible
h
wave-functions for the Kramers doublets have the forms

--- Page 329 ---

314 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
(a) |±t>, for which
(b) two doublets with admixtures | ±f, Tf)* for which g = 0;
±
(c) two doublets of the form of eqn (5.11), whose (/-values are given
by (5.12).
Only the latter can fit the observed values for the ground state, and
we can test the accuracy of the fit by calculating the value of the
quantity
which is obtained by eliminating 6 from eqns (5.12) and which should
equal unity if the first-order theory is correct. Inserting
and the experimental (7- values we obtain 0-86 for the ethylsulphate
and 0-84 for the trichloride, showing that the first-order theory is not
a bad approximation. The best value for the ethylsulphate is 6 = 24°,
which gives (cf. Table 5.9)
Neodymium has two odd isotopes of mass 143 and 145, both with
nuclear spin / = f (incidentally these were the first nuclear spins in
the 4/ group to be determined by electron paramagnetic resonance).
From eqn (5.30) we should expect, on first-order theory, that
the experimental values for both ethylsulphate and trichloride are
both 0-89, showing again that the first-order theory is approximately
correct.
In a second approximation the crystal field terms will introduce
into the ground doublet admixtures from the next excited level J = -V-
with the same values of J. By varying the amplitudes of these admix-
z
tures it is possible to improve the agreement between the calculated
and experimental values of g\\, g±, and A\\/A . The most extensive
±
calculations of this kind have been carried out by Halford (1962) in
order to interpret Endor measurements on the Nd3+ isotopes in LaCl .
3
The complete crystal field and spin-orbit coupling energy matrix for
the 4/f, 4/^s and 4/^ manifolds was computed and diagonalized
numerically, using the crystal field parameters obtained by Judd
(1959a) with corrections for intermediate coupling. These parameters
were obtained by fitting the levels observed in the optical fluorescenc

--- Page 330 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 315
spectrum, and they lead to #-values for the ground doublet of
which are in good agreement with Halford's measurements of
which are more accurate than those of Hutchison and Wong (1958)
given in Table 5.10.
Details of the Endor spectrum, including discussion of a number of
important corrections, are given in § 4.8.
Pm3+, 4/4, 5/ (S = 2, L = 6; ground state J = 4, (J\\ A ||J) = f)
4
This ion has no radioactively-stable isotopes, but resonance has
been observed for the isotope 147Pm, which has a half-life of 2-64 years
and is a beta-emitter. The magnetic ground state of Pm3+ incorporated
in lanthanum ethylsulphate is a non-Kramers doublet which is fitted
by a spin Hamiltonian of the type given in eqn (5.20) with the addition
of a hyperfine term A\\S I . Stapleton, Jeffries, and Shirley (1961)
Z Z
observed eight hyperfine lines, corresponding to / = 1, with an asym-
metric shape, but the line width appeared to increase rapidly with time
after crystal growth, presumably owing to radiation damage of the
crystal. Their results for g\\ and A\\ are listed in Table 5.9, and are
fitted by wave-functions of the form (5.51) with 6 <—'38° (and admixtures
of order 0-03 from the J = 5 functions) which correspond to a negative
value of <7|| in eqn (5.52), though this of course has no physical
significance.
Sm8+, 4/5, «jBj (S = f, L = 5; ground state J = f, (J|| A ||J) = f)
In the ground state the small value of J = f means that, as in the
case of cerium, the first-order theory is very simple, and only the
doublet |.±i) has g different from zero. However it would have
L
ff\\= T"5 9± = T, which are very different from the observed values
(see Tables 5.9, 5.10) that lie close to 0-6 with remarkably little
anisotropy. Samarium has two odd isotopes, each with I = f, whose
magnetic hyperfine constants have been measured, and these give for
the ratio the values 0-24 for the ethylsulphate and
0-26 for the chloride. This shows that the first-order theory is completely
inadequate for Sm3+, and in view of the fact that the first excited
state J = i lies at about 1000 cm."1 this is not too surprising.

--- Page 331 ---

316 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
In the next order of perturbation theory the doublet becomes
for which
and
where the factors used are given in Table 20 except {f|| A ||f) = ff
and (HI N |||) = ffff• With the relatively small admixture of th
J = •§• state given by 0 = 0-07 rad the correct value of (g\\lg±)l(A\\fA )
L
can be obtained for the ethylsulphate, and the theoretical (/-values are
then <7u = 0-66, g = 0-65, which is as good as can be expected from
±
a second-order theory that makes such drastic changes. It can readily
be seen that these are due to the terms in sin 26 that arise from the
off-diagonal elements between J = | and J = 1; their coefficients a
relatively large, particularly for the g-values, and, classically, this
corresponds to a situation where there are large components of L
precessing about J as can be seen in a vector diagram.
Eu3+, 4/6, 7jF (/S = 3, L = 3; ground state J = 0)
0
Obviously, no electron paramagnetic resonance can be expected for
an ion with J = 0. Elliott (1957) has considered the possibility of a
nuclear magnetic resonance experiment in the ground state, and has
shown that this is considerably affected by off-diagonal effects from
the low-lying J = 1 level at about 300 cm"1. The magnetic hyperfine
structure produces a pseudo-nuclear quadrupole splitting, and heavy
magnetic 'shielding' (i.e. a pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect of opposite
sign to the true nuclear Zeeman interaction) in the J = 0 state.
Judd, Lovejoy, and Shirley (1962) have observed the quadrupole
splitting in the ethylsulphate using nuclear alignment techniques for
152Eu and 154Eu, and find it to be considerably larger and of opposite
sign to that predicted by Elliott. Edmonds (1963) has shown that this
can be ascribed to the electric field gradient at the nucleus due to
the crystal field F°, assuming it to be enhanced by the same large
negative anti-shielding effects as observed for 139La.

--- Page 332 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4f) GROUP 317
Tb3+, 4/8, iF (S = 3, L = 3; #rorad state J = 6, (J\\ A \\J) = f)
Q
This is a non-Kramers ion where resonance is observed in the
ground state when the oscillatory magnetic field is parallel to the
crystal axis. The lines are however narrow and of normal shape;
measurements at different frequencies show that the behaviour is that
of a doublet with a small initial splitting of 0-2 to 0-3 cm"1, and a
value of </u close to 18. These results identify the ground doublet as
consisting principally of the states J = [±6), split by a small amount
z
and slightly admixed with the J = |0) state through the term Fg in
z
the crystal potential. It is fitted with a spin Hamiltonian of the type
given by eqn (5.20) with a single value of A = (A* + A^)*, with the
addition of hyperfine terms, so that the transitions occur at
Baker and Bleaney (1958) attempted to deduce values of the crystal
field parameters from the experimental results for A and (18— g\\), but
even with corrections for intermediate coupling (which affects g\\) and
for an admixture of the state J = 5, J = 0 through the V\ term (which
z
affects A) they arrived at values considerably different from the
optical values in Table 5.7 found later by Hufner (1962) for Tb3+ in
the ethylsulphate. In fact the difference between g\\ and 18 is pre-
dominantly due to intermediate coupling, and the correction to A is
of the same order as the experimental values, so that such a discrepancy
in the crystal field parameters is hardly surprising. Hiifner's crystal
field parameters give c = 5-7 cm."1, d = 111 cm.-1, and (from eqns
(5.20a) with the corrections mentioned above) A = 0-2 cm-1, g^ = 17-8,
in reasonable agreement with the resonance results A = 0-387 cm-1,
<7n = 17-72.
ground state
No resonance has been observed in the ground state of either
ethylsulphate or trichloride, indicating that g = 0. This is confirmed
L
by susceptibility measurements (Cooke, Edmonds, McKim, and Wolf
1959) in the ethylsulphate, which give g\\ = 10-8, g = 0. Magnetic
L
resonance has been observed in the first excited doublet by Baker and
Bleaney (1958), who estimated it to lie at 15±3 cm"1 from relative
intensity measurements, with g\\ = 5-86, g = 8-4. Optical measure-
L
ments of Gramberg (1960) give 16-0 cm"1 for this splitting, with

--- Page 333 ---

318 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
another doublet at 21 cm"1. These results made it possible for Powell
and Orbach (1961) to determine the four constants of the crystal
potential (see Table 5.7), and hence the energies and wave-functions
of the J+J = eight doublets into which the crystal field splits the
multiplet J = -V5-. The ground doublet is a it-1/, ±f, Tf combination,
which has g = 0, and the first excited doublet is a ±|, =F| combination
L
of the type (5.11).
A weak resonance, corresponding to g ^ 10~2 in the ground doublet
L
of the ethylsulphate, has been reported by Gill (1963), while Brower
and Stapleton (1967) have similarly observed resonance in the ground
doublet of (Dy, La)Cl . These results are attributed to small distortions
3
of the crystal field. In the latter salt resonance was also observed from
a slightly split quartet of states at about 9-9 cm"1 above the ground
doublet, essentially consisting of two doublets that accidentally lie
very close together (only 0-135 cm"1 apart in zero magnetic field).
ground state
The ground state in both the ethylsulphate and the chloride is a
non-Kramers doublet in which the transitions can be described by eqn
(5.56) with </|| about 16 and A\\ about 0-35 cm"1 for the single
stable isotope 165Ho, / = f. The lines are asymmetric in shape
and fairly narrow, so that the hyperfine components, which are over
450 G apart, are well resolved. Other sets of lines (see Fig. 5.5) can be
observed at high fields, as well as some intermediate lines, in the
ethylsulphate. It turns out that in this case the ground doublet, which
is of the type
for either salt, lies a little below the singlet
and it is possible to observe transitions between | and r\ with the
oscillatory magnetic field parallel to the crystal axis, and also transitions
between £ and f or r\ with the oscillatory magnetic field perpendicular
to the crystal axis. The resonance data can be described by means of
a fictitious spin S = 1, where £ and rj are eigenstates S = ±1, and
z
£ is the eigenstate S = 0. The spin Hamiltonian is then
z

--- Page 334 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4f) GROUP 319
FIG. 5.5. Schematic representation of the three lowest energy levels of diluted holmium
ethylsulphate. Continuous lines: behaviour of the energy levels when H is parallel to the
crystal axis (for clarity only two hyperfine components are shown); Broken lines:
behaviour when H is normal to the crystal axis (hyperfine components omitted). The
various transitions observed are (in terms of S = 1): (a) | +1, m) <-> | — 1, m) (H parallel),
(6) |+lf»>«-*|-lwi + l> (H parallel), (c) | + 1, m) <-> | -1, m> (H perpendicular),
f f
(d), (e) | -fl, m> <-> |0, m> (H parallel). (After Baker and Bleaney 1958.)
where D = — 5-5 cm"1 is the energy by which the doublet states lie
above into singlet (in this case the negative sign means that the
doublets lie below the singlet). The other constants are (Baker and
Bleaney 1958)
where and P are the strengths
0
of the quadrupole coupling in the doublet and singlet respectively.
It should be noticed that in using the S = 1 formalism the experi-
mental values of g^ and A\\ are just half what they would be in the

--- Page 335 ---

320 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
spin 8 = | formalism, apart from a correction to A\\ of order A^/D.
In Tables 5.9 and 5.10 the 8 = J formalism is used for the doublet;
for the ethylsulphate the constants in the spin Hamiltonian (5.59) are
ground state
The first excited state J = V3 is some 8000 cm"1 away and first-
order theory should be quite accurate. This is confirmed by observation
of the hyperfine structure due to the odd isotope 167Er, which yields a
ratio (g\\lg±)l(AftlA±) = 1*00 in the ethylsulphate and 1-04 in the
chloride. The ground doublet is of the form (5.11); its g- values could
be fitted also by the combination ±¥, ±i, TV but for this to be
the ground doublet would require rather unreasonable values for the
crystal field parameters. The theoretical g- values given by eqn (5.12)
with J = -^ yield the relation
and this relation is well obeyed both by the ethylsulphate and by
the chloride.
ground state
No resonance has been observed for this ion in either the ethyl-
sulphate or the chloride, and the crystal field parameters predict that
the ground state should be a singlet.
ground state
Here again no resonance has been observed. The crystal field theory
predicts a ground doublet \J = ±f } (in keeping with susceptibility
g
measurements) for which obviously g = 0.
L
5.7. Experimental results for the double nitrates,
Ln Mg (N0 ) ,24H 0
2 3 3 12 2
Magnetic resonance results for the rare-earth double nitrates were
interpreted by Judd (1955), with the aid of some data from optical
spectroscopy, on the basis of a crystal field of C$ symmetry, a result
v
that has been confirmed by X-ray crystallography (see §5.1). The
crystal potential then has the form (5.3) with the additional terms

--- Page 336 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 321
which have operator equivalents
where the 0£ are given in Table 16 and their matrix elements in Table
17. The extra terms correspond to the site having threefold instead of
sixfold symmetry about the crystal axis. It appears that they are
rather large, as can be seen from Table 5.11, which gives the parameters
TABLE 5.11
Crystal field parameters for the rare-earth double nitrates,
Ln Mg (N0 ) , 24H 0
2 3 3 12 2
(cm"1) (cm"1) (cm"1) (cm"1) (cm"1) (cm"1) Reference
Ce -70 -30 ±900 -60 ±2800 850 Judd (1955)
— 155 + 6 ±1780 -43 ±4960 2390 Leask, Orbach, Powell,
and Wolf (1963)
Pr -70 -20 ±420 -50 ±2300 700 Judd (1955)
Nd -50 -30 ±400 -40 ±1950 700 Judd (1955)
-73 — 18 ±790 -70 ±1760 1330 Tinsley (1963)
Pm
Sm -30 -30 ±400 -40 ±1800 700 Judd (1955)
-14 -15 ±1440 Friederich, Hellwege,
and Lammerman
(1960)
assumed by Judd (1955). Here only the relative signs and not the
absolute signs of A^ and A^ are given, since they change sign on rotation
by 180° about the crystal axis, unlike the remaining terms. The actual
signs thus depend on the orientation chosen for the #-axis. It was
pointed out by Judd (1957a) that these values lie fairly close to those
appropriate to a crystal field of icosahedral symmetry, for which
all the other A^ being zero. This point has also been confirmed by the
X-ray analysis, which shows that the lanthanide ion is surrounded by
twelve oxygens at the corners of a somewhat irregular icosahedron.
An important result is that for pure icosahedral symmetry, levels with
J less than 3 are not split, while remarkable degeneracies occur for
higher values of J. For example, J = 3 splits into a triplet and a
quartet, whereas even in a pure cubic field it splits into three levels
(two triplets and a singlet). The splittings for all manifolds with integral
or half-integral values of J up to 8 are given by Judd (1957a) and
22

--- Page 337 ---

TABLE 5.12
Paramagnetic resonance data for the double nitrates Ln Mg (N0 ) , 24H 0. Taken from the tables of Bowers and
2 3 3 12 2
Owen (1955) and Orion (1959), except for (a) Stapleton, see Euby, Benoit, and Jeffries (1962); (b) Judd and
Wong (1958)
T A\\ MJ P\\
Ion Diluent (°K;) ?„ \ff±\ Isotope (cm-1) (cm-1) (cm-1)
Ce La 4-2 (±)0-25(5) 1-84(2)
(a) (±)0-032(68) 1-8264(13)
Pr La 4-2 1-55(2) 141 0-077(2)
Nd La 4-2 (-)0-45(5) 2-72(2) 143 ( + )0-0052(5) 0-0312(1)
145 ( + )0-0032(3) 0-0194(1)
Pm
Sm Sm 4-2 (-)0-76(1) 0-40(5) 147 ( + )0-0346(5) <0-010
149 (-f)0-0287(5) <0-010
Dy La ( + )4-281(6) 8-923(160) 161 (-)0-01161(7) 0-02463(15) —0-00142(10)
163 (+)0-01622(7) 0-03415(15) -0-00168(15)
Er La (b) ( + )4-21(l) 7-990(10) 167 (-)0-0142(1) 0-0274(1) +0-0013

--- Page 338 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 323
Wybourne (1965), with their group-theoretical representations. Further
details can be found in McLellan (1961).
The main effect of the extra terms (5.63) is to admix states whose
values of J differ by 3, so that the states are more complicated than
z
in the case of C symmetry where only states whose values of J differ
sh z
by 6 are admixed. The experimental magnetic resonance results are
listed in Table 5.12, and we give here only a brief discussion.
Ce3+, 4/1, 2.F
f
First-order theory gives wave-functions for the ground doublet of
the type
for which
These are connected by the relation 2g±— g\\ = ^r = 4-29, but the
experimental values (taking g\\ as zero) give 3-68 showing that the
first-order theory is inadequate.
In second order no less than three admixtures from the J = %
state have to be included, with J = if, ±|, and ^f; formulae for
z
the <7~values in this case are given by Judd (1955). The resonance
results can then be fitted within experimental error, using the crystal
field parameters given in Table 5.11.
Cerium magnesium nitrate is very useful in adiabatic demagnetiza-
tion and as a magnetic thermometer; all its magnetic ions are equiva-
lent, the (/-tensor is highly anisotropic, and interactions between the
ions are very small. It is also one of the first substances in which an
Orbach relaxation process was observed, from which an excited doublet
is found to lie at 34°K (Finn, Orbach, and Wolf (1961)). This splitting
has been verified by magnetic susceptibility and calorimetric measure-
ments, and has been observed directly by far infrared spectroscopy by
Thornley (1963) who finds it to be 36-25±0-4°K in cerium magnesium
nitrate and 30-2±0-4°K in the corresponding zinc salt. Leask, Powell,
Orbach, and Wolf (1963) have attempted to compute the crystal
field parameters from susceptibility measurements, obtaining the
values given in Table 5.11. They worked in the L , S representation,
z z
and quote the eigenstates in this form; they show also that if a small
orbital reduction (k = 0-95) is assumed, crystal field parameters some
10 to 20 per cent different are required to fit the experimental results.

--- Page 339 ---

324 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
Pr3+, 4/2, 3#
4
Optical spectroscopic results of Hellwege and Hellwege (1953) and
Brochard and Hellwege (1953) were used by Judd (1955) in the analysis
for this ion. The results predict a ground doublet of the non-Kramers
type
for which g = f(4a2 + /32-2y2) and g = 0. Values of a = 0-458,
]} L
j8 = —0-756, y = 0-467 give g\\ = 1-56 in good agreement with the
resonance result. Note that the reversed signs (which follow from time
reversal, eqn (15.29)) of the coefficient of |±1) in the two substates
lead to g = 0, as expected for a non-Kramers doublet.
L
Nd»+, 4/3, 4/
f
First-order theory gives for the ground doublet
± cos 6 cos (p |f, d=l) + sin 0 cos <p |f, =Ff> + sin y |f, ±i>,
which with the parameters given by Judd (see Table 5.11) leads to
but with rather too low a value of A . Second-order theory gives four
±
extra admixed states from J = V, with J = ±|, ij, Tf , and TV,
z
for which the detailed formulae are given by Judd (1955), who obtains
the calculated values
in good agreement with experiment. The rather different crystal field
parameters of Tinsley (1963) are based on an analysis of the optical
spectrum observed by Dieke and Heroux (1956).
Sm3+
Since the ground state has J = f and the first excited state is J = f,
the theory is similar to that for Ce3+ except that the second-order
terms are more important (see Judd (1955)). Excited doublets of the
J = f manifold have been observed at 46-5 cm"1 and 68-9 cm"1 by
means of optical spectroscopy (Friederich, Hellwege, and Lammermann
1960), and the crystal field parameters attributed to them in Table
5.11 represent a fit to these splittings using first-order theory only
(i.e. neglecting admixtures of the J = % state); see Scott and Jeffries
(1962).

--- Page 340 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 325
It is convenient to take these two ions together because each has
ground state J = V, and the theoretical interpretation uses the
icosahedral crystal field as a starting point. In such a field the J =
manifold breaks up into two sextet states and one quartet (F ); for
8
both ions the latter is expected to lie lowest. When a perturbation of
lower (C ) symmetry is included, the quartet breaks up into two
2v
doublets, one of which would be
where the coefficients are those appropriate to a pure icosahedral field,
and are uniquely defined in a group-theoretical treatment since the
quartet (F ) occurs only once in the reduction of J = V5- For this
8
doublet
which gives the values
and
(Judd and Wong 1958)
in remarkably good approximation to the observed values (Table 5.12).
Relaxation measurements (Larson and Jeffries 1966a) indicate the
presence of another doublet at 15 cm."1 in the case of Dy3+.
5.8. Lanthanide ions in cubic symmetry
As mentioned in Chapter 18 and in § 5.1, the resonance spectra of
a number of lanthanide ions, both di- and tri-positive, have been
observed on sites of cubic symmetry in crystals such as MgO, CaO
(octahedral symmetry) and CaF , SrF , BaF , Th0 (cubic, eightfold
2 2 2 2
coordination). In cubic symmetry the way in which a manifold of
given J is split is readily found from group theory, and the results are
summarized in Table 5.13. Manifolds with J less than 2 are not split;
half-integral values of J give rise to doublets (F , F ) and quartets
6 7
(F ); integral values of J give singlets (T F ), doublets (F ) and
8 l9 2 3
triplets (F , F ). When a given representation occurs only once, its
4 5
wave-functions are uniquely determined from symmetry alone and a
number are listed in Tables 4 and 9. When a given representation occurs
more than once, the wave-functions depend on the value of x (see
eqns (5.72) or (18.14)). The doublets F , F can be described by spin
6 7

--- Page 341 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
326
TABLE 5.13
Group theoretical representation of the decomposition
of manifolds of various J in a cubic field, showing how
often the various representations occur
r r
J (dou T b 6 let) (doub 7 let) (quar 8 tet)
i
1
f
1
f
1 1
7 1 1 1
2"
9. 1 2
2
1 1 2
2
JL3. 1 2 2
2
¥ 1 1 3
j (singlet) (singlet) (doublet) (triplet) (triplet)
1 1
2 1 1
3 1 1 1
4 1 1 1 1
5 1 2 1
6 1 1 1 2
7 1 1 2 2
8 1 2 2 2
Hamiltonians with S = J and have isotropic 0-values; where they
occur in the ground manifolds J = f, 1, f, or V5 of the lanthanide ions,
the wave-functions are uniquely determined and so are the (/-factors,
a list of which (in first-order theory) is given in Table 22. Apart from
small effects induced by the external magnetic field (see § 5.10), the
magnetic hyperfine interaction is isotropic, and the nuclear electric
quadrupole interaction is zero. The F quartets can be described by a
8
spin Hamiltonian with S = f, but they have rather peculiar properties
which are discussed in Chapter 18; in particular, the Zeeman interaction
and magnetic hyperfine interaction are not isotropic; there may be a
nuclear electric quadrupole coupling whose form is somewhat similar
to that of a free ion with J = f (but needing two constants instead
of one), and a complicated 'pseudo-nuclear' Zeeman coupling.
In the non-Kramers cases (integral J), the singlet states are of
course of no interest in electron paramagnetic resonance, though in
nuclear magnetic resonance they may show an isotropic 'pseudo-
Zeeman' interaction as well as a true nuclear Zeeman interaction, with

--- Page 342 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4f) GROUP 327
no nuclear electric quadrupole splitting. The F doublets have no
3
first-order Zeeman interaction (though a second-order splitting has
been observed in an electron magnetic resonance experiment for Dy2+
in CaF ; see below), and similarly no magnetic hyperfine coupling,
2
though they may have a nuclear electric quadrupole coupling (see
Chapter 18). The F , F triplets can be represented by a spin Hamil-
4 5
tonian with 8 = 1, with isotropic Zeeman interaction and magnetic
hyperfine interaction, but the nuclear electric quadrupole coupling
can be represented by a formula similar to that for F quartets (with
8
8 = 1 instead of 8 = f) in which again two constants are needed.
A crystal field interaction of cubic symmetry is conveniently expressed
in the operator equivalent form
where
and
Since we have only two parameters in (5.69) the energy levels and eigen
functions can be computed numerically, on a reduced energy scale,
for various values of the ratio of the two parameters. This has been
carried out by Lea, Leask, and Wolf (1962); for numerical convenience
they write (see eqns (18.14), (18.15))
so that the Hamiltonian becomes
where F±, F are numbers listed by them, and which are mostly (though
%
not invariably) the same as those in the columns headed F in Tables
17. With these definitions BJB = 0 for x = 0 and ± °° for x = ±1,
6
so that the whole range is contained between x = — 1 and +1.
The values of A± and A based on a point charge model and including
6
only the nearest neighbours are given for a regular octahedron and
cube by eqns (16.15) and (16.16). The lattice sums converge rapidly
and for the CaF lattice the inclusion of more distant neighbours gives
2
values of A and A that differ by —8-7 and +8-8 per cent respectively
4 G
from those in (16.16). If Ca2+ is replaced by a dipositive ion, calculation
of the crystal potential should be rather accurate if no distortion takes
place of the crystal lattice. On this supposition Bleaney (1964a) has
shown from the optical spectrum of Tm2+ in CaF that the effective
2

--- Page 343 ---

328 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
values of (r4) and (r6) are some 4 and 10 times larger respectively than
the values calculated by Freeman and Watson (Table 5.1, and inter-
polation). If Ca2+ is replaced by a tripositive ion without local charge
compensation, so that cubic symmetry is retained, the induced dipoles
on nearby lattice sites give roughly a 20 per cent increase in the crystal
potential, and on applying this to the crystal field parameters estimated
by Bierig and Weber (1963) for Dy3+ in CaF one again finds that the
2
effective values of (r4), (r6) are some 3 and 8 times larger respectively
than those of Freeman and Watson. The results of Kiss (1965) show
that the crystal field parameters of Dy2+ in CaF are very similar to
2
those for Dy3+. From a comparison of Dy2+ in CaF , SrF , and BaF
2 2 2
Kiss finds that jB varies approximately as K~2 rather than JB~5, where
4
E is the lattice spacing, showing that the crystal field model is inadequat
unless considerable local distortion of the lattice is assumed.
Also, the effect of uniaxial stress on optical transitions in Tm2+:CaF
2
and Tm2+: SrF is found by Axe and Burns (1966) to be larger than that
2
predicted by a point charge model, and their calculations (see also
Watson and Freeman 19676) suggest a sizable covalent contribution
to the ligand field splitting.
The possibility that CaF with suitable lanthanide doping would
2
provide a good laser material has led to intensive investigation of its
spectra. The following examples illustrate some points associated with
the electron magnetic resonance spectra.
4/3, 4/ . Pr2+ (cubic)
f
The paramagnetic resonance spectrum of this ion in CaF with cubic
2
symmetry has been observed by Merritt, Guggenheim, and Garrett
(1966). They find the ground state to be a F quartet, with a large
8
hyperfine structure. The Zeeman splittings are fitted with a value of
—0-55 for the parameter x of Lea, Leask, and Wolf (1962), which is
close to the value of \x\ needed to fit the spectra of a number of
lanthanide ions in CaF .
2
In CaF Bierig and Weber (1963) find the ground state to be a F
2 8
quartet, with a F doublet as the first excited state at 8-5 ±1 cm"1
7
higher in energy. The doublet has an isotropic g = 7-52(5), which
agrees well with the predicted value of (V){«7|| A ||J) = 7-55. When
the magnetic field is parallel to a (100) axis, three resonance lines are
observed within the F quartet at 2-63(5), 5-48(15), and 14(1)
8

--- Page 344 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 329
which can be fitted with calculated values of 2-57, 5-36, and 13-3 using
x = +0-6 (eqn (5.72)). This is also the value of x at which F and F
7 8
states lie lowest and very close together in the calculations of Lea,
Leask, and Wolf (1962). Bierig and Weber find that the results can be
fitted with the approximate crystal field parameters of
They have verified that the Zeeman effect in the F quartet has the
8
correct angular dependence for x = 0-6 when H is rotated in a {100}
plane, and that it is independent of orientation when H is in a {111}
plane, as expected from eqn (18.28), since the quantity
is invariant in this plane.
Low and Rubins (19636) have observed an isotropic line at g = 6-60(5)
for Dy3+ in CaO, which they identify as the F doublet that lies lowest
6
in an octahedral field when x lies between —1 and —0-48. Its theoret-
ical (/-value is 6-67, and they suggest that there may be an orbital
reduction factor k = 0-98.
The spectrum of Dy2+ in CaF has been extensively investigated.
2
The ground state is a F doublet, with a F triplet at 4-863 cm"1
3 4
(determined by a direct measurement; Mergerian, Stombler, and
Harrop 1965), and a F triplet at 28-6 cm."1 (Kiss, Anderson, and
5
Orbach 1965). The remaining levels, two triplets, a doublet and a
singlet lie above 312 cm."1. Such a grouping of levels occurs near
x = —0-46 for J = 8 (see Lea, Leask, and Wolf 1962). The calculated
g- value for the F triplet is 6-84, but because of the cluster of low-lying
4
states the levels are strongly perturbed when a magnetic field is
applied (cf. Fig. 5.6). Their behaviour has been studied by Sabisky
(1964), who finds g = 6-76(2) after allowing for a quadratic Zeeman
effect. The F doublet is also split by the quadratic Zeeman effect,
3
and transitions become allowed between the two components of the
doublet when H is not along an (001) axis. This occurs then because
the magnetic field admixes some of the F states characterized by J
4 z
values (±5, ±1, =p3, +7) into the F states which are characterized
3
by (±6, ±2) and (±8, ±4, 0), so that transitions of the type AJ = 0,
Z
il become allowed. Obviously transitions between the F doublet
3
and F triplet are allowed in zero field for the same reason, and from
4

--- Page 345 ---

330 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
FIG. 5.6. Theoretical calculations of the Zeeman splitting of the lowest eight levels of
Dy2+ (4/10, 5/) ;p parallel to a <100> axis. (After Mergerian, Harrop,
g in Ca 2 with H
Stombler, and Krikorian 1967.)
a study of such transitions Mergerian, Harrop, Stombler, and Krikorian
(1967) have determined the T —T splitting to be 145-89 GHz.
4 3
The resonance results for these ions are summarized in Table 5.14.
The theoretical g-value for the F doublet is ( + )6-8 (or 6-77 allowing
7
for intermediate coupling) while that for F is ( — )6; the rather low
6
value for Ho2+ suggests that a small amount of orbital reduction is
present (see Bleaney 1964a), which may be partly due to spin-phonon
interactions (Inoue 1963). The fact that the ground states are different

--- Page 346 ---

TABLE 5.14
Resonance data for ground states 0/Ho2+, Er3+ (4/11, *I±±) in a cubic field. The hyperfine constants are for 165Ho and
1E67r (/ = | in both ca
^.(MHz) Reference
Eightfold coordination
Ho2+ in CaF doublet r (-)5-912(3) (-)3921(1) Lewis and Sabisky (1963)
Er3+ in CaF
2
doublet
r6,
( + )6-785(2) (-)677(10) Ranon and Low (1963)
CdF 2 doublet r, ( + )6-758(10) (-)693(10) Zverev, Kornienko, Prokhorov, and
2
Smirnov (1962)
Th0 doublet r, ( + )6-752(5) ( — )697-8(9) Abraham, Weeks, Clark, and Finch (1965)
CeO 2 doublet r, ( + )6-747(6) (-)696-3(9) Abraham, Weeks, Clark, and Finch (1966)
2
Fourfold coordination
Er3+ in ZnSe(I) doublet f r, (-)5-950(5) Kingsley and Aven (1967)
quartet r 8 at 6-5 ±1 cm-1above doublet
(II) quartet r. ground state
m
Sixfold coordination
Er3+ in MgO quartet r e ground state Descamps and Merle D'Aubigne (1964)
Belorizky, Ayant, Descamps, and Merle D'Aubigne (1966)
Note that the conventional nomenclatures for doublets F , F in a tetrahedral field are interchanged from
6 7
those for cubic (eightfold) field (see Kingsley and Aven (1967)).

--- Page 347 ---

332 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
for Er3+ and Ho2+ in CaF indicates that we are near the point
2
x = —0-45, where these two states cross, the value of \x\ being slightly
greater in the latter case. The calculations of Lea, Leask, and Wolf
(1962) show that there should also be a low-lying F quartet. Lewis
8
and Sabisky (1963) have observed 'forbidden' transitions in the hyper-
fine structure of Ho2+ in the F doublet which show a very large
6
'pseudo-nuclear' Zeeman effect, from whose magnitude they deduce
that the F quartet lies at 32^4 cm"1, in good agreement with optical
8
results of Weakliem and Kiss (1967) who find a F quartet at 30-1 cm"1
8
and a F doublet at 33-5 cm."1.
7
The results for Er3+ in MgO are discussed in detail in Chapter 18
in connection with the general treatment of the F quartet. Ay ant and
8
Belorizky (1964) find that the results are fitted best with a value of
(J|| A ||J) which is 1-8 per cent lower than the simple free ion value
of £ = 1-2. Of this, 0-4 per cent is due to the admixture of states with
different values of J, and if the remainder is ascribed to a reduction
of the orbital i-value one obtains k = 0-979. Allowing for these effects,
the results correspond to x = 0-714; the results of Low and Rubins
for the same ion in CaO can be interpreted similarly with x = 0-73
(Descamps and Merle D'Aubigne 1964). A detailed study of thehyperfine
structure of Er3+ in MgO by Belorizky, Ayant, Descamps, and Merle
D'Aubigne (1966) confirms the expected form of the interactions, and
gives a quadrupole coupling in good agreement with that calculated
from atomic beam measurements on the free atom, the lattice contribu-
tion being of course zero in cubic symmetry.
The spectrum of Er3+ in cubic symmetry has also been observed for
(Er, Zn)Se by Kingsley and Aven (1967). Two sets of spectra are found,
believed to be associated with
(I) Er3+ substituting for Zn2+ (surrounded by a tetrahedron of
Se2" ions);
(II) Er3+ at an interstitial site (normally surrounded by a tetra-
hedron of 4 Zn2+ sites and an octahedron of 6 Se2~ ions).
In spectrum I, the ground state is a F doublet, with a F quartet
7 8
6-5 ±1 cm."1 higher in energy. In spectrum II the ground state is a F
8
quartet.
4/13, *Fi . Yb3+, Tm2+ (cubic)
A number of experimental resonance results are summarized in
Table 5.15.

--- Page 348 ---

TABLE 5.15
Experimental resultsj/or YW+andT 2+ (4/13) in cubic symmetry
m
™A (I = J) ™A (I = |)
g (MHz) (MHz) Reference
Yb3+ CaO T (-)2-585(3) ( — )2094(18) Low and Rubins (19636)
6
CaF T ( + )3-438(2) ( + )2638-70(5) (-)727-094(60) Baker, Blake, and Copland
2 7
(1969)
CdF T ( + )3-4359(8) ( + )2649(5) ( — )726 ( 1 ) Konyukhov, Pashinin, and
2 7
Prokhorov (1962)
ThO T (+)3-423(l) (+)2631(3) ( — )725 ( 1 ) Abraham, Weeks, Clark, and
2 7
Finch (1965)
Ce0 T (+)3-424(l) ( + )2631(3) ( — )726(1) Abraham, Weeks, Clark, and
2 7
Finch (1966)
g "•A (I = i)
(MHz)
Tm2+ CaF T ( + )3-443(2) (-)1101-376(4) J = £ Bessent and Hayes (1965)
2 7
T; (-)l-453(2) (+)1160(5) J = f Sabisky and Anderson (1966)

--- Page 349 ---

334 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
In eightfold coordination the F doublet should be the ground state
7
except for values of x less than about +0-2; in sixfold coordination
(x negative) the F doublet always lies lowest. The spectrum of Tm2+
6
in CaF has been studied in considerable detail. From the optical
2
spectrum of Kiss (1962), values of the crystal field were deduced by
Bleaney (1964a), who interpreted the (/-factor in the ground doublet
as giving evidence for an orbital factor k = 0-991. Later, paramagnetic
resonance measurements on the J = f, F doublet were made by
7
Sabisky and Anderson (1966) using an optical pumping technique to
populate this doublet indirectly. In this case the deviation of the
(/-factor requires k = 0-986, so that (1— k) is here significantly larger
than in the ground doublet. One explanation of the deviation in the
g-factors is that it is due to electron-phonon interactions, for which
Inoue (1963) has estimated A</ = —0-01, a result that is rather smaller
than the observed deviation of —0-025. However, measurements of
the fluorine hyperfine structure (Bessent and Hayes 1965) show that
the interaction, which is point dipole for more distant shells of fluorines,
is larger than point dipole for the first shell, suggesting that there may
also be a contribution from covalent bonding. For the isoelectronic
ion Yb3+:CaF (cubic), a value of k = 0-984 is found for the F ground
2 7
doublet (Baker, Blake, and Copland 1969); this is a larger value of
(1— k) than for the ground doublet of Tm2+:CaF , and it may be
2
significant that in the fluorine ligand hyperfine structure (see Table
4.4) the value of A is appreciably larger for Yb3+ than for Tm2+.
p
On the other hand, Axe and Burns (1966) estimate that for Tm2+
covalency gives a value for (1 — k) of order 10~3 rather than 10~2.
For the F doublet of Yb3+ in CaO (where the analysis is simpler
6
because it is not admixed with any J = f state), Low and Rubins
(19636) find that the rather low value of g, which on simple theory
(k = 1) should be —%(J\\ A ||J) = —2-667, corresponds to a value
of k = 0-959(1).
A comparison of magnetic hyperfine measurements on two doublets,
such as given in Table 5.15 for Tm2+ in CaF , makes it possible to
2
extract the A (S . I) contribution to the hyperfine structure. If no
8
corrections are applied for electron-phonon or covalent effects in the
hyperfine structure, a value is found (Sabisky and Anderson 1966) of
( + )87(13) MHz, which is equivalent to a coefficient of -190(30) MHz
in eqn (5.31) or (5.32), between 2 and 3 times the numerical values
assumed in these equations. However this result depends on, and is
rather sensitive to, the assumption that <r~3) = <r~3) (see § 17.7), and
c

--- Page 350 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 335
that these quantities are the same for doublets belonging to the J = f
and J = f manifolds.
The hyperfine structure of Yb3+ in CaF is discussed in § 5.10.
2
5.9. Ions with a half-filled 4/-shell, 4/7, *S^ Eu2+, Gd3+, Tb4+
If the ground state of the 4/7 ions were a pure 8^ state, the only
non-zero interaction in a magnetic resonance experiment would be the
Zeeman interaction
where g would be isotropic and very close to the free spin value of
2*00232 (corrections for diamagnetic and relativistic effects, estimated
by Judd and Lindgren (1961), reduce this to 2-0005 for the Eu atom,
whose configuration is 4/76s2,8$z)- However, even for a free atom or
ion, there is a significant amount of intermediate coupling, which on
including a first-order correction makes the ground state
whose g- value is
For the Eu atom the best estimates of a give a result in good agreement
with the experimental value of 1'9935(3). Less information is available
for the ions in the solid state on which to base an estimate of a, but
the measured g- values of Eu2+ and Gd3+ given in Table 5.16 (which
TABLE 5.16
Values of g and the cubic splitting parameters 6 , 6 for a number of 4/7
4 6
ions in cubic fields. A number of the original sign determinations have
been corrected. (See Shuskus 1962, and Low and Rubins 1963a)
6 = 60B 6 = 1260J3
4 4 6 6
g (MHz) (MHz) Reference
Eu2+ in CaO 1-9914(10) — 77•1(15) + 4•5(15) Shuskus (1962)
Eu2+ in CaF 2 1•9926(3) -176 •12(2) + 0•78(2) Baker and Williams (1962)
Eu2+ in SrCl 1•995(1) 39 Low and Rosenburger
2
(1959)
Gd3+ inCaO 1•9925(10) -36•6(3) + 3'•6(3) Shuskus (1962)
Gd3+in CaF 1•991(2) (-)138(4) ( + )3(2) Low (1958)
2
Gd3+inTh0 1•991(1) — 168-75(60) -!•28(60) Low and Shaltiel (1958)
2
Hurrell (1965)
Gd3+in SrCl 1•9906(10) (±)29-7(l) (T)0-2(l) Low and Rosenburger
2
(1959)
Th*+inTh0 2-•0146(4) -2527-53(10) -24•84(4) Baker, Chadwick, Garton,
2
and Hurrell (1965)

--- Page 351 ---

336 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
are typical of many experimental results) seem to be explicable on
this basis, while the value of 2-0146(4) for Tb4+ in Th0 is not.
2
In the solid state where an ion is subjected to a ligand field the
Zeeman interaction may be expected to be more complicated, with
terms linear in H but involving higher powers of the components of S.
The form of these terms (which are experimentally very small) will
be considered in § 5.10, together with comparable terms in the magnetic
hyperfine structure. The latter have been determined with much
greater certainty, because of the higher accuracy possible in Endor
measurements (see Chapter 4).
The main result of the ligand field is to produce a splitting of the
electronic states in zero magnetic field, with a consequent 'fine structure5
in the resonance spectrum. This is possible only through perturbations
of high order, so that the splitting is usually rather small, whereas for
the lanthanide ions which are not in /S-states the comparable splitting
is of order 102 cm"1. Fortunately the experimentalist can include such
effects in his spin Hamiltonian by the simple device of introducing
spin operators which reflect the symmetry of the site on which the
ion is placed in the solid. Thus for cases of cubic symmetry we add to
eqn (5.74) the general cubic terms
whose effects on the spectrum are discussed in § 3.4. B^ B§ are
regarded as parameters to be determined experimentally, and a repre-
sentative list of results is given in Table 5.16. For numerical con-
venience the modified parameters 5 = 60jB , 6 = 1260£ are used,
4 4 6 6
where the numerical multipliers are those listed in the column F for
J = % in Tables 17. For comparison with the nomenclature of Low
(1960) we give the equivalence c = 46 , d = 46 (see also Table 3.8).
4 6
The experimental results do not give any very firm guide to the
theoretical interpretation. The values of 6 appear to be negative both
4
in octahedral and cubic (eightfold coordinated) sites, suggesting that
perturbation mechanisms linear in the crystal field can be ruled out,
but the magnitude of 6 does not seem to be correlated in any obvious
4
way with the strength of the crystal field estimated on a point charge
model. The unusually large value of 6 for Tb4+ in Th0 (all transitions
4 2
observed come at intermediate fields—see Fig. 5.7), together with
other abnormalities (see Baker, Chadwick, Garton, and Hurrell 1965)
suggests that bonding effects are important in this case, but 6 is not
4
particularly large for Eu2+ in CaO (Shuskus 1962) though the magnetic

--- Page 352 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 337
FIG. 5.7. Energy levels of Tb4+ in ThO plotted as a function of a magnetic field applied
2
in a (100) direction, showing the transitions observed at a frequency of ^9 GHz. The
position of the lines is shown below, the broken lines being those on which Endor was
observed. (After Baker and Hurrell 1965.)
hyperfine structure is distinctly smaller than for Eu2+ in CaP , a
2
result that in 3d5 ions usually indicates a greater degree of covalent
bonding. Furthermore, the value of 6 for Eu2+ changes sign in the
4
series of host lattices CaO, SrO, BaO (see Overmeyer and Gambino
1964, Miyata and Argyle 1967).
The value of 6 always seems to be small compared with 6 , but
6 4
because of the numerical multipliers perhaps the most direct com-
parison can be made by considering the crystal field splittings in zero
magnetic field. The *S state then divides into two doublets (F , F )
6 7
and a quartet (F ), the ratio of the separations being
8
so that if 6 — 0 the ratio is just 0-6. The deviation from this value
6
is only a few per cent for the eightfold coordinated ions in Table 5.16,
which are all in CaF type lattices. On the other hand, for Tm2+ in
2
CaF , whose ground state is J = f, the comparable ratio is 0-06. This
2
seems to be in line with the suggestion (Lacroix 1957) that for 4/7, 8S
23

--- Page 353 ---

338 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
states the crystal field produces the 6 term only through higher-order
6
perturbation mechanisms than are required for 6 .
4
In compounds where the symmetry is less than cubic a larger
number of spin operators will be required, but these must still reflect
the symmetry of the site. Thus for C symmetry (LaCl , the ethyl-
3h 3
sulphates) we need to add to (5.74) the terms
In experiments where these terms are small compared with the Zeeman
interaction (as is often the case), the first three terms, which are
diagonal, can be determined at once from the positions of the transi-
tions when the external magnetic field is applied along the axis. The
last term then enters only in second order, and can be found more
accurately by measurements with the magnetic field in the plane
normal to the symmetry axis. If the direction of the magnetic field
is then taken as the z-axis of the spin operators, the Hamiltonian can
be transformed, using the formulae in Table 5 of Jones, Baker, and
Pope (1959), to (H at angle 6 = 7r/2, <£ to z-axis)
where only the diagonal terms have been retained. These are similar
to those in (5.78) except for numerical changes, but the presence of
cos 6^ in the last term means that the line spacings will vary as cos 6^
as the magnetic field is rotated in the plane normal to the crystal axis.
The value of B* can be obtained directly from this variation.
When the symmetry is only <7, or <7 ,, we must add to (5.78) the
3 3t
terms
which affect the transition frequencies only in second order when the
magnetic field is along the threefold axis. When the magnetic field is
normal to this axis, the expectation values of 0\ and 0\ are zero, so
that as H is rotated in this plane the variation in the spectrum reflects
only the 0\ term. Thus to first order the behaviour of the spectrum
under these conditions is the same as for C symmetry, and measure-
3h
ments must be made at intermediate directions to determine the terms
in (5.80), as is discussed for Gd3+ in A1 0 by Geschwind and Remeika
2 3
(1961), and in the hexa-antipyrene iodide by Baker and Williams (1961).
The results for Gd3+ measured in four compounds of three or sixfold
symmetry are given in Table 5.17. The main feature of the results is

--- Page 354 ---

TABLE 5.17
* Fine structure' splitting parameters for Gd3+ in four compounds. They are somewhat temperature sensitive; in the
first three cases the temperature for which values are given is 90°K, in the last it is 4-2°K. For Gd3+ in A1 0 the
2 3
additional parameters b\ = %B\ = 18-3(10), ft3. = 36-B3. & 1-0 (in units of 10~4 cm"1) have been determined
6° = 3B° 6j = 60BJ bl = 1260BJ |6j = 1260^1
2 Z
g inunits of 10-* cm-1 (2-998 MHz) Reference
LaCl c» 1•991(1) + 16-0(2) + 2-13(5) + 0-25(5) 1-4(3) Hutchison, Judd, and Pope (1957)
Lanth 3 anum C* 1•990(2) + 204-7(20) -3-96(30) +0-63(60) 3-5(5) Bleaney, Scovil, and
3
ethylsulphate Trenam (1954)
Bismuth c* 1•992(2) + 124(1) + 0-9(1) + 0-6(1) 12(1) Trenam (1953)
magnesium
nitrate
A1 2 0 3 C 3 1•9912(5) + 1032-9(20) + 26-0(10) + 1-0(5) 5-0(5) Geschwind and Remeika (1961)

--- Page 355 ---

TABLE 5.18
Principal hyperfine constants of some ions with 4/7, 8$j ground states, as measured by Endor. The column —ASlgfi
I
gives the magnetic field at the nucleus in the fully polarized state S = S. The following columns give the estimated
z
contributions from f-electrons (A/g ) including relativistic effects, and from core polarization (A lg ). A, B are the
t n G n
magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole parameters (see eqn (4.42)); g g are the nuclear g factors referred to
I} n
Bohr magnetons and nuclear magnetons respectively
t*i
W (nuclear -ASIgtf A t lg n A c /g n B Q BIQ
/ (MHz) magnetons) (kG) (MHz) (MHz) (MHz) (barns) (MHz/barn)
CaF Eu2+ 151 f -102-907(1) + 3-4413(9) -0-7855(52) + 1-16(8)
2
Eu2+ 153 f -45-673(2) + 1-5196(13) -2-0294(68) + 2-92(20)
Eu2+ 340 -15 -60 -0-68(5)
CeO Gd3+ 155 | ( + )12-048(3) (-)0-2567(6)
2
Gd3+ 157 | + 15-809(5) -0-3357(6)
ThO Gd3+ 157 f + 15-768(3) -0-3371(6) -0-687(18) + 1-70(16)
2
Gd3+ 320 -18 -52 -0-40(4)
ThO Tb*+ 159 f -73-891(23) + 1-994(4) 250 -22 -33 +6-194(38) 1-23(10) + 5-0(4)
2
References: Eu2+, Baker and Williams (1962).
Gd3+, Hurrell (1965), Baker, Copland, and Wanklyn (1969).
Tb*+, Baker, Chadwick, Garton, and Hurrell (1965).

--- Page 356 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 341
that, except for Gd3+ in LaCl , the 'fine structure' is dominated by
3
the 'quadrupole' term J3°. This suggests that such a term is produced
by lower order perturbation mechanisms than the other terms, since
the B® term is far from dominant in the splittings of other lanthanide
ions that are not in ^-states. Wybourne (1966) has shown that when
relativistic effects are included, a term of the right order of magnitude
(but of the wrong sign) can be produced by a second-order process
involving the first power of the spin-orbit coupling and of the crystal
field.
We consider now the principal hyperfine interactions, listed in Table
5.18 for some 4/7 ions in cases of cubic symmetry. We can isolate the
electronic effects by dividing through by g (or g ) and by Q. The
z n
column headed —^4 $/<///? gives the electronic magnetic field at the
nucleus in the state S = S and is of interest in a comparison with
z 9
the corresponding field in a substance (such as the metals) which enter a
magnetically co-operative state. This field shows a small but significant
decrease as the valency of the ion increases. The following two columns
give the contributions (Alg ) from /-electrons including relativistic
f n
effects, and (AJg ), from core polarization, as estimated by Baker,
n
Chadwick, Garton, and Hurrell (1965), and show that the latter
decreases markedly for Tb4+, a result again consistent with increased
covalent bonding. The column (B/Q) shows a more dramatic difference
in that this quantity is much larger and of opposite sign for Tb4+ than
for the two other ions.
In these and a number of other cases small higher-order terms in the
spin Hamiltonian have been determined experimentally. Some of
these are outlined in the following section.
5.10. Higher-order terms in the spin Hamiltonian
In the spin Hamiltonian the allowed terms have the dimensions
#r$s/*, where r+s+t must be even to satisfy time reversal invariance,
and where s < 2/S, t < 21 because operators containing higher powers
have zero matrix elements. The chief terms in the spin Hamiltonian
are those for which r+s+t = 2, except in the case r = t = 0, when
powers of S up to 4 are encountered for d-electrons and 6 for/-electrons.
These are the 'fine structure' terms that occur for d5 (see § 7.12) and
for/7 (see §§ 5.9, 6.2, 6.3), and whose effect on the spectrum has been
discussed for the case of cubic symmetry in § 3.4. Fine structure terms
with r = t = 0, s = 2 occur for other configurations, and are similarly
discussed in §§ 3.5, 3.6.

--- Page 357 ---

342 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
The case r = s = 0 arises only for the nuclear electric quadrupole
interaction, which under non-cubic symmetry may be expressed in a
form with t = 2 for a Kramers doublet and sometimes also for non-
Kramers doublets (an exception to the latter is discussed in § 18.6).
Occasionally such a form suffices for manifolds of higher degeneracy,
but then we may need terms for which s = t = 2. We have already
met such terms in § 4.7, where a nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
of the same form as for a free atom was assumed for Eu2+, 4/7 in CaF .
2
This is not strictly correct, since even in cubic symmetry two parameters
rather than one are needed in this interaction (see §§18.4 and 18.6),
but the error is not likely to be serious for Eu2+ where the size of the
interaction is close to that for the free Eu atom.
Fine structure terms are often comparable with or larger in energy
than the electronic Zeeman interaction. In contrast, the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction, although one of the two principal
hyperfine interactions, is usually rather small. The remaining terms
with which we shall be concerned in this section are also rather small,
with one exception. For an ion with appreciable 'unquenched' orbital
momentum, such as Co2+ in a tetrahedral field or a rare-earth ion in a
cubic field (cf. § 5.8), groups of states with degeneracies up to four
may occur, as in the F quartet. The spin Hamiltonian for this is
8
discussed in some detail in Chapter 18, using an effective spin S = f.
Terms of the form HS3 may then be as important as the simple Zeeman
term HS, but the reason for this is that in using 8 = f to describe
the quartet we are labelling the states by quite fictitious quantum
numbers that have no simple relation to the actual angular momenta.
It would be incorrect to ascribe terms of dimensions HS* to an elec-
tronic magnetic octupole moment, since this would interact only with a
non-uniform magnetic field which has an octupole-like distribution
over the region of the electronic magnetic moment, whereas if is a
uniform field. Terms in //S3 arise in a similar way from the magnetic
field of the nucleus, but the fact that this field is non-uniform over the
electronic distribution does not play a significant role.
In considering other terms, we confine ourselves to cases of cubic
symmetry. Nevertheless, we can perhaps further emphasize our point
about the effective spin by referring to § 18.6, where it is shown that
terms of degree SI2 are allowed for a F doublet in a cubic field. This
3
is possible because for a non-Kramers doublet (see § 18.5) the compo-
nents of the effective spin 8 may not be time-odd operators, whereas
the condition that r+s+t must be even rests on the assumption that

--- Page 358 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GBOUP 343
the components of 8 are time-odd operators. General discussions of the
allowed terms are given by Koster and Statz (1959) and Tuhina Ray
(1963), and below we illustrate the situation by outlining two sets of
experimental results.
For an ion with configuration 4/7, whose ground state S = % has
an eightfold multiplicity, we may anticipate a number of higher-order
terms. In the electronic Zeeman interaction, additional terms that
have been explored are
where the last term applies when H is along a cube axis of fourfold
z
symmetry. (The parameter g in (5.81) is of course quite different from
l
that in eqn (3.9).) Similarly, in addition to the principal hyperfine
terms in eqn (4.42), we have
Here we have retained the nomenclature of Baker and Williams (1962) ;
more symmetrical forms of the terms in S3 (which have the advantage
that they vanish for 8 < f ) are given in eqn (18.21)).
Some experimental results are listed in Table 5.19. As we would
expect for ions where the orbital angular momentum is very small, the
terms of higher degree become rapidly smaller. They arise from the
TABLE 5.19
Electron paramagnetic resonance and Endor data for some 4/7 ions. A, g
are the usual parameters; the others are defined by eqns (5.77), (5.81), and
(5.82). For references, see Table 5.18
Eua+ in CaF Gd3+ in ThO Tb4+ in Th0
2 2 2
60B (MHz) -176-12(2) -168-75(60) -2527-53(10)
4
1260B (MHz) + 0-78(2) -1-28(60) -24-84(4)
8
9 1-9926(3) 1-991(1) 2-0146(4)
9i 0(1) XlO-5 — 0(2) X 10-'
0(l)xlO-« 2-l(4)xlO-«
92 —
— — 1-1(5) xlO-6
93
Isotope 151 Isotope 157 Isotope 159
A (MHz) -102-907(1) + 15-7679(33) -73-891(23)
A' (kHz) + 13-77(46) -3-05(30) + 103-3(23)
A" (kHz) + 0-084(31) —
—
B' — — + 1-02(14) XlO-6

--- Page 359 ---

344 THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP
small admixture of excited states through the spin-orbit coupling and
the ligand field. This means that we might expect the ratio A' I A to
be of the same order as gJAg rather than gjg, where A</ = g — g is a
B
measure of the orbital admixture. The measurements of g± are not
sufficiently accurate to check this expectation, and the fact that (in
contrast) fairly accurate values of A' /A are listed reflects the fact that
Endor measurements are often higher in precision than electron
paramagnetic resonance measurements (cf. § 1.13 or § 4.1).
An interesting contrast is provided by Endor measurements on
Yb3+ (cubic) in CaF , where the ground state is an electronic Kramers
2
doublet T (see Table 5.15). The Endor spectrum is fitted to the spin
7
Hamiltonian (with 8 = J)
where the nomenclature (apart from the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman term)
is that of Baker, Blake, and Copland (1969). For the isotope 171Yb,
/ = J, and terms in higher powers of / than the first are allowed only
TABLE 5.20
Nuclear and hyperfine parameters for Yb3+ (cubic) in
CaF , for the F Kramers doublet ground state, with
2 7
g = +3-4380(5). The Endor spectrum is fitted to the spin
Hamiltonian of eqn (5.83), and the data are from Baker,
Blake, and Copland (1969), except for the values of g
z
which are those of OlschewsJci and Otten (1967)
171Yb(I = J) 173Yb(/ =rf)
<100> axis mean of <100> and <110> axes
A (MHz) + 2638-70(5) -727-094(60)
g(I) + 8-702(50) XlO-4 — 2-396(12) XlO-4
9i + 5-35816 XlO-4 — 1-4761 XlO-4
fih (HzG-1) + 49-6(7)
fa (HzG-1) + 65-2(10)
C (kHz) + 12(5)
D (kHz) + 133(33)
9(I)lQi + 1-6240 + 1-6231

--- Page 360 ---

THE LANTHANIDE (4/) GROUP 345
for the other stable isotope 173Yb, for which I = f. The measured
parameters are given in Table 5.20, those for 173Yb being a weighted
mean of measurements in (100) and (110) directions. The external
magnetic field admixes the excited F quartet states into the ground
8
F doublet, and this accounts for the difference between the effective
7
value g(I) and the true nuclear ^-factor g measured by optical pumping
z
experiments (Olschewski and Otten 1967) in the free atom. From the
difference, the energy of the F level is found to be 604 ±10 cm"1.
8
This same admixture is responsible for the terms in ph and (3q;
physically they correspond to interactions between the nuclear electric
quadrupole moment and an electric field gradient arising from a distor-
tion of the electronic charge cloud whose magnitude is proportional
to the applied magnetic field. The same admixture contributes to the
terms in C and D, which are essentially second-order effects of the
nuclear electric quadrupole interaction, together with (in C) cross
terms between the nuclear magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole
interactions. In addition, such second-order effects admix the excited
F states, giving further contributions to (7, D; finally, there is a
6
small contribution to A from such terms which similarly involves
admixtures from both the F and F levels. When allowance is made
8 6
for this, the following corrected values of A were obtained:
The size of the correction can be seen by comparing these values with
those in Table 5.20.
Although the various nuclear parameters in eqn (5.83) were deter-
mined from the Endor spectrum as six independent constants, the
results were also successfully analyzed by Baker, Blake, and Copland
in terms of just the two principal free ion hyperfine parameters
(magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole), together with two energy
differences, those of the F , F levels relative to the ground F doublet.
8 6 7

--- Page 361 ---

6
THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
6.1. Ions and compounds of the actinide group
ALTHOUGH Bohr had suggested as early as 1923 that another
paramagnetic group might occur at the upper end of the periodic table,
with electrons in the 5/ shell, it was not until much later that the point
at which such a series started became clear. In a review of the evidence
Seaborg (1949) postulated that the 5/series starts with actinium as the
analogue of lanthanum, thorium that of cerium, etc., the closed shells of
electrons corresponding to a radon core. Later Dawson (1952), on the
basis of magnetic data, suggested that at the start of the series the
magnetic electrons occupied 6d states rather than 5/, but it is now
accepted that this interpretation is incorrect (see, for example, Bleaney
(1955)). The number of unpaired electron spins is shown in Table 6.1
for the ions where the evidence is most complete. These electrons occupy
the 5/ states, and at 7 electrons (Am2+, Cm3+) we reach the half-filled
shell; presumably the shell would be complete with 14 electrons at the
tripositive ion of element 103. Measurements on the heavier ions are, of
course, very difficult because of the high level of radioactivity, and
magnetic resonance measurements have been confined to the lighter
members of the group. Since most of the isotopes are a-particle
emitters, radiation damage is heavy, causing magnetic resonance
spectra to deteriorate rapidly in a single crystal, or even to be un-
observable immediately after crystal growth. Ionic radii and some
other data for the first half of the actinide group are given in Table 6.2.
In the solid state the tripositive ions have been studied mainly in the
compounds LaCl andLa(C H S0 )3, 9H 0, which have been extensively
3 2 5 4 2
used in work on the lanthanide group. The site symmetry is C (see the
Bh
discussion in the previous chapter) and analysis of the results is similar
to that for the 4/ group. Uranium ions have been incorporated into
CaF , and its analogues, where charge compensation results in magnetic
2
resonance spectra that show tetragonal or trigonal symmetry as well as
cubic symmetry.
The actinide ions in higher valency states have been studied in
compounds that are, in the main, different from those of the 4/ group.
The two sets of compounds of greatest importance have regular
octahedral symmetry at the actinide ion site. In the gas phase the
molecules UF , NpF , and PuF have a structure in which the metal
6 6 6

--- Page 362 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GBOUP
347
TABLE 6.1
Number of unpaired electron spins for the principal ions of the actinide
group. In addition the complex ions (UO )2+, (Np0 )2+, (Pu0 )2+ have
2 2 2
0, 1, and 2 unpaired electron spins respectively. For these ions, as for
those in the table, the unpaired electrons occupy the 5/ states
0 1 2 3 4 5 67
Thorium Th4+
Protoactinium Pa5+ Pa4+
Uranium U6+ U4+ us+ U2+
Neptunium Np6+ Np4+ Np3+
Plutonium Pu6+ Pu4+ Pu3+
Americium Am3+ Am2+
Curium Cm3+
atom is at the centre of a regular octahedral arrangement of six fluorine
atoms, the metal to fluorine distances being 0-1996, 0-1981, and 0-1971
nm respectively. A magnetic resonance experiment shows that cubic
symmetry is preserved in the solid state for NpF (Hutchison and
6
Weinstock 1960). Some quadripositive ions have been studied in the
diluted state in the compounds Cs ZrCl and [(CH ) N] PtCl , in each
2 6 3 4 2 6
TABLE 6.2
Some data for ions in the first half of the actinide series
Tripositive ions Quadripositive ions
Ionic Spin-orbit Ionic Spin -orbit
radius coupling radius coupling
Z Ion (nm) (cm-1) Ion (nm) (cm-1)
90 Th3+, 5/1 0-108 Th4+, 5/° 0-095
91 Pa3+, 5/2 0-106 Pa4+, 5/1 0-091 1490 ASJ
92 U3+, 5/3 0-104 1666 CW U4+, 5/2 0-089 1800 JSSW
1659 GCCN
93 Np3+, 5/4 0-102 2070 CW Np4+, 5/3 0-088
1969 GCCN
94 Pu»+, 5/5 0-101 2292 CW Pu4+, 5/4 0-086
2260 GCCN
95 Ams+, 5/« 0-100 2548 CW Am4+, 5/5 0-085
2605 C
96 Cm3+, 5/7 2948 CW
2842 GCCN
The ionic radii are from Evans (1964); the other references are
ASJ Axe, Stapleton, and Jeffries (1961).
CW Carnall and Wybourne (1964), Wybourne (1964).
GCCN Gruber, Cochran, Conway, and Wong (1966).
JSSW Johnston, Satten, Schreiber, and Wong (1966).
C Conway (1964).

--- Page 363 ---

348 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
of which the metal ion is at the centre of a regular octahedron of
chlorine ions.
The actinide series differs also from the lanthanide series in the
formation of complex ions such as the uranyl ion (U0 )2+ and its
2
analogues (Np0 )2+ and (Pu0 )2+. These ions are linear, of the form
2 2
0—U—O, with a rather short distance for the U—0 bond which pro-
vides evidence for a covalent type of bonding. Uranyl sodium acetate,
(UO )Na(C2H 0 )3 is cubic, with four (U0 ) groups per unit cell whose
2 3 2 2
axes lie along the threefold axes of the cube; paramagnetic resonance has
been observed in the plutonyl salt (Hutchison and Lewis 1954). A salt
that has been used more extensively is uranyl rubidium nitrate,
(U0 )Rb(N0 ) . This salt is hexagonal and all the (U0 ) groups lie
2 3 3 2
parallel to the c-axis, surrounded by three nitrate groups in the equa-
torial plane, making the c-axis a threefold axis for each (U0 ) group.
2
Paramagnetic resonance has been observed in the neptunyl and plu-
tonyl ions present in dilute form in uranyl rubidium nitrate (Bleaney,
Llewellyn, Pryce, and Hall 1954a, 6) and the properties of these ions
have been the subject of a detailed theoretical study by Eisenstein and
Pryce (1955, 1956).
6.2. Tripositive actinide ions
Optical studies have been made of a number of the tripositive ions of
the actinide group, mostly incorporated in crystals of LaCl . An
3
analysis of these results together with data obtained on ions in solution
shows that the behaviour is similar to that of the 4/ group except that
the spin-orbit coupling is considerably larger, as can be seen from a
comparison of Tables 6.2 and 5.3. Two sets of values are given for the
tripositive ions, which illustrate the spread in the experimental values.
The electrostatic parameters such as F are rather smaller than in the
2
4/group, as can be seen from Tables 6.18, 6.19 in Wybourne (1964), so
that departures from L$-coupling are much more pronounced. For
example, Conway (1964) finds that in the ground multiplet 5/6, 7F of
Am3+ the level J = 1 lies 2720 cm-1 above J — 0, and J = 6 lies
12350 cm"1 above J = 0. Thus these two splittings are in the ratio
2:9-1 instead of the ratio 2:42 that is appropriate to pure LS-eoupling,
a departure that is far greater than those given in Table 5.2 for the
corresponding 4/6 ions. It follows that intermediate coupling is an
important factor in interpreting any resonance results; however no
analysis of the crystal field will be attempted here and the resonance
results given below summarize mainly the spin Hamiltonian parameters.

--- Page 364 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP 349
5/3, U3+ in LaCl
3
The resonance results for this substance have been fitted to the usual
spin Hamiltonian for effective spin S = J with axial symmetry; they
are summarized in Table 6.3.
The gr-values are remarkably close to those (g\\ = 4-00, g = 1-76)
L
measured for the corresponding ion 4/3, Nd3+ in LaCl , a result which in
3
itself strongly suggests that the resonance is due to a doublet split off
by the crystal field from a ground state characterized fairly accurately
TABLE 6.3
Spin Hamiltonian parameters for U3+ in LaCl
3
|9||| = 4-153(5), I0J = 1-520(2) Hutchison, Llewellyn, Wong, and Dorain (1956)
Isotope 233 (I = f ) Isotope 235 (I = £ )
\A I, | 378-6(12) X 10-* cm-1 176(1) X 10~4 cm-1
J4J 123-6(10) X 10-4 cm-1 58-5(5) X 10~* cm-1
| P || | 9-9(10) X 10-* cm-1 5-5(5) X 10~4 cm-1
Bleaney, Hutchison, Llewellyn, Dorain, Hutchison, and
and Pope (1956) Wong (1957)
as 5/3, 4/|. The ratio (A^A^Kg^fg^ is 1-12, which is also very close to
that for Nd3+ in LaCl , and suggests that crystal field strength and
3
spin-orbit coupling are roughly in the same ratio as for Nd3+. The
nuclear spins of -f for isotope 233 and -J for isotope 235 are clearly
established from the hyperfine structure, the ratio of the nuclear
moments being //|35/^|33 = O66. The quadrupole interaction is
measured by observation of the 'forbidden' hyperfine lines that appear
when the external magnetic field is not along the symmetry axis (cf.
§ 3.9). The values of P\\ are very much larger than in the case of Nd3+,
and the correction for the pseudo-quadrupolar interaction APjj which
was quite important for Nd3+ ( § 4.8) should be quite small for U3+. Thus
the ratio of the quadrupole moments, Q235/Q233 = 1-17(20) should be
quite accurate. As in the case of Nd3+, the lattice may make a substan-
tial contribution to the electric field gradient at the nucleus, since the
anti-shielding factor y^ is likely to be larger for U3+ as well as <r~3),
which would increase the gradient due to the /-electrons.
5/7, Cm3+ in LaCl , and La(0 H S0 ) , 9H O
3 2 5 4 3 2
This ion is expected to be in an 8$7 state, like Gd3+, where crystal
field effects produce splittings only through higher-order effects.
Abraham, Judd, and Wickman (1963) have shown that some spectra
attributed earlier to Cm3+ must be due to Gd3+; they find that only a

--- Page 365 ---

350 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
single anisotropic resonance line is visible, with the following g- values :
Since g is very close to 4<7||, this must correspond to the transition
±
I +*><-> !-!> of S =i split by an axial term D{S2-±S(S + l)} (or
z
B^{3S*— $($ + !)}) which is large compared with the frequency at which
resonance is observed (~0-3 cm."1). The value of g\\ should be equal to
the g- value of the free ion, and its rather low value is due to a fair
degree of intermediate coupling, being in reasonable agreement with
that calculated from the wave-functions
suggested by Carnall and Wybourne (1964) (see also Gruber, Cochran,
Conway, and Mcol (1966)). The larger degree of intermediate coupling
means that we should also expect the crystal field splittings to be much
larger for Cm3+ than for Gd3+, in agreement with experiment. A propor-
tionate increase in line-width for the other transitions due to crystal
imperfections would also be expected, and the damage due to the high
radioactivity would readily make such lines too broad to be observed.
6.3. Actinide ions in CaF
2
The electron spin resonance and optical spectra of several actinide
ions have been studied in CaF and isomorphic crystals, partly in a
2
search for suitable laser crystals.
5/4, U2+; 5/3, C73+ and 5/2, U4+ in CaF
2
Magnetic resonance was observed by Bleaney, Llewellyn, and Jones
(1956) due to uranium in CaF and SrF ; the spectra showed axial
2 2
symmetry about a fourfold axis with the following g- values :
Uranium Neodymium
\ff\\\ \g±\ l^ii I foil
CaF 3-501 1-866 4-412 1-301
2
SrF 3-433 1-971 4-289 1-505
2
(Errors: ±0-008 in g , ±0-002 in g .)
{l L
The similarity of the results suggests that the ions are U3+, Nd3+. A
fluorine hyperfine structure was observed in the U3+ spectrum, but not
in the Nd3+ spectrum, suggesting that the 5/ electrons take part in an
appreciable amount of covalent bonding.

--- Page 366 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP 351
Title et al. (1962) have reported resonance lines whose angular
variation can be fitted to that of a F quartet in cubic symmetry, which
8
would be expected as the ground state for 5/3 in the cubic field of CaF ;
2
however the observed (/-values have not been interpreted, and do not
seem to correspond to those expected from simple crystal field theory
using the calculations of Lea, Leask, and Wolf (1962), though this is
perhaps not surprising.
A number of asymmetrical lines typical of non-Kramers doublets
with g < 0-1 and axial symmetry about a threefold axis have also
L
been observed in CaF doped with uranium and, for comparison, with
2
praseodymium. The values of g\\ are
(a) jr,, = 5-65(1) McLaughlan (1966) Pr3+, 4/2, »JET.
4
(b) jr,, = 5-83(1) McLaughlan (1966) Pr3+, 4/2, 3# .
4
(c) 0r,, = 5-66(2) McLaughlan (1966) U4+, 5/2, 3# .
4
(d) gr,| = 4-02(1) McLaughlan (1966) U4+, 5/2, 3# .
4
(e) 0,| = 3-238(5) Yariv (1962); Title et al. (1962).
The first three lines are so similar in the value of g\\ that they are
assigned to/2 ions, where the 3.ff manifold is split by the trigonal field
4
to give as ground state the non-Kramers doublet (cf. eqn (5.67))
For this doublet the maximum possible value of
(corresponding tooc = l,/? = y = 0); this maximum is 6-4 for/2, 8fl
4
but only 4-8 for/4, 5.ff, so that the lines cannot be due to 5/4, U24" ions.
4
The last value (e), also ascribed to 5/2, U4* ions by the authors quoted,
is assigned to 5/4, U2+ by Hargreaves (1967).
In the absence of local charge compensation, an /2, 3H± ion in the
purely cubic field of CaF may have as ground state (see Lea, Leask and
2
Wolf (1962)) a F triplet with an isotropic g = 2 and an effective spin
6
S = 1. Such an isotropic line has been observed by McLaughlan (1967),
and the line (d) above is attributed to a |+1) <-»| — 1) transition for
such a triplet split by a trigonal distortion, the |6) level lying higher
by some 7 cm-1 (McDonald 1969; Wetsel and Donoho 1965).
5/7, Am2+ and Cm3+ in CaF
2
The magnetic resonance spectra of these ions at sites of cubic
symmetry in CaF have been observed by Edelstein and Easley (1968).
2
At low field strengths a single resonance line with an isotropic g-value
of ( —)4-492 is observed for 244Cm3+, but at higher field strengths
(frequencies of 35 GHz) some anisotropy is found. Similar results are

--- Page 367 ---

352 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
TABLE 6.4
Magnetic resonance results for the F
6
doublet of the 8S% state split by a cubic
field in CaF (Edelstein and Easley 1968).
2
Similar but slightly smaller values of
( —)4-484(2) and (—)4-475(2) have been
obtained for 244Cm3+ in Th0 and Ce0
2 2
respectively (Abraham, Finch, and Clark
1968)
Ion 0(r.) i A\ (cm-1)
244Cm3+ (-)4-492(2) 0 0
241Am2 + (-)4-490(2) f 0-01837(2)
243Am2+ (-)4-490(2) f 0-01821(2)
FIG. 6.1. The apparent gr-factor of the F doublet of two 5/7 ions on cubic sites in CaF,
6 2
as measured at 35 GHz. The magnetic field is rotated in an (Oil) plane, and 6 = 0
corresponds to a <100> axis. The anisotropy is due to admixture of the excited F states
8
by the Zeeman interaction (Edelstein and Easlev 1968).

--- Page 368 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP 353
FIG. 6.2. Splitting of the ground J = \ manifold of two 5/7 ions on sites of cubi
symmetry in CaF . The energy of the F quartet level is deduced from the anisotropy
2 8
shown in Fig. 6.1. Two calculated energies are given for the F doublet, using two sets of
7
values for the splitting parameters 6 = 60-B, 6 = 1260.B, either of which gives the
4 4 6 6
correct energy for the F level. These sets are (Edelstein and Easley 1968):
8
6 (cm-1) 6 (cm-1) TF(r)(om-i)
4 6 7
(-M15 0 35-7
Cm3+
-1-433 -0-1 45-1
-1-549 0 49-6
Am2+
-1-849 -0-1 58-4
obtained for Am2+, with a hyperfine structure due to the odd isotopes
241, 243, each of which has / = f. The resonance is attributed to the
F doublet of an 8$7 state with a large cubic field splitting; the effective
6
(/-value (see Table 22) is (—3) times the true gr-value for S = \
low fields, while at higher fields the anisotropy arises from admixture
of the excited F quartet by the Zeeman interaction. The energy of the
8
F level in zero field can be deduced from this anisotropy.
8
The results are listed in Table 6.4; the anisotropy is shown in Fig. 6.1
and the energy levels in Fig. 6.2. For the 8 = \ configuration the
24

--- Page 369 ---

354 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
value of gj is deduced to be 1-9261(10) for Cm3+ and 1-9258(10) for
Am2+; the latter is slightly smaller than the value gj = 1-93788(7)
measured by Armstrong and Marrus (1966) for the free atom Am, which
has the configuration 5/77s2, 8S , but both are in good agreement with
7
those for Cm3+ in C symmetry (see § 6.2). The cubic field splittings
3h
(see Fig. 6.2) are enormously greater than those listed in Table 5.19 for
the corresponding 4/7 ions.
6.4. Actinide ions in octahedral symmetry
We consider first the quadripositive ions. Optical measurements on
Pa4+, 5/1 in Cs ZrCl (Axe, reported by Raubenheimer, Boesman, and
2 6
Stapleton (1965)) yields the value £ = 1490 cm."1 for the spin-orbit
parameter. This is in line with values for the tripositive ions (Table 6.2
and for U4+, 5/2 (see below). On the other hand, the fourth degree term
in the crystal potential is much larger than that for tripositive actinide
or lanthanide ions. For Pa4+ the above authors give A±(r*} = +888
cm"1, A (r6) = +42 cm"1, and similar values are found for U4+ (see
Q
below).
Magnetic resonance has been observed for Pa4+ in Cs ZrCl by Axe,
2 6
Stapleton, and Jeffries (1961) who also measured the hyperfine structure
of 231Pa (/ = f ) by Endor. In an octahedral field the ground manifold
of 5/1, 2F is split into a doublet (F ) and a quartet (F ), the former
L 7 8
lying lower (from optical measurements) by about 1900 cm"1. The
magnetic resonance spectrum of the doublet was fitted to the usual
spin Hamiltonian
with the isotropic values \g\ = 1-1423(14), \A\ = 1578-6(14) MHz
\g(I)\ = 7-74 x 10~4. After applying an 8 per cent correction for the
pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect, a value of 1-96 nuclear magnetons is
obtained for the nuclear moment. The experiments show that g has the
opposite sign to g(I\ and hence also to g \ since the nuclear moment is
x
expected to be positive this gives a negative sign for g (and also for A).
For a pure J = f manifold split by a small cubic field the g- value for
the F doublet should be (-• |) x (J\\ A \\J) = — V1 for/1 (cf. § 18.2 and
7
Table 22) ; the observed value is rather smaller because the crystal
field admixes an appreciable amount of the J = %, F states into the
7
ground doublet. In general, one can write the ground doublet as

--- Page 370 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP 355
for which
showing that g can be positive or negative according to the value of a.
The hyperfine constant is
where the term in K allows for the possibility of a contribution from
core polarization. An alternative approach is outlined below, in the
theory for NpF .
6
Measurements of the susceptibility of [(CH ) N] UC1 , where the
3 4 2 6
U4+ ion is in an octahedral environment, show that it has a small
temperature-independent susceptibility up to 300°K (Hutchison and
Candela 1957). This is consistent with a ground term 5/2, BH^ which in
an octahedral field of the expected sign gives a I\ singlet as the lowest
level; the small constant susceptibility shows that the crystal field
splittings are large compared with room temperature (200 cm"1).
Analysis of the optical spectrum (see, for example, Satten, Schreiber,
and Wong (1965)) gives values of A±(r*} & 900 cm."1, -4 {/*6) ^ 56 cm"1,
6
£ = 1796 cm"1; the first excited state (the F triplet of3H^) lies at about
4
900 cm-1.
The magnetic resonance spectrum of NpF at dilutions of 2 and 4
6
per cent in UF has been observed at 4°K by Hutchison and Weinstock
6
(1960). The results are fitted to the spin Hamiltonian (6.1); g is found
to be isotropic with the value g = —0-604(3), the sign being deter-
mined using circularly polarized radiation (cf. § 3.2). The hyperfine
structure, also isotropic, is due to the isotope 237Np (/ = f ), and its
value is \A\ = 0-0665(5) cm."1. These results are consistent with a
structure in which the neptunium ion is surrounded by a regular
octahedron of fluorine ions, with a single electron in the 5/ shell. This is
similar to that of Pa4+ in Cs ZrCl (see above, but the much smaller
2 6
<7-value shows that a weak crystal field approach is an even poorer
approximation in this case).
The theory of NpF has been considered in some detail by Eisenstein
6
and Pryce (1960). In a cubic field the sevenfold orbital degeneracy of an
/-state is lifted, giving a singlet (a or F ), and two triplets (^ or F ,
2 2 4
and t or F ) ; the wave-functions are listed in Table 6.5. In an octahedral
2 5

--- Page 371 ---

TABLE 6.5
Splitting of the orbital states of an f-electron in a cubic field (Eisenstein and Pryce 1960). The wave-functions to the
right are in terms of \l) and are real linear combinations of those given in Fig. 7.5. (A common factor of <\/7 has been
z 9
omitted from the functions given in Cartesian coordinates as compared with Eisenstein and Pryce). If the orbital split-
ting is related to the spin operator form -B (02+50*) + ^(OJ—210*), then V = 106 +846 ; V = 186 + 286 , and
4 4 6 4 6
for a single f-electron B± = 6 /60 = 2,4 <r4)/(llx45), B = 6 /180 = -4J. (r6)/(llx 13x27)
4 4 6 6 6
Symmetry Energy Wave-functions

--- Page 372 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP 357
field the a state is lowest, since it has zero density along each fourfold
2
axis and so avoids the negatively charged ligand ions as much as
possible; the t states lie next, and the t states highest. In crystal field
z ±
theory this is equivalent to assuming that the fourth degree terms in
the octahedral potential outweigh the sixth degree terms. In terms of
bonding, the a orbital is non-bonding, the t^ orbitals can form a-bonds,
2
and the t orbitals 7r-bonds. If we assume that the magnetic electron
2
occupies an anti-bonding orbital, and that cr-bonding is stronger than
TABLE 6.6
Basis functions off1 including spin in a cubic
field (Eisenstein and Pryce 1960)
The orbital functions are given in Table 6.5; the nota-
tion is that f$ is an orbital function combined with 'up'
spin (m = -f-J) and ft is an orbital function combined
a
with 'down' spin (ra = — J). The values in the column
g
headed mj are the values of l-\-a.
z e
7r-bonding, this gives the same order of levels as assumed above, the
anti-bonding cr-orbitals t lying highest, and the non-bonding orbital
l
a lowest.
2
When the electron spin is introduced the product wave-functions can
be classified as F (doublet), T (doublet), and T (quartet), where T
6 7 e 6
occurs only once, but F and F occur twice, as given in Table 6.6.
7 8
From the energy matrices given in Table 6.7 it is clear that the ground
state will be a F doublet, which can be written as
7

--- Page 373 ---

358 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
TABLE 6.7
Energy matrices for the F (doublets), F (quartets) and F
7 8 6
(doublet) states of NpF . The quantities V^ V are the energies of
6
the t and t levels respectively (see Table 6.5); -\/k', \/k are
2 :
factors by which the amplitude of the 5f wave-functions are reduced in
the t± and t orbitals respectively. t orbitals are a-bonding, t
2 : 2
orbitals 7T-bonding and the remaining a orbital is non-bonding
2
(Eisenstein and Pryce 1960)
A B C D
whose (/-value is
if an orbital reduction factor k% is assumed to allow for any 77-bonding
in the t orbitals (note that the nomenclature used by Eisenstein and
2
Pryce differs from that normally used for bonding effects with d-
orbitals). Equation (6.5) with k = 1 is equivalent to eqn (6.3), as can
be verified by noting that in the limit of a weak crystal field the two F
7
states belonging to J = f and J = f have the form
and
In their analysis for NpF Eisenstein and Pryce attempted to fit the
6
gr-value, the optical spectrum, and the temperature-independent term
in the magnetic susceptibility. With k = 1 (and also no orbital reduction
factor for the ^ orbitals), they adopted the values
£ = 2405 cm-1, V = 5442 cm-1, V = 22220 cm-1,
which give a temperature-independent susceptibility term of 158 x 10~6
per mol, in good agreement with the value of 165 x 10~6 obtained by
Hutchison, Tsang, and Weinstock (1962) for NpF in UF , extrapolated
6 6

--- Page 374 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP 359
to infinite dilution. These parameters are considerably larger than
those for the single /-electron of Pa4+ in Cs ZrCl of
2 6
(see Raubenheimer, Boesman, and Stapleton 1965). The corresponding
crystal field parameters are
which showed a marked rise with increasing valency. Both parameters
are positive, as would be expected for an octahedral configuration.
The magnetic hyperfine constant is
and it can be verified by using eqns (6.6a) that this is identical with eqn
(6.3a). The value of 26 required to fit the experimental (/-value of
NpF is 63°, for which
6
6.5. Neptunyl and plutonyl ions
As mentioned in § 6.1, ions of the type (U0 )2+ are linear. Uranyl
2
salts have only a temperature-independent susceptibility, suggesting
that there are no unpaired electrons. The free uranium atom has a
closed radon core, and six valence electrons, two of which have been
lost in (U0 )2+. Eisenstein and Pryce (1955) postulate that the remain-
2
ing electrons are used to form covalent bonds with the oxygen atoms.
In a simple model which uses only cr-bonding, the six valence electrons
of each oxygen are assumed to be in non-bonding orbitals formed from
the 25, 2p states on the oxygens, which are thus filled. For the central
uranium ion, bonding orbitals of cr-type can be formed from 5/, 6d, Is
(and perhaps Ip) using the substates with m = 0; taking the 0 — U — 0
l
axis as the z-axis, this means the/, <5j. orbital in Table 6.5, whose wave-
function z(5z2 — 3r2) is strongly directed along the z-axis, and similarly
the (3z2— r2) orbital belonging to the eZ-states. The two orbitals forming
a bond with the inwardly directed sp orbital on each oxygen can
z
accommodate just four electrons, which are assumed to be those
originally associated with the uranium. The situation is therefore
different from any considered hitherto for compounds of ions containing

--- Page 375 ---

360 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GBOUP
/-electrons, in that we have strong bonding involving /-orbitals. In
many respects it resembles a linear molecule (cf. Elliott 1953).
We now consider such 'actinyl' groups in the hexagonal compound
(U0 )Rb(N0 ) , where the axes of all the groups are parallel to the
2 3 3
unique crystal axis.
A strong nuclear electric quadrupole interaction with axial symmetry
would be expected in this compound; this has been verified by measure-
ments of anisotropy in the a-particle emission from 233U, 235U at
temperatures below 1°K by Dabbs, Roberts, and Parker (1958).
The paramagnetic resonance spectrum of this compound has been
measured by Bleaney, Llewellyn, Pryce, and Hall (19546). As would be
expected from the foregoing discussion, it shows strong axial symmetry,
and the results have been fitted to a spin Hamiltonian with effective
spin S = % of the usual form with axial symmetry. The measured
parameters are (see Pryce 1959)
The hyperfine parameters are for the isotope 237Np, whose nuclear spin
is / = f. The actual signs are not determined experimentally, except
for the result that A \\, P\\ are of opposite sign. Pryce (1959) has pointed
out that theoretically g\\ is negative (see below), and that A | should be
(
negative provided that the nuclear magnetic moment is (as expected)
positive. A negative value of A ^ and a positive value of PJJ have been
confirmed by Hanauer, Dabbs, Roberts, and Parker (1961) from the
temperature dependence of the anisotropy in the emission of a-particles
in a nuclear alignment experiment.
The concentration of negative charge along the axis of the 0—U—0
complex means that any additional electron such as the extra electron
in the neptunyl ion will be strongly repelled, and in the ground state
it would occupy an orbital whose charge distribution is concentrated in the
equatorial plane. The 5/ orbitals will therefore have very different
energy, according to their charge distribution. The states for which
l = ±3 will be lowest, followed by the l = ±2, ±1 and the anti-
z z
bonding l = 0 states in that order. The excited states are estimated
z
by Eisenstein and Pryce to lie at 20000-30000 cm"1, as also are the 6d

--- Page 376 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GBOUP 361
states. These splittings are large compared with the spin-orbit coupling,
of order 2000 cm"1, so that in a first approximation we retain only the
diagonal term t,ls. Since £ is positive for a single electron, the four
z z
states with l = ±3, s = ±i are split into two doublets, the lower
z z
doublet being that for which the axial components of orbit and spin
are anti-parallel. These two states can be denoted by j = l +s = \ ±f ),
z z z
the other two states \j = ±|) lying higher in energy by 3£. Use
z
of the Zeeman operator l +2s shows that in this approximation the
z z
ground doublet would have g^ = 4, g — 0. Such a doublet would not
L
show a magnetic resonance line, though the similarity of the g- values
to the experimental results suggests that the basic theory is correct.
We now allow for the effect of the crystal field due to other
constituents, mainly the three nitrate ions symmetrically disposed in
the equatorial plane. These produce a crystal field of threefold
symmetry about the z-axis, of whose components FJ is of vital impor-
tance because it admixes states with l = ±3. The ground doublet is
z
then no longer exactly characterized by j = ±f , but contains an
z
admixture of the j — ±1 states, making a resonance transition
z
allowed. In addition off-diagonal elements of the spin-orbit coupling
will admix some of the l = ±2, j = ±f states, but since the spin-
z z
orbit coupling is rather weak relative to the splitting due to the axial
charge concentration, their amplitude is rather small. These two per-
turbations can be taken into account by writing the wave-functions of
the ground doublet in terms of \l, s) as
z z
where q is about 0-1. Use of the Zeeman operator l-\-2s then gives
z z
If q is fixed (and its effect is anyway rather small), the values of g\\ and
g are related, depending only on the parameter p, and it is not possible
L
to fit the experimental values of g\\ and g simultaneously. If g is
L L
fitted, the value of g\\ given by these equations is very close to —4;
since most of the contribution to g^ comes from the orbit, this suggests
that an orbital reduction factor k should be introduced to allow for
some covalent bonding. The g- values then become
The experimental gr-values can then be fitted using k = 0-9, p = 0-056.

--- Page 377 ---

362 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
In eqns (6.8) we have chosen as the | +) state that which gives a 1 :
correspondence between the matrix elements of the effective spin and
of the true angular momentum 1 + s. This makes the sign of g\\ negative
because it is dominated by the contribution from the orbit, which is
opposed to the smaller spin contribution.
The theoretical expressions for the hyperfine constants given by
Eisenstein and Pryce (1955) are
(here the sign of A \\ has been reversed from the original, like that of g\\ ; .
see Pryce (1959)). With the value q = 0-1 assumed above, and the value
p = 0-056 required to fit the g- values, these equations can be solved
for K and g (r~*) using the measured hyperfine constants. To fit the
n
anisotropy, a value of about —3-1 is required for /c, which then gives
(An alternative solution, K = +120, which leads to g (r~3) = 0'4
n
seems quite inadmissible.) Even if we take a value of g = +2, which
n
corresponds to a magnetic moment close to the Schmidt limit of 4-8 n.m.
for / = f, this result seems to give rather a large value for (r~3),
especially if some bonding occurs, which would tend to reduce (r~3).
This result may be compared with that for NpF , where a similar
6
value of <7(r~3) might be expected. If the measured value of A is there
n
taken to be negative, eqn (6.7a) yields the result
which would be equal to 13-7 if we take K = —0-75. Thus to reconcile
this result with that for the neptunyl ion we again need a negative value
of /c, though not so large.
In the 3d and 4/ groups the observed values of K are positive
but we shall not hazard a prediction of its sign for the 5/ group. The
theory given above for the magnetic hyperfine constants of the neptunyl
ion should be accepted with reserve, since Eisenstein and Pryce (1956)
have pointed out that the crystal field may contain a F3 term, which
could admix s-states directly to the 5/, l = ±3 states. This would
z
affect the hyperfine structure in a way that cannot be represented by
the addition of a /c-term, and the formulae (6.11) would no longer be
correct.

--- Page 378 ---

THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP 363
The theory of Eisenstein and Pryce (1955) gives a nuclear electric quad-
rupole interaction
where a and a' are the probabilities that the bonding electrons are in
the neptunyl 5/ and 6d states rather than on the oxygen atoms. Since
(r~3) is expected to be considerably larger than (r~3) , this leads to a
6d 5/
negative nuclear quadrupole moment for a positive value of P\\, the
field gradient at the nucleus being due mainly to the cr-bonding
electrons. If there were an appreciable amount of 7r-bonding, this
would give a contribution to P\\ of opposite sign. Shielding corrections,
and lattice contributions have been omitted from (6.12).
(Pu0 )2+ in (U0 )Rb(N0 )
2 2 3 3
Paramagnetic resonance has been observed for this ion by Bleaney,
Llewellyn, Pryce, and Hall (1954a). The line shape is asymmetrical,
as expected for resonance due to a non-Kramers ion; the spin Hamil-
tonian parameters for a non-Kramers doublet with an effective spin of
\ are found to
The theory is discussed by Eisenstein and Pryce (1956). Exchange
interaction between the two electrons outside the (U0 )2+ type core is
2
assumed to be strong, so that they will have parallel spin and hence
must occupy different orbital states. There are then two possibilities:
(a) they occupy the states l = +3 and l = — 3, giving a resultant
z z
L = 0 and 8 = ±1; (b) they occupy the states l = ±3, l = ±2
z Z z z
with parallel spin, giving four possible states L = ±5, S = ±1,
z z
which are then split by spin-orbit coupling into two doublets, that
where the spin and orbital components are anti-parallel having the
lower energy. Because of the Coulomb repulsion between the two
electrons, the ground state is (b), where the electrons occupy orbitals
with different values of l . The values of L +2S for the two states of
z Z Z
the ground doublet are then ±(5—2), so that we have g\\ = 6, gr = 0.
x
In the next approximation, the crystal field and spin-orbit coupling
will admix some other states into the ground state wave-functions, but
the amplitude of the admixtures is expected to be small and does not
seriously change the value of g», while g remains zero. To explain the
±

--- Page 379 ---

364 THE ACTINIDE (5/) GROUP
observed value of g\\ it seems necessary to introduce a reduction factor
k for the orbital moment, which then gives
The measured value of g^ = 5*32 can then be fitted with a value of k of
about 0-93, which is not inconsistent with that needed to fit the
corresponding neptunyl compound. Magnetic resonance has been
observed by Hutchison and Lewis (1954) in another plutonyl compound,
plutonyl sodium acetate; they find g^ = 5-92, which would require a
value of k = 0-99.
The magnetic hyperfine interaction arises from the 5/ electrons,
together with a contribution of s-like character due to core polarization
and the fact that the F3, term in the crystal field can directly admix
5-states into the l = ±3 states. The two mechanisms cannot be
z
differentiated in the present case, so that both can be combined in a
single term, giving
with, of course, A = 0. Using the value of —0-200(4) n.m. (Faust,
L
Marrus, and Nierenberg 1965) for the nuclear moment of 239Pu, a value
of about 6 a.u. is found for (r~3) if K = 0, and a rather smaller value if
K is positive. A strong nuclear electric quadrupole interaction may be
expected for isotopes with / > J, but cannot be observed in an electron
spin resonance experiment. An /-electron with l = ±2 has
z
so the extra electron in the plutonyl ion gives no contribution to the
nuclear electric quadrupole interaction, and eqn (6.12) should apply
also to the plutonyl ion.

--- Page 380 ---

7
IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS
7.1. Introduction
As soon as the investigation of paramagnetic ions by means of
electron paramagnetic resonance had begun (Zavoisky 1945) it became
clear that single crystals were needed. In the iron group a number of
these can be grown fairly readily from aqueous solution, such as copper
sulphate, the alums, and the tutton salts. Salts of the last two classes
were already in use for magnetic cooling by means of adiabatic
demagnetization, where a fairly high degree of magnetic dilution is an
advantage in obtaining the lowest possible temperatures. Such dilution
is also advantageous in reducing line-width and thus obtaining higher
resolution in magnetic resonance experiments, so that these salts were
both the natural ones to choose for resonance experiments and of
interest in other fields. The need for still higher resolution in order to
examine the finer detail of the spectrum led to the use of diluted salts,
where most of the paramagnetic ions are replaced by diamagnetic ions;
the alums and tutton salts, and other hydrated salts, lend themselves
readily to this modification. An immediate result was the discovery of
hyperfine structure in a paramagnetic copper salt by Penrose (1949);
other paramagnetic ions with nuclear magnetic moments were quickly
investigated, with results that led to the first successful nuclear align-
ment experiments. A subsidiary aim of magnetic resonance experiments
became to find suitable salts for magnetic cooling and nuclear align-
ment, one of the most important series in this respect being the double
nitrates, which act as host both to divalent iron group ions and to
trivalent rare-earth ions.
Ligand hyperfine structure was first observed by Griffiths and Owen
(1954) in complex chlorides of 4d, 5d group ions, and later by Tinkham
(1956a, 6) for the fluorine ligands of several 3d group ions in ZnF .
2
Almost simultaneously with Tinkham's work, nuclear magnetic
resonance from the 19F ion in MnF was observed by Shulman and
2
Jaccarino (1956). Fluorine has the advantage over other halides of a
fairly large nuclear magnetic moment and small nuclear spin (/ = J)
which, together with the absence of nuclear electric quadrupole inter-
action, combine to give well-resolved ligand hyperfine structure in

--- Page 381 ---

366 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
electron resonance experiments and signals of good intensity in nuclear
resonance experiments. A considerable amount of work has therefore
been carried out on iron group fluorides; in particular, salts of the type
KMgF , which have cubic symmetry and in which the divalent cation
3
is surrounded by a regular octahedron of fluorines, each fluorine being
bonded to two collinear divalent cations, have been attractive for
magnetic resonance work because of their simple structure. The presence
of cubic symmetry reduces the unknown parameters in the theory to a
number where most of them can be determined experimentally, and
greatly enhances the possibility of an unambiguous interpretation of the
results. In general single crystals of such fluorides must be grown from
the melt or from a high melting point flux, and have become available
only since about 1955. In view of the complexity of the spectrum in
TABLE 7.1
Formula Typical host crystal Local symmetry
(a) Crystals with approximately octahedral symmetry around the
paramagnetic ion
M"O MgO, CaO Regular octahedron
KM"F KMgF Regular octahedron
3 3
M'F NaF (NaCl, etc.) Regular octahedron
KM"(SO), 12HO alums Distorted octahedron with
42 2
threefold symmetry axis
LaM'(NO) , 24HO 'double nitrates' Distorted octahedron with
2 3 312 2
threefold symmetry axis
M"SiF, 6HO ZnSiF, 6HO Distorted octahedron with
6 2 6 2
threefold symmetry axis
M//(BrO), 6HO Zn(BrO), 6HO Distorted octahedron with
32 2 32 2
threefold symmetry axis
M"C1 MgCl Distorted octahedron with
2 2
threefold symmetry axis
M* O A1O Distorted octahedron with
3 2 3
threefold symmetry axis
KM//(SO), 6HO tutton salts Distorted octahedron
2 42 2
with lower symmetry
M"F ZnF Distorted octahedron
2 2
with lower symmetry
KM"(CN), 3HO KFe(CN), 3HO Distorted octahedron
4 6 2 4 6 2
with lower symmetry
KM'" (CN) KCo (CN) Distorted octahedron
3 6 3 6
with lower symmetry
(b) Crystals with approximately tetrahedral symmetry around the
paramagnetic ion (see also Table 7.24)
M"S, M"Se, etc. ZnS (cubic), CdSe, etc. Regular tetrahedron
M"S, M"Se, etc. ZnS (hexagonal), etc. Distorted tetrahedron
with threefold symmetry axis

--- Page 382 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 367
such compounds, it was perhaps fortunate that most early work was
carried out on hydrates, where no resolved ligand hyperfine structure is
visible; the main features of the paramagnetic resonance spectrum of
the central ion were thus discovered and interpreted before the
complexity of ligand hyperfine structure was introduced.
A list of the principal types of compounds in which paramagnetic
resonance of iron group ions has been studied is given in Table 7.1. In
describing the experimental results we shall confine ourselves mainly
but not exclusively to cases of cubic symmetry; we shall not attempt to
mention all the experimental results (a catalogue is seldom readable)
but shall single out those that illustrate the main aspects of the theory.
At the same time we shall endeavour to give a reasonably complete
picture of the behaviour of each ion. The ions that have been inves-
tigated by paramagnetic resonance are listed in Table 7.2, which shows
the configuration and the ground state of the free ion. In this table and
throughout this chapter (except in § 7.17) we assume that the para-
magnetic ion is co-ordinated to six negatively charged ligand ions, and
that the sign of the octahedral (cubic) crystal potential is the same as
that calculated for a cage of negative ions on a point charge model.
In octahedral coordination the positively charged paramagnetic ion
is surrounded by a cage of six negatively charged ions, as shown in Fig.
7.1. If these six ligand ions form a regular octahedron, the symmetry is
exactly cubic, but in many cases small distortions occur. In general,
two sets of reference axes are used:
(i) the fourfold axes, parallel to the lines joining the central ion to
each pair of ligand ions, are taken as Cartesian axes (x, y, z). The six
ligand ions of charge q at points (0, 0, ±-B), etc., give a potential at a
point (#, y, z) at a distance r < R near the centre
where the first term has no angular variation and just changes the
energy of all ^-electrons on the central ion (assuming them to have
identical radial wave-functions) by the same amount, while the second
term gives rise to a spin operator term of the form B^{0^+501} in the
ligand field interaction. If one pair of ligand ions (along the axis that we
take to be the z-axis) is at a slightly different distance from the other
four, we have a tetragonal distortion that produces extra potential
terms of the form (3z2-r2), (35z4-30zV2+3r4). In terms of spin

--- Page 383 ---

TABLE 7 .2
Configuration d1 d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d' d8 d9
V4+ Cr4+ Mn4+
Examples of ions Ti3+ V3+ Cr3+ Mn3+ Fe3+ Co3+ Ni3+ Cu3+
Cr2+ Mn2+ Fe2+ Co2+ Ni2+ Cu2+
Cr+ Mn+ Fe+ Co+
Ground term of free ion 2Z> *F *F 5Z> *S 5D *F *F 2Z>
/Total spin S J 1 f 2 f 2 f 1 i
Ground term of ion
in weakly Orbital degeneracy 3 3 1 2 1 3 3 1 2
bound octahedral (octahedral field)
complex Orbital degeneracy 2 1 3 3 1 2 1 3 3
^(tetrahedral field)
Ground term of ion Total spin S \ 1 f 1 J o i 1 i
in strongly
bound octahedral Orbital degeneracy 3 3 1 3 3 1 2 1 2
complex

--- Page 384 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 369
FIG. 7.1. A paramagnetic ion at the centre O of a regular octahedron of negative charges,
showing one set of fourfold axes. A tetragonal distortion preserves the fourfold symmetry
about one of these axes, assumed to be the z-axis. Typical inter-ionic distances (para-
magnetic ion to ligand ion) are 0-207 nm when ligand is O2~ ion of HO in hydrated
2
crystal; 0-210 nm for O2~ in MgO; and 0-201 nm when ligand is F~ ion in KM"F .
3
operators Oq these are conveniently introduced in the form given in eqn
k
(7.2a) (see § 7.2). If each pair of ligand ions is at a different distance
from the other pairs, we have a rhombic distortion, introducing further
potential terms of the type (x*—y2), (Iz2—r2)(x2—y2), corresponding
to spin operators 0\, 0\. Angular distortions of the octahedron may
give rise to terms of still lower symmetry.
(ii) a threefold axis, a line drawn from the centre through the mid-
point of one of the faces of the octahedron, whose direction cosines
are [111], [111], etc. with respect to the fourfold axes, is taken as
the z-axis. This is particularly convenient when a trigonal distortion of
the octahedron is present, as illustrated in Fig. 7.2, giving a ligand field
interaction in spin operator form of the type in eqn (7.2b).
Terms of higher degree in the ligand potential are of course present,
but within a manifold of d-electrons their matrix elements are all zero.
Within this manifold terms of odd degree also have zero matrix
elements; such terms exist for tetrahedral coordination (see §7.17),
and other ligand arrangements lacking inversion symmetry.
In principle a potential function, representing the electrostatic
potential of the cage of ligand ions at a point near the centre of the
cage, can be written down in terms of the charges on the ligand ions
25

--- Page 385 ---

370 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.2. A paramagnetic ion at the centre of a regular octahedron of negative charges,
showing one of the threefold axes. A trigonal distortion preserves the threefold symmetry
about the z-axis.
and their positions. This is not a very fruitful approach in the 3d group
for a number of reasons:
(i) the charge distribution on the ligands and their exact positions
are often not known sufficiently precisely;
(ii) the charge distribution (i.e. the radial wave-functions) of the
magnetic electrons on the central ion is not known sufficiently
precisely;
(iii) the electrostatic energy change for the magnetic electrons is by
no means a small perturbation compared with other energy
terms;
(iv) the wave-functions of the magnetic electrons on the central ion
and of electrons on the ligand ions overlap appreciably, so that
we ought to consider the complex consisting of the central ion
in its cage of ligand ions as a whole.
In this situation numerical calculations are difficult and often
unrealistic. Nevertheless the simple electrostatic approach has been
surprisingly rewarding, particularly in the earlier days of the theory of
paramagnetic ions in solids, using empirical values of the energy param-
eters. This is due to the fact that we are principally concerned with the
way in which the energy levels of the e£-electrons split under the action
of the ligand field, and to a large part this is determined by symmetry

--- Page 386 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 371
considerations. In the following sections we shall derive these splittings,
using a ligand field interaction in spin- operator form
applied to the magnetic electrons as a perturbation. This is similar to
that used for 4/, 5/ electrons (except that we shall mostly be concerned
with complexes of nearly cubic symmetry), but differs in the way it is
applied as a perturbation because of its relative magnitude. In the 4/
group, its energy is small compared with the spin-orbit coupling
energy, so that it is applied as a perturbation to the manifold of
(2J + 1) states for a given term J of the free ion. In the 3d group the
ligand field energy is larger than the spin-orbit coupling, and compar-
able with electrostatic interactions within the ion which give rise to
iS-coupling. We therefore adopt first (§ 7.2) an 'intermediate ligand
field' approach in which (L, S) wave-functions are used, and find how
the manifold of (2L + 1) states is split by the ligand field. In the follow-
ing section (§7.3) we consider the 'strong ligand field5 approach in
which single electron functions (I, s) are used to discuss the way in
which the (2$ + l)(2Z + l) — 2(21 + 1) levels are filled in the presence of
the ligand field splitting. In § 7.4 we outline the rather different
approach using orbitals which are linear combinations of 3d and ligand
ion wave-functions. The forms of the Zeeman and hyperfine inter-
actions under these conditions are considered in §§ 7.5-7.7.
In these sections a static ligand field is assumed, but whenever this
leaves a degenerate orbital ground state the celebrated theorem of
Jahn and Teller (1937) shows that this is unstable against small dis-
placements of the ligands. The complications introduced thereby
(which may be static or dynamic in nature) are discussed in Chapter 21,
and are mentioned only in passim in this chapter. Our primary concern
is to indicate the principal features of the magnetic resonance spectra
of ions of the 3d group, with a brief outline of the theoretical back-
ground needed for their interpretation. An 'intermediate ligand field'
approach is assumed; compounds for which a 'strong ligand field' is
needed are treated in Chapter 8 with ions of the 4td, 5d groups.
In §§ 7.8-7.16 each 3dn ion in sixfold coordination is considered in
turn, while 3dn ions in fourfold and eightfold coordination are briefly
discussed in § 7.17. Some representative data are given in each case;
usually this is limited to axial symmetry, for which the resonance data

--- Page 387 ---

372 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
can be fitted to the spin Hamiltonian
though extra terms may be needed on occasion (e.g. for ions with
S = 2 or |).
7.2. The intermediate crystal field approach
Apart from the half-filled shell, d5, 6$, the ground orbital states of free
ions of the d-shell are either D or F. In a majority of cases the ligand
field has predominantly cubic symmetry, with small distortions, in the
sense that the splitting of the orbital states due to the cubic field is
larger than that due to terms of lower symmetry. We shall diagonalize
the matrix of the cubic field splitting first, and then evaluate the effect
of terms of tetragonal or trigonal symmetry on the assumption that
these can be treated by first-order perturbation theory. The calculation
can be carried out rather neatly using the 'spin-operator technique',
where (in spite of the nomenclature) the operators involve the orbital
angular momentum.
D-states (L = 2)
In a cubic field with a tetragonal distortion the equivalent operator
Hamiltonian is
where the magnitude of the cubic field is denoted by JS and the other
4
two terms represent the tetragonal distortion of second and fourth
degree in the potential respectively. (Since 0° occurs twice the separa-
tion into two fourth-degree terms is not unique, but it is convenient to
use the form given in (7.2a) since the small terms are then diagonal.)
The matrix elements of (7.2a) can be written down from Table 17, and
the solution is straightforward. The energy levels and wave-functions
are given in Fig. 7.3.
If the symmetry is predominantly cubic but with a trigonal distor-
tion the equivalent operator Hamiltonian is
where the introduction of the fraction ( — f) makes the parameter 5
4

--- Page 388 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 373
FIG. 7.3. Splitting of a D state in a cubic field and tetragonal fields of the second and
fourth degree. On the right the states are given in terms of \L ), and also for the triplet
Z
state in terms of \l), where I is the fictitious orbital momentum. There are no off-
z
diagonal elements of the tetragonal field between the orbital states which result from
diagonalization of the cubic field.
of the cubic field operator identical with that in eqn (7.2a). The energy
levels and wave-functions are given in Fig. 7.4.
The wave-functions given for the states in Fig. 7.3 are the same as
those listed in Table 4, and on the extreme right of the figure the
triplet F states are labelled in terms of the fictitious angular momentum
5
I = 1 by which it is often convenient to describe them. The matrix
elements of orbital momentum within these three states are the same as
those for I = 1, but with a change of sign (a = — 1), as shown in
Chapter 14. On the other hand, the wave-functions listed in Fig. 7.4
are not the same as those given in Table 5, and differ by more than a
simple change of overall sign. In fact the wave-functions in Table 5 are
those appropriate to a cubic field operator {OJ— 20^/(2)0^}; the
difference is equivalent to a rotation of the coordinate system by 180°
around the threefold axis, and either representation is equally valid.
However it would be inconsistent (and lead to wrong answers) to use
the wave-functions in Table 5 in calculations based on the Hamiltonian
(7.2b).
An advantage of the equivalent operator language is that it gives a
single representation for all states with L = 2. However it must be
remembered that for a given crystalline potential the magnitude of the
coefficients will depend on the configuration ; thus for L = 2 they will
differ in sign (and magnitude) for the configurations d1, d*, cZ6, and cZ9,
all of which have a ground term with L = 2. We list below the sign of

--- Page 389 ---

374 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.4. Splitting of a Z> state in a cubic field and trigonal fields of the second and
fourth degree. On the right the states are given in terms of \L), and also for the triplet
S
state in terms of \l). The states shown are those resulting from diagonalization of the
z
cubic field, and there is an off-diagonal element of the trigonal field
J5 for each of these configurations, in octahedral (sixfold) and in
4
tetrahedral (fourfold) or cubic (eightfold) coordination with negatively
charged ligand ions.
B± positive J5 negative
4
Octahedral d\ d« d*, d*
Tetrahedral, cubic d4, d9 d\ d«
F-states (L = 3)
In a cubic field with a tetragonal distortion the Hamiltonian (7.2a)
leads to the wave-functions and energy levels given in Fig. 7.5.
Similarly, in a cubic field with trigonal distortion the Hamiltonian
(7.2b) gives the results shown in Fig. 7.6.
As before, the wave-functions in the tetragonal case are identical
with those given in Table 4, but in the trigonal case there are
differences corresponding to the wave-functions in Table 5 being
associated with a cubic field operator {0^—20^(2)0^}. The signs of £
4
for various configurations whose ground state is F are listed below.
b± positive negative
Octahedral
Tetrahedral (cubic)

--- Page 390 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 375
FIG. 7.5. Splitting of an F term in a cubic field and tetragonal fields of the second and
fourth degree. On the right the states are given in terms of \L }, and also for the triplet
Z
states in terms of |/). The states shown result from diagonalization of the cubic field, and
2
there is an off-diagonal tetragonal field matrix element
The states given in Figs. 7.3-7.6 are those appropriate to a cubic field,
and are therefore only correct in some cases for the axial fields in so far
as these are small compared with the cubic field. The axial field splittings
have one or two peculiarities ; for a D-state ion the doublet P is not
3
split by a trigonal field, a result that has important effects on the
resonance spectrum of an ion for which this is the ground state, such as
Cu2+ in an octahedral field. For an .F-state ion the T triplet is not split
5
by a tetragonal field of the second degree, but this has only an indirect
effect on the ground state. Axial field splittings do not displace the
centre of gravity of the cubic field triplets or doublet from which they
are formed so far as the second-degree terms B^0\ are concerned ; this
does not hold for the fourth-degree terms B^O^, though the latter still
leave the centre of gravity of the whole manifold undisplaced.
To compare the splittings for different ions in a given crystal field
we need the formulae deduced in Chapter 16, viz.

--- Page 391 ---

376 IONS OF THE 3d GKOUP
FIG. 7.6. Splitting of an F term in a cubic field and trigonal fields of the second and
fourth degree. On the right the states are given in terms of \L }, and also for the triplet
Z
states in terms of \l}. The states shown result from diagonalization of the cubic field, and
z
there are off-diagonal trigonal field matrix elements
where Aq denotes the strength of the potential, (r2) and (r4) are the
k
mean second and fourth powers of the radius of the electronic charge
distribution, and (L\\ a \\L), (L\\ (i \\L) are numerical coefficients given
in Table 19. (Their value for an Estate is i that for a Z)-state, but
the signs depend on the number of electrons.) We shall not write them
all out, but consider only the cubic field. Following the pioneer work of
Van Vleck, the cubic field splitting for a single ^-electron is frequently
denoted in the literature by the symbol IQDq. From Figs. 7.3, 7.4 we
see that this equals 120 U , or (ff)^.4(r4) for d1; the splitting is the
4
same for d4, d6, dg since these can be considered as an electron or hole
plus a half-filled or filled shell, but the energy diagram for a hole is
inverted from that for an electron. Since the value of (L\\ {} \\L) for an
.F-state is ^ that of a D-state, the cubic field splittings for an .F-state
are 600 jB = lODq between T and T , and 480 J3 = 8Dq between T
4 2 5 4 5
and F , making the overall splitting equal to ISDq.
4
Once again, the inversion of the energy diagrams for d3, d8 compared
with those for d2, d7 follows from the fact that the former can be
regarded as a half- or filled shell with two holes, the latter as an empty

--- Page 392 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 377
or half-filled shell plus two electrons. Values of the cubic splitting
parameter Dq can be deduced from the optical absorption spectrum; a
typical set of values for hydrated ions in solution is given in Table 7.3
(slightly different values have been given by other authors). The values
for hydrated ions in crystals do not appear to be significantly different,
as can be readily seen from the fact that the colour is not materially
changed. This table also gives the values of the one-electron spin-orbit
coupling parameter £, as deduced from the spectrum of the free ion. In
many cases, however, we shall use the spin-orbit coupling in the form
A(L . S) rather than £(1. s); the two parameters are related by the
equation (valid for a ground state obeying Hund's rules)
where the + sign is required for a shell that is less than half-filled,
and the — sign for a shell that is more than half-filled.
The spin operator technique we have used so far in this chapter
represents interactions only within the ground term (D or F in the iron
group). Except for the configurations dl and d9, there are, however,
excited terms belonging to the same configuration, and in general there
will exist matrix elements of the crystal field between the ground term
and some of the excited terms. In many compounds the cubic com-
ponent of the crystal field is much larger than the other components
and it is a good approximation to neglect all matrix elements of the
crystal field to excited terms except those due to the cubic field. With
this restriction there is only one such matrix element, that between the
orbital triplet \F, F ) and the triplet P, which also belongs to F . The
4 4
effect is to depress in energy the F triplet with respect to the other
4
terms F , F belonging to the F manifold, and to admix the states so
2 5
that they take the form (with e2 + ^2 = 1)
This orbital triplet can still be represented by a fictitious angular momen-
tum I = 1, but the fictitious orbital (/-factor associated with it becomes
The spin-orbit coupling will also be modified (see § 19.5).
7.3. The strong crystal field approach
The intermediate crystal field approach is a useful introduction to
paramagnetic resonance of the iron group, and explains to a good
approximation many of the experimental results. However the cubic

--- Page 393 ---

TABLE 7.3
Values of cubic field splitting parameter (Dq) for hydrated ions in solution, and of the one-
electron spin-orbit parameter £. These values are based on Tables VII and VIII of McClure
(1959). The values of B,Cfor the free dipositive ions are from Table VI of McClure (1959)
3d1 3d2 3d3 3d4 3d5 3d6 3d7 3d8 3d9
Ion Xi3+ ya+ Cr3+ Mn3+ Fe3+ Co3+
Dq (cm-1) 2030 1800 1760 2100 1400 1910
£ (cm-1) 154 209 276 360
Ion Sc2+ Ti2+ V2+ O2+ Mn2+ Fe2+ Co2+ Ni2+ Cu2+
Dq (cm"1) 1180 1400 750 1000 1000 860 1260
£ (cm-1) 79 120 168 236 335 404 528 644 829
B (cm-1) 694 755 810 860 917 971 1030
O (cm-1) 2910 3257 3565 3850 4040 4497 4850
C/B 4-19 4-31 4-40 4-48 4-41 4-63 4-71

--- Page 394 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 379
crystal field is by no means a small perturbation, as can be seen from
the fact that in many salts the overall cubic splitting of the F term is
larger than the separation between the ground F term and the excited
P term. An alternative procedure is the so-called 'strong crystal field'
approach, in which the crystal field is diagonalized before the Coulomb
interaction. Then we no longer consider terms such as *F, *P, etc.,
which represent the groups of energy levels characterized by given
values of L, S into which the configuration is split by the Coulomb
interaction, but return to the single electron states. We shall restrict
the discussion to the case of a field of octahedral symmetry.
In such a field the five orbital states of a cZ-electron split into a lower
triplet and an upper doublet, with separation 10 Dq. This is, of course,
the same as shown in Figs. 7.3 and 7.4, but the nomenclature used for
the symmetry classification is different: the triplet states are known as
de states, the doublet states as dy. However one reason for returning to
the single electron states is to introduce the modifications due to
bonding with the ligand ions; the de states take part in 7r-bonding, the
dy states in cr-bonding. The nomenclature de, dy refers to pure d-
electron states; the augmented states formed by admixing orbitals
belonging to the ligand ions have the more general symmetry classifica-
tion t (triplet), and e (doublet), and we shall anticipate the discussion
2
of bonding by using the appropriate nomenclature immediately.
For configurations containing more than one d-electron, we have a
choice of states for the various electrons. Obviously the crystal field
energy is minimized by placing as many electrons as possible in the
lower t states, but we must take into account the powerful coupling
2
between the electron spins which is expressed in the first of Hund's
rules, that the ground state is the one of maximum spin. We shall begin
by assuming that the spin coupling energy is larger than the crystal
field energy; then only three electrons can be placed in the t orbitals
2
with parallel spin because of the exclusion principle, but two further
electrons can be accommodated in the e-orbitals with parallel spin.
This maximum of five electrons with parallel spin corresponds to a
half-filled shell with S = f; since there is only one such arrangement, the
overall state is an orbital singlet L = 0, or 6$5. The ground state of any
given configuration can quickly be constructed by following these
rules, whereby the crystal field energy is minimized subject to maxi-
mizing the spin and the restrictions imposed by the exclusion principle.
The results are shown in Fig. 7.7; the orbital multiplicity of the ground
state is given by the number of ways in which the electrons can be

--- Page 395 ---

380 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.7. Construction of the ground states of the ^-configurations in an octahedral
field using the strong crystal field approach, but assuming the spin coupling to be
stronger than the crystal field energy.
distributed between orbitals of the same energy. These agree with the
ground states in an octahedral field obtained by the intermediate
crystal field method, and listed in Table 7.2; a similar procedure can be
carried out for a tetrahedral field, placing the doublet e states below
the triplet t states instead of above.
2
In some compounds such as the complex cyanides of the 3d group
the magnetic behaviour suggests that the crystal field energy is much
larger, and sufficient to outweigh the spin coupling. We can construct
the appropriate ground states for this situation by placing electrons as
far as possible in the £ orbitals. For configurations containing up to
2
three electrons the ground states are the same as those in Fig. 7.7, but
the remainder are different (with the exception of d8 and d9), as
shown in Fig. 7.8. The maximum spin multiplicity (S = f) is obtained
for d3, corresponding to a half-filled t shell, and then decreases as far
2

--- Page 396 ---

IK INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 381
FIG. 7.8. Construction of the ground states of the <#-configurations in an octahedral field
using the strong crystal field approach, and assuming the crystal field energy to be
larger than the spin coupling energy.
as dB, where the £ shell is filled. Further electrons must go into the
2
e-shell, which is rather high in energy so that compounds of this kind
tend to be chemically unstable and occur rather rarely. We shall discuss
the experimental results for compounds of this type, which include
most paramagnetic salts of the 4d! and 5d groups as well as the complex
cyanides of the 3d group, separately in Chapter 8.
We consider now the excited states. For dl this is a trivial problem,
the only excited state being that where the electron is placed in the
6-shell, its energy being then IQDq higher than in the t shell. If at first
2
we include only the crystal field energy, then for two electrons (d2)
there will be states t e and e2 lying at lODq, 2QDq relative to the ground
2
state t\ and formed by promoting first one and then two electrons to the
e-shell. In all of these states we can keep the spins parallel, giving spin
triplet states with S = 1, though there will of course be spin singlet

--- Page 397 ---

382 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
states (S = 0) generally comparable in energy. If we confine ourselves
to the spin triplet states, the orbital multiplicity of t\ is three and that
of e2 is one, while the t e states have sixfold multiplicity since one
2
electron can be in any three of the t states while the other can be in
2
either of the e-states. This gives in all ten states, the same total number
of spin triplet states as in the free ion where they are distributed
between the *F and 3P states, with sevenfold and threefold orbital
degeneracy respectively. Before introducing the Coulomb energy, we
classify the strong crystal field states according to their symmetry
properties, which we quote without proof. They are
of which the first three are threefold degenerate and the last is a singlet
(apart, of course, from the spin multiplicity of three). The advantage of
this procedure is that the Coulomb interaction ^ e*lra nas matrix
elements only between states with the same total spin S and with the
same symmetry classification. In the present case the only off-diagonal
matrix element is that between the two 3T states; when all the
1
FIG. 7.9. The spin triplet states of d2 in an octahedral crystal field, showing their
derivation from the weak and strong crystal field approaches.

--- Page 398 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 383
Coulomb energy terms are included, the energy matrix, in which B is
the radial integral parameter introduced by Racah, is
which on diagonalization gives for the energy
while the states *T(te) and *E(e2) remain at 10 and 20 Dq respectively.
2 2
In all we obtain three orbital triplets and one singlet (each with three-
fold spin degeneracy), as shown in Fig. 7.9. In the limit of zero crystal
field two triplets and the singlet collapse into the term BF, and the
remaining triplet becomes 3P, lying higher in energy than 3F by 15 B.
To give an impression of the sizes of the various terms we mention
that in the free V3+ ion (d2) the separation 3P— 3.Fis some 13000 cm."1,
while in aqueous solution 10 Dq is about 18000 cm"1. For the free ion
the Racah parameter B is about 860 cm"1, so that (Dq/B) is a little
greater than 2. Reference to the energy level diagram of Tanabe and
Sugano (1954), reproduced as Fig. 7.10, shows that a number of the
singlet states have energies comparable with the excited triplet states
at this value of (Dq/B). However such singlet states have little effect on
the paramagnetic resonance spectrum as they are not appreciably
admixed into the ground state by crystal fields of lower symmetry
(assumed small in magnitude) or by the spin-orbit coupling.
The lowest triplet may be described in the two ways (see Fig. 7.9)
where tan 2a = 12B/(9B + lODq), and e2+r2 = 1, and from the equi-
valence we find that -\7(5)r = cos a — 2 sin a. The triplet may be
described as before by a fictitious angular momentum I == 1, with
orbital ^-factor (cf. eqn (7.4))
In the limit where Dq —> 0, the value of cos a tends to 2/^/5 and sin a to
l/y'S, and fit to — |. Likewise the separation between the F and F
4 5
triplets belonging to *F tends to 8Dg, as shown in Figs. 7.5 and 7.6.
These results are valid also for the F triplet that forms the ground
4
state of d7 in an octahedral field (compare § 20.4).
A similar procedure can be carried out for d3 in an octahedral field.

--- Page 399 ---

384 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.10. Splitting of states of the d2 configuration by an octahedral field (Tanabe and
Sugano 1954). The observed levels of V+++ are shown to the left for comparison with the
calculated positions of 1D 3P, and 1G as shown in the diagram. The value of y = C/B
t
used in constructing the diagram is 4-42, the best value for V+++. The importance of
interference from the next higher configuration of the same parity as 3d2 viz. 3c?4s, may
be judged from the fact that its lowest level 3D is at 1111? on the energy scale of the
diagram. At the right of the diagram one notes that there are three sets of lines each
characterized by a certain slope. These correspond to the three strong-field states
at 0, 1, 2 X (10Dq). The notation used in these figures is that of Tanabe and Sugano;
its relation to the notation used here is as follows:
In a strong crystal field without the Coulomb interaction the spin
quartet states are *A (t*), an orbital singlet, which we take to be at
2
zero in energy; *Ti(t\e) and ^(t^e), two orbital triplets at 10dq
4T1(^2e2), an orbital triplet at 2QDq. Still higher in energy is e3, at 30 dq
but one of the spins must then be reversed because the e-states can only

--- Page 400 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 385
FIG. 7.11. Splitting of states of the d3 configuration by an octahedral field (Tanabe and
Sugano 1954). The Estate of the next excited configuration 3d2(3^)4sliesat W/B = 113.
accommodate two electrons with parallel spin, so that this must be a
spin doublet state. Introduction of the Coulomb energy raises both the
41\ states and admixes them, giving one orbital triplet whose states are
denoted by sin a \^T^(t\e)}+ cos a ^T^t^e2)); in the small crystal field
limit cos a tends to 2/-\/5, and the energy to 18Dq, as in Figs. 7.5 and
7.6. The orthogonal state is the orbital triplet corresponding to 4P in
the weak field limit.
When we come to d4 there are only two possibilities of spin quintet
states. These are t\e, which is an orbital doublet, and t\e?, which is an
orbital triplet lying higher in energy by 10Dq. Other states such as
£e3, i\ must be states of lower spin. The latter makes it impossible for
2
there to be matrix elements of the Coulomb interaction between such
states and the spin quintet states, so that the latter are unadmixed
and their relative separation is unchanged. For d5 there is only one spin
26

--- Page 401 ---

386 IONS OF THE 3d GBOUP
FIG. 7.12. Splitting of the states of the c?4 configuration in an octahedral field (after
Tanabe and Sugano 1954). The observed levels of the free Mn IV (Mn3+) ion are shown
on the left. For this ion C\B = 4-61, B = 965 cm-1 and the next *F state from the
excited configuration 3d3(4.F)4s lies at W/B w 116.
sextet state, and the result is straightforward. Configurations with more
electrons can be treated in the same way by considering holes in a
filled shell instead of electrons, remembering of course that the states
of higher energy are formed by displacing the holes downwards.
A complete solution of the problem including both Coulomb and
crystal field energy involves three parameters, the two Racah param-
eters B and G and the crystal field energy Dq. Such solutions have
been given by Tanabe and Sugano (1954); by assuming that the ratio
C\E is the same as in the free ions, where it varies between about 4-2
to 4-9, they were able to draw reduced energy level diagrams for each
configuration. A series of these are reproduced in Figs. 7.10-7.16; the

--- Page 402 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 387
FIG. 7.13. Splitting of the states of the d5 configuration by an octahedral field (Tanabe
and Sugano 1954). For the free III (Mn2+) ion, C/B = 4-48 and B = 860 cm-1. The
observed levels for this ion are shown on the left. The next lowest sextet state belongs
to the configuration 3d4(5D)4s, and lies at W/B & 73.
energy, relative to the Racah parameter B, is plotted against the
reduced crystal field energy (Dq/B). At (Dq/B) = 0, the states group
themselves into the free ion terms, but in the opposite limit of very
large (Dq/B) the levels diverge linearly as sets of lines whose slope
(W/lQDq) tends to 0, 1, 2, etc., corresponding to the limit of strong
crystal field. For d2, d3, and d8 the ground term remains the same for all
(Dq/B), but for the others there is a cross-over at a certain value of
(Dq/B) lying between 2 and 3, above which the ground state becomes
one of lower spin. This corresponds to the point at which it becomes
energetically more advantageous to put electrons into the £ states,
2

--- Page 403 ---

388 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.14. Splitting of the states of the d6 configuration in an octahedral field (Tanabe
and Sugano 1954). For the free Co IV (Co3+) ion C/B = 4-81, B = 1065 cm-1.
which reduces the crystal field energy, than to conserve spin pairing
energy by forming states of maximum spin. The reader may verify that
in Figs. 7.12-7.15 the ground state for sufficiently high values of (Dq/B)
is that corresponding to Fig. 7.8 instead of Fig. 7.7. Thus for d4 the
ground state becomes a spin triplet, for d5 a spin doublet, and for d* a
singlet, with a doublet again for d7; although the spin quartet states
mostly lie below the spin doublet states in d5 for the free ion, there is
no value of (Dq/B) at which a quartet state becomes the ground state in

--- Page 404 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 389
FIG. 7.15. Splitting of the states of the d1 configuration by an octahedral field (Tanabe
and Sugano 1954). The levels for the free Co HI (Co2+) ion are shown on the left; for
this ion C\B = 4-63, B = 971 cm-1. The excited level 3d6(5D)4s, 6D lies at (W/B) » 48.
an octahedral field, though a slightly split quartet ground state has
been observed in an Fe3+ complex of G symmetry (Wickman et al,
2v
1967).
The optical spectra of a number of tripositive ions in corundum
(A1 0 ) have been studied by McClure (1962) over the temperature
2 3
range 4-2-1200°K, and have been interpreted in terms of a strong
crystal field or single electron approach. The values of the cubic field
and trigonal field parameters are given in Table 7.4. In comparison
with the nomenclature of our Fig. 7.4 (which is appropriate to a single
d-eleetron in trigonal symmetry), the cubic field splitting 10Dq is taken
as the separation between the upper orbital doublet F or E(e) and the
3

--- Page 405 ---

390 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.16. Splitting of the states of the d* configuration by an octahedral field
(Tanabe and Sugano 1954). The levels for the free Ni III (Ni2+) ion are shown on the
left; for this ion (C/B) = 4-71, B = 1030cm-1. The excited configuration 3f/7(4^)4s,
5^lies at (W/B) ^51.
centre of gravity of the lower split triplet T or A^t), E(t). These are
5
displaced by the JSJOJJ trigonal field term, so that in terms of Fig. 7.4
McClure's parameters are
where v, v' are the diagonal and off-diagonal elements of the trigonal
field.

--- Page 406 ---

TABLE 7.4
Values of the cubic field parameter (Dq) and the trigonal field parameter v for
tripositive ions in A1 0 . The values are taken from McClure (1962), except for
2 3
(a) Pryce and Bunciman (1958), (b) Blumberg, Eisinger, and Geschwind (1963).
In terms of the nomenclature of Fig. 7.4, appropriate to a single d-electron in
trigonal symmetry, the parameters are (see eqn (7.5)) lODq = 120.84 — (140/3)B|J;
v = -95°+80£°. ThevaluesofB, C for the free ion are from Table VI of McClure
(1959). The values of £for the free ion are from Blume and Watson (1963)
3d1 3d2 3d3 3d4 3d5 3d6 3d7 3d8
Ion Ti3+ V3 + Cr3+ Mn3+ Fe3+ Co3+ Ni3+ Cu3+
Dq (cm-1) 1905 1750(0) 1815 1947 1650 1830 2100(b)
v (cm"1) >0 960 1425 1950 720 1000
J (cm-1) 159 219 292 380 486
B (cm-1) 861 918 965 1015 1065 1115
C (cm-1) 3814 4133 4450 4800 5120 5450
C/B 4-43 4-50 4-61 4-73 4-81 4-89

--- Page 407 ---

392 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
In this section we have attempted only an outline of the strong-field
representation, and in the next we attempt the same for covalent
bonding. A more general discussion is given in Chapter 20; for a still
more complete account (including the Racah parameters B, C that
are a measure of the mutual electrostatic repulsion energy of the
electrons) a book such as Griffith (1961) may be consulted. For the
magnetic properties that are our main interest we have drawn widely
on the review article of Owen and Thornley (1966).
7.4. The effects of bonding
In considering the effects of bonding we make use of real wave-
functions. For the d-wave-functions on the central ion these are related
to the states specified by their angular momentum component along
the z-axis as follows:
In discussing the orbitals on the ligand ions in the complex XY we
6
follow the conventions adopted in Chapter 20. The six ligand ions are
placed at equal distances along each of the #, y, z axes, the numbering
being 1, 4 on the #-axis; 2, 5 on the t/-axis; 3, 6 on the z-axis, with the
smaller numeral on the positive side in each case. The ligand orbitals,
consisting of s- and ^-states, are divided into two classes: (1) cr-bonding
orbitals, whose maximum charge density is along the bond-axis, and
whose wave-functions are symmetrical about that axis; such orbitals
are normally s-p hybrids, and suitable combinations belong to the
symmetry class e \ (2) 7r-bonding orbitals, whose maximum charge
g
density is directed normal to the bond axis; these are pure £>-states, and
are denoted by X, Y, or Z, where an JT-orbital is symmetrical about a
line parallel to the #-axis, etc.; in suitable combinations their symmetry
class is t .
2g
The correct combinations of orbitals on the central ion and on the
ligand ions are derived in Chapter 20 and are listed in Table 24.
Only central ion and ligand ion orbitals belonging to the same symmetry
classes can be combined, with the result that e orbitals take part only
g

--- Page 408 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 393
FIG. 7.17. Schematic representation of the central ion and ligand ion orbitals of
symmetry e which are involved in cr-bonding. The ligand orbitals are drawn with equal
g
lobes but in general they will be hybrid s-p orbitals with unequal lobes, for which we
in cr-bonding, and t orbitals only in vr-bonding. The way in which
2g
combinations of the correct symmetry are formed can be understood
from Figs. 7.17 and 7.18, which show the two e and one t combination
g 2g
respectively. The phases of the ligand orbitals are chosen to match the
symmetry of the central ion orbital; the conventions of Chapter 20 are
that the or-orbitals on the ligands have their positive lobes facing
inwards, and the 77-orbitals have their positive lobes in the positive
direction of the axis to which they are parallel. The correct signs in the
combinations can then be inferred from the figures; the double ampli-
tude assigned to cr and cr corresponds to the amplitude of 3z2 — r2
3 6
being twice as great along the z-axis as along the x- and y-axes.
The augmented states listed in Table 24, consisting of linear com-
binations of central ion and ligand orbitals, are five in number, two
of symmetry e and three of symmetry t . The latter are lower in
g 2g
energy than the former by an amount 10Dq, or A, where the change of
nomenclature symbolizes that the energy splitting may be of different
origin. On a pure crystal field model the energy is associated with the
electrostatic repulsion between electrons on the central ion and the
negatively charged ligand ions; the e (dy) orbitals have higher energy
g
because their wave-functions have maxima along the axes and approach

--- Page 409 ---

394 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.18. Schematic representation of the central ion and ligand ion orbitals of
symmetry t which are involved in jr-bonding. Only one set is shown; the other two are
2g
similar and can be derived by permuting the axes.
the ligand ions more closely than do the t (de) states. However
2g
attempts to calculate the cubic field splitting from first principles on
this basis have failed badly, the results not always being even of the
correct sign. It is clear that overlap and bonding make a considerable
contribution to the energy splitting, but although much interest
attaches to this theoretical problem, the value of A must generally be
regarded as a parameter to be determined from experimental results
(cf. Owen and Thornley 1966).
In building up the states for a configuration dn, electrons can be
placed in the augmented states of symmetry e and t in the same way
g 2g
as outlined in the last section for the strong crystal field states to which
the augmented states reduce in the limit where they become pure
central ion states. The resulting many-electron states are labelled by
their spin multiplicity, the symmetry (A , T^ T , etc.), and the single
2 2
electron states (t*, t*e, etc.) of which they are composed. States of the
same spin and symmetry may be admixed by the Coulomb interaction,
though we may expect the latter to be modified in magnitude for
the augmented orbitals. Tanabe and Sugano (1954) assumed that the
Racah parameter C was the same as in the free ion; and that the

--- Page 410 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 395
Racah parameter B was similarly unaltered for the dipositive ions, but
considerably reduced (~20 per cent) for the tripositive ions. Attempts
have been made to derive values by fitting the optical absorption
spectrum, though approximations such as B = 4(7 are often made to
reduce the labour of analysis (see, for example, Sugano and Peter 1961).
Experimental evidence for a reduction of B, C in octahedral complexes
is summarized in Table 7.5.
TABLE 7.5
Values of the Racah parameters B, C for the free ions and of the reduced
values B', C' for the same ions in octahedral symmetry. Note that the
values of B, C come from a different source from those in Tables 7.3, 7.4.
This table is based on Table 5 of Owen and Thornley (1966), where
references to the original papers are given
Ion V2 + O3+ Mn2+ Co2+ Ni2+
dn d* d* d* d? d*
B(cm'1) 766 830 960 1115 1084
C (cm-1) 2855 3430 3325 4366 4831
Host crystal MgO MgO MgO MgO KMgF
3
B' (cm-1) 550 688 786 845 955
C' (cm-1) 2475 3095 3210 3803 4234
B' IB 0-72 0-83 0-82 0-76 0-88
C'lC 0-87 0-90 0-97 0-87 0-88
The use of augmented orbitals introduces changes in the matrix
elements of some other operators. The matrix elements of angular
momentum for the central ion are multiplied by a factor that is written
k^ for matrix elements between t electrons and k^ between t and
2 2
e-electrons; there are no matrix elements between e-electrons so that
the factor lc that we might have expected does not arise. For con-
aa
venience we repeat the expressions for k^ and k^ given in eqns (20.31)
and (20.40).
The matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling are similarly multiplied
by factors (see eqns (20.43-20.44), but there is some uncertainty as to
the causes of the changes (see the discussion by Marshall and Stuart
(1961)), and it is often simplest to regard the spin-orbit parameter as
reduced in the solid compared with the free ion but by an amount to be
found by comparison with experimental results. Different values may

--- Page 411 ---

396 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
be expected for the effective spin-orbit parameter when only £
2
electrons are involved from that where matrix elements between t
2
and e-electrons arise, but there are seldom sufficient data to determine
both.
The most direct manifestation of the fact that the magnetic electrons
must be described by augmented wave-functions containing ligand
orbitals comes from the observation of hyperfine structure due to the
nuclear moments of the ligand ions. The magnetic hyperfine structure
of each ligand ion is symmetrical about the bond axis, and may be
represented by the spin Hamiltonian (20.47)
for ligands L = 3, 6 which lie along the z-axis, with corresponding
expressions for the other ligands with suitable permutations of the axes.
Here S is the effective spin used in the spin Hamiltonian of the central
ion. There are a number of contributions to the magnetic hyperfine
structure, the most obvious being the simple dipolar interaction
between the magnetic moment of the ligand nucleus and the electronic
magnetic moment of the central ion. In a first approximation the
latter may be regarded as localized at the centre, so that the interaction
is that between two point dipoles, for which the contribution to AL
is 2u4 , while that to A^_ is — A&, where
d
where R is the distance between the centres of the central ion and the
ligand ion. The non-spherical distribution of the magnetic dipole
density on the central ion means that some corrections need to be
applied to this formula (see Chapter 20) but these amount usually to no
more than a few per cent and are normally neglected. A typical value
of A^ is that for an impurity ion in KMgF , which is 3-1 X 10~4cm~1 for
3
g = 2. This is the one contribution to the ligand hyperfine structure
which can be accurately calculated, and is present whether the magnetic
electrons are in augmented orbitals or in purely central ion orbitals.
That part of the ligand hyperfine structure which arises because the
magnetic electrons are in augmented orbitals containing ligand orbitals
is considerably more complicated; its calculation is outlined in Chapter
20, and we shall give here only a summary. It is usual to analyze the
ligand hyperfine structure into components as follows:

--- Page 412 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 397
Here the main components (apart from A&) are those which would arise
from electrons in s and p functions on the ligand ions, assuming the
ground state to be one formed of augmented orbitals without any
admixtures of excited states through the spin-orbit coupling; the
correction terms dA arise through such admixtures, and are normally
small. For ions such as dz, d5, d8 where the ground term is an orbital
singlet, (,4,) || = (A ) and (A )\\ = —2(A ) = 2A . If the correction
9 L 9 9 JL P
terms are neglected (or estimated), values of A and A can be found
s 9
from the experimental measurements of A^ and A^_, using the cal-
culated value of A^. The results can then be related to the 'spin
densities' defined by eqn (20.51):
using the hyperfme parameters
Since we shall be dealing mainly with fluorine ions, we give here the
hyperfine constants calculated by Shulman and Sugano (1963) for
the 2s and 2p states of 19F-(/ = i):
Then for the ions d3, d5, d8 with orbital singlet ground states we have
where S is the true spin of the central ion ground state, and the values of
A „ are respectively:
Here the negative sign that appears with A reflects the fact that the
v
magnetic field produced at the nucleus by an electron is oppositely
directed for an electron in a p orbital to that from an electron in a p
v a
orbital. For d3 only A appears because the ground state electrons are
v
all in the 7r-bonding t orbitals; conversely for d8 only A appears
2g a
because the two holes are in the cr-bonding e states; while for d5 both
g
A and A are present because every orbital contains one electron.
a v
For ions in which the ground state is not an orbital singlet the cal-
culations are considerably more complicated, and an example (for the

--- Page 413 ---

398 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
ion d7) is given in Chapter 20. An important difference is that (A)^ is
v
not just equal to —2(A )±, but each contains f and f in different
P ff t
proportions so that in principle it is possible to determine them
separately if the relation between (A)\\ and (A)± is known.
8 8
7.5. The electronic spin Hamiltonian
In the previous sections we have considered the interaction of the
magnetic ions with the ligand ions. This is primarily an interaction
involving the orbital momenta of the magnetic electrons, and the
electron spin entered the discussion only through the need to satisfy
the over-riding requirements of the exclusion principle. We now
introduce the interactions involving the electron spin and carry the
theory a stage further, primarily in order to obtain an electronic 'spin
Hamiltonian5 that describes the behaviour of the ground manifold of
electron states within which paramagnetic resonance is observed. In
doing so we revert to the 'intermediate ligand field' approach, assuming
LS- coupling to be valid; results for compounds where a 'strong ligand
field5 approach is required are considered in Chapter 8. General formulae
can be deduced readily only for ions where the cubic ligand field results
in the ground orbital state being a singlet, and the effective spin 8 in the
spin Hamiltonian is then generally the same as the true spin 8, making
a distinction between S and S unnecessary. When the orbital ground
state is not a singlet, the situation is more complex, and is outlined in
later sections where the experimental results are considered ion by ion.
The interactions that we now introduce are as follows:
(a) the spin-orbit interaction
where X = ±(£/2/S) from eqn (7.3), the + sign being required for a
shell that is less than half-filled, and the — sign for a shell that is more
than half-filled;
(b) the spin-spin interaction (see § 16.5 or eqns 1.104, 1.105)
in the form appropriate to LS- coupling;
(c) the electronic Zeeman interaction
These interactions are all small compared with the cubic ligand field

--- Page 414 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 399
TABLE 7.6
Free ion values of the radial averages (r~3), (r2), (r4), and of the spin-orbit
parameter X and the spin-spin parameter p, for ions of the 3d group. The
radial averages (rn) are calculated, from tables given by Burns (1962),
Freeman and Watson (1965), Tucker (1966). The calculated values of A
are based on Blume and Watson (1963) and Dunn (1961). The experi-
mental values of A are obtained by setting the overall multiplet splitting in
the free ion equal to AS(2L+1), without further correction. The calculated
values of p are from Watson and Blume (1965)
<r23 <r2> <r4> A (calc) A (exp) P
Ion (a.u.) (a.u.) (a.u.) (cm-1) (cm-1) (cm-1)
3d1 2Z> Sc2+ 86 79
Ti3+ 2-552 1-893 7-071 159 154
V4+ 3-684 1-377 3-593 255 248
3d2 3^ Sc+ 35
Ti2+ 2-133 2-447 13-17 61 60 0-16
V3+ 3-217 1-643 5-447 106 104 0-26
O4+ 4-484 1-227 2-906 163 164
3^3 4^r rpj+ 1-706 3-508 31-62 29
V2+ 2-748 2-070 9-605 57 55 0-11
Cr3+ 3-959 1-447 4-297 91 91 0-17
Mn4+ 5-361 1-104 2-389 135 134
3d4 5£> V+ 2-289 2-819 20-71 34
Cr2+ 3-451 1-781 7-211 59 58 0-12
Mns+ 4-790 1-286 3-446 87 88 0-18
Fe4+ 6-332 1-000 1-986 125 129 0-25
3d5 *S Cr+ 2-968 2-319 14-14
Mn2+ 4-250 1-548 5-513
Fes+ 5-724 1-150 2-789
Co*+ 7-421 0-9080 1-659
3d6 BZ> Mn+ 3-683 2-026 10-87 -64 -64
Fe2+ 5-081 1-393 4-496 — 114 — 103 0-18
Co3+ 6-699 1-049 2-342 (-145)
Ni4+ 8-552 0-8371 1-423 (-197)
3d7 4^ Fe+ 1-774 8-385 -115 -119
Co2+ 6-035 1-251 3-655 -189 -178 0-24
Ni8+ 7-790 0-9582 1-971 (-272)
Cu4+ 9-814 0-7719 1-221 (-320)
3d* *F Co+ 5-388 1-576 6-637 -228 -228
Ni2+ 7-094 1-130 3-003 -343 -324 0-53
Cu3+ 9-018 0-8763 1-662 (-438)
3d9 2D Ni+ 1-401 5-264 -605
Cu2+ 8-252 1-028 2-498 -830 -830
splitting, which is of order 104 cm-1. Values of £ are given for the free
ions in Tables 7.3 and 7.4, and lie in the range 102 to 103 cm"1. Values
of X and other parameters for the 3d group are listed in Table 7.6. The
spin-spin interaction is roughly of order 1 cm"1 in magnitude; some
values of the constant p are listed in Table 7.6 for a number of ions

--- Page 415 ---

400 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
(note that higher-order effects of spin-orbit coupling may produce
contributions comparable to />; see Watson and Blume (1965)). The
electronic Zeeman interaction is of order 1 cm"1 in a field of lOkG.
As indicated in § 7.4, we cannot expect the effective values of these
interaction parameters to be the same for a magnetic ion in a complex
as for the free ion. Experimental evidence for a reduction in the
effective value X' of the spin-orbit parameter is given in Table 7.7,
TABLE 7.7
Values of the spin-orbit coupling parameter (a) A for free ion
(from Lande interval rule) (b) X' for ion in octahedral complex,
found from paramagnetic resonance g value using the relation
g = g — 8A'/A and experimental value of cubic field splitting
8
parameter A. The data are from Table 4 of Owen and Thornley
(1966), where references to the sources are given
A (free ion) A' (complex)
Ion Ligand (cm-1) (cm-1) A'/A
03+, 3d3 HO in Cr alum 91 57 0-63
2
Cr3+, 3d3 O2~ in MgO 91 46 0-51
V2+, 3d3 O2~ in MgO 55-5 36 0-65
Ni2+, 3d8 HO in tutton -324 -270 0-83
2
salt
Ni2+, 3d8 F- in KMgF -324 -258 0-79
3
Ni2+, 3d8 O2~ in MgO — 324 — 242 0-75
taken from Owen and Thornley (1966) where an extensive discussion
is given. The effective value of A' depends on whether we are considering
matrix elements between tf-orbitals, 7r-orbitals or between a- and
7r-orbitals. In addition A' may be anisotropic in a complex whose
symmetry is less than cubic. Bonding will also affect the spin-spin
interaction by changing the distribution of electronic magnetization,
but this interaction is significant in so few cases that we shall not
pursue this point. Much more important is the modification of the
effective orbital moment through bonding to the ligands, which in
octahedral (or cubic) symmetry we can introduce by replacing (7.17) by
where k < 1. The value of Tc again depends on whether we are dealing
with a- or 77-orbitals, and it may be anisotropic in complexes of less
than cubic symmetry.
A further complication in interpreting experimental resonance

--- Page 416 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 401
results is that apparent reductions in A and k may be produced by the
dynamic Jahn-Teller effect (see Chapter 21).
Application to singlet orbital ground state
We outline now the results of including these interactions in
considering the case of a singlet orbital ground state, a full discussion
being given in Chapter 19.
For such an orbital singlet state all diagonal components of the
orbital angular momentum are zero, a result that we write in the form
(see § 11.7)
where |0) represents the singlet orbital state, and^p = x, y, z. However
for interactions such as the spin-spin interaction, which can be written
in the form (see eqn (19.6))
where p, q = x, y, z, we meet the quadratic combinations of the orbital
components whose values can be written (see eqn 19.15)
This completes the diagonal terms involving the orbital momentum, so
that in first order we have just <7/#(H . S) = g^H 8 for the Zeeman
S v v
interaction and — pl S S for the spin-spin interaction. This means
Jtq 3) q
that in this approximation we have 'spin-only5 g-values, but when
S > 1 the levels may be split in zero magnetic field through spin-spin
interaction. The latter arises only when the distribution of spin
magnetization (determined by the geometrical 'shape' of the square of
the orbital wave-function) is non-cubic, so that the self-energy of the
magnetization depends on the orientation of the spin with respect to
its anisotropic distribution in space.
We now consider second-order effects arising from matrix elements
of the orbital angular momentum between the ground orbital and
excited orbital states. Their effect on the manifold of spin states in the
ground orbital level can be written
where the quantities
27

--- Page 417 ---

402 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
and
are tensor quantities formed from the matrix elements of L connecting
the ground orbital state |0) of energy W with excited orbital states
0
|n) of energy W . From (7.24) we see that K is a symmetric tensor; it
n m
can be shown (see § 19.2) that A^ is also symmetric provided that the
symmetry of the ligand complex is no lower than rhombic. The first
term in (7.22) in A2 comes from using the off-diagonal terms of the spin-
orbit coupling twice, and the second from the cross term between the
spin-orbit coupling and the spin-spin interaction. Essentially they arise
from a second-order change in shape of the magnetization in the ground
state, giving rise to changes in the self energy of the magnetization
dependent on the orientation of the magnetization. Equation (7.23)
comes from cross terms between the spin-orbit coupling and the
Zeeman interaction, and represents the fact that the orbital momen-
tum has a second-order contribution which is not exactly zero.
Collecting both the first- and second-order contributions we have
altogether for the effective spin Hamiltonian
where the cross term in ph in (7.26) can generally be neglected. (It
should be noted —s ee § 7.10 — that third-order contributions to the
effective spin-spin interaction cannot always be neglected.) In the
notation of Chapter 3 we can write the effective spin Hamiltonian as
3e = (S . D . S)+/?(H . g . S), (7.28)
where the first term gives rise to 'fine structure' splittings and the
second to gr-factors that differ from the free-spin value and may be
anisotropic. In calculations based on (7.26), (7.27) we must remember
that the quantities A, A , A' may have to be modified in the presence
pq pq
of bonding effects.
Doublet orbital ground state
From Figs. 7.3, 7.4 we see that for an ion in a D-state the orbital
levels in a cubic field split into a triplet and a doublet, the latter being
the ground state in a number of cases. The doublet is peculiar in that
there are no matrix elements of the orbital angular momentum between

--- Page 418 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 403
the two components of the doublet, and the diagonal elements are also
zero. In a ligand field of tetragonal, rhombic, or lower symmetry the
doublet splits into two singlets whose separation is usually large
compared with JcT at ordinary temperatures. An effective spin
Hamiltonian can then be derived for the lower orbital singlet as in the
previous section, the energy denominators in (7.24), (7.25) being
determined primarily by the cubic field splitting.
In a cubic or trigonal field the two components of the orbital doublet
do not split. However a distortion of lower symmetry will split them,
giving one state of lower energy, and according to the theorem of Jahn
and Teller (1937) such a distortion may be expected to occur spon-
taneously. This gives a singlet ground orbital state, as above, but when
there are a number of distortions that give the same energy change, the
system may resonate between them, giving interesting dynamic
Jahn-Teller effects. These are discussed in Chapter 21.
Triplet orbital ground state
If the cubic ligand field has the right sign, an orbital triplet may be
the ground state, either F for an ion in a D-state or F for an ion in an
5 4
jP-state. If the ligand field has an axial distortion (tetragonal or
trigonal) the triplet splits into a doublet and a singlet, as in Figs. 7.5,
7.6; with lower symmetry the degeneracy is lifted completely. Obviously
Jahn-Teller effects may drastically change the picture, as discussed in
§§21.9 to 21.12. They may produce a static distortion; but in some
cases the spin-orbit coupling produces splittings large enough to
stabilize the system against such distortions, though a partial quenching
of the orbital momentum may still be present (with an apparent
reduction in the spin-orbit coupling parameter, and also in any trigonal
distortion).
In cubic symmetry, if we represent the orbital triplet by a fictitious
angular momentum I = 1, then under the action of spin-orbit coupling
the (2l+l)(2S + l) = 3(2£ + l) manifold of states splits into a series of
levels characterized by J = /S + l, S, \S — l\ as shown in Figs. 7.19,
7.20. The energy separations are just those that would be produced by
an effective spin-orbit parameter which we write as I, i.e. by
so that they obey the interval rule

--- Page 419 ---

404 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.19. Triplet orbital state for a D-ion in a cubic field, showing splitting of levels for
under spin-orbit coupling (eqn (7.29)) and first-order
Zeeman effect (eqn (7.31)). In (a), I is assumed negative (appropriate to dl in octahedral
field); in (b), A is assumed positive (appropriate to c?6 in octahedral field). With the levels
inverted, the diagrams are appropriate to (a) d* in tetrahedral symmetry, (b) c?4 in
tetrahedral symmetry.
The levels have first-order Zeeman splittings of the form
in which, writing g for the effective orbital 0-factor,
t
where, of course, / = 1 in both (7.30) and (7.32).
The fictitious angular momentum J has been introduced here in a
manner that demonstrates its resemblance to the real total angular.
momentum J = L + S used in ordinary atomic theory. It is an example
of the effective spin 8 used in the effective spin Hamiltonian, though
obviously it is not the same as the true spin S and the g^-factor given

--- Page 420 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 405
FIG. 7.20. Triplet orbital state for jf^-ion in cubic field, showing splitting of levels for
(a) I = 1, S = 1; (b) I = 1, S = f under spin-orbit coupling (eqn (7.29)) and first-order
Zeeman effect (eqn (7.31)). In (a), A is assumed negative (appropriate to d2 in octahedral
field); in (b), A is assumed positive (appropriate to d7 in octahedral field). With the levels
inverted, the diagrams are appropriate to (a) d8 in tetrahedral symmetry, (b) d3 in
tetrahedral symmetry.
by (7.32) is nothing like the free spin value except in accidental cases.
The simple picture given above must be modified to allow for a
number of effects.
(i) As for orbital singlet states, second-order effects involving
coupling through the spin-orbit interaction to excited orbital states
change the effective value of gj (though it remains isotropic); together
with the spin-spin interaction, they also give rise to small splittings of
states with J > 2 in a manner consistent with group theoretical
requirements for cubic symmetry.
(ii) In the presence of small departures from cubic symmetry,
the §j-f<actors become anisotropic, and there will be splittings of the

--- Page 421 ---

406 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
manifolds for which J > 1, but not for J = \ because of the require-
ments of Kramers degeneracy. If the ligand field interaction of less than
cubic symmetry is small compared with the spin-orbit splitting, its
effect can be expressed by introducing spin operators ^ Oq operating
k
k,Q
within each manifold of given J. For J = 1 or f, only operators with
k = 2 are needed, but for larger values of J, operators with k = 4 will
also be required.
(iii) If the departures from cubic symmetry give ligand field inter-
actions comparable in energy with I, the resultant energy matrices
including both them and the spin-orbit coupling must be diagonalized,
following which the first-order Zeeman effect can be calculated. Again
modifications will result from matrix elements of the spin-orbit
coupling with excited states, and from spin-spin interaction.
(iv) If the non-cubic ligand field interaction is much greater than
the spin-orbit coupling, the splitting of the orbital levels is computed
first as in Figs. 7.3-7.6, after which the other interactions (spin-orbit
coupling, spin-spin and Zeeman interactions) are introduced.
(v) A static model may not be applicable because of the Jahn-Teller
effect.
It is clear that no useful general formulae can be given at this stage,
and the results for individual ions will be presented in §§7.8-7.16,
where the effects of bonding are also discussed. An exception may arise
for an ion with an odd number of electrons, where a ground state of
twofold degeneracy may result (a 'Kramers doublet'), which can be
represented by a spin Hamiltonian with S = ^
where along a principal axis
evaluated within the two states of the doublet. Here the notation
(g^p indicates that the effective orbital (/-factor ^ may itself be aniso-
tropic.
7.6. Magnetic hyperfine interaction
The magnetic hyperfine interaction is often thought of as an inter-
action between the nuclear magnetic moment (JL and a magnetic field
Z
H at the nucleus generated by the magnetic electrons; it can equally
e
well be regarded as an interaction between the distributed electronic
magnetic moment jx and the average magnetic field H generated
e n

--- Page 422 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 407
by the nuclear dipole moment. We have thus
where the definitions of H , H are rather more general than in eqns
e n
(1.28), (1.30) in that precessing components are included as well as
steady components. For a free ion we can write JJL = (7 j# l, and
Z n n
H = — (Alg f} )J, so that (7.34a) becomes just
e n u
For positive values of (A/g ) we see that H is oppositely directed to J;
n e
because of the negative sign of the electronic charge, this means that
H is in the same direction as the electronic magnetization.
e
In the weak ligand field approximation which is appropriate to 4/, 5/
ions the magnetic hyperfine interaction was introduced in the form
(7.34b), giving rather simple relations (see § 5.4) between the free ion
value of A and the principal values of the tensor A in the interaction
(S.A.I) of the effective spin Hamiltonian. When the ligand field is
intermediate or strong a rather different approach is necessary, in
which we consider separately the various contributions to the magnetic
hyperfine interaction. These arise partly from the orbital motion of the
electrons, and partly from their spin magnetization.
Neglecting any hyperfine anomaly, we regard the nucleus as having
a point dipole moment, while the electronic charge and spin magnetiza-
tion are distributed in space. For an element of electronic charge dq at
distance r from the nucleus, moving with velocity v, we can write down
the magnetic field at the nucleus, giving on integration
where G is the angular orbital momentum and m the electronic mass.
If G = Ifi for the iih electron of charge — e, we can write
i
and, on summing over all electrons, we find
where /? is the Bohr magneton.
In LS- coupling ^l = L and if (r"3); is the same for all electrons in
i }

--- Page 423 ---

408 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
the open shell, we have
where the minus sign shows that the orbital contribution to H is
e
always in the same direction as the orbital magnetic moment. If we
write (x = (// //)I, which avoids the choice between expressing the
z 7
nuclear moment in nuclear or Bohr magnetons, we have for the orbital
contribution to the magnetic hyperfine Hamiltonian
where the first form is needed when we have to consider single electrons
(as in strong ligand fields) and the second is suitable for intermediate
ligand fields if .L$-coupling is applicable.
The contributions to H associated with the electron spin can be
e
divided into two; one of these arises from the spin magnetization
'outside' the nucleus, and the other from the magnetization 'inside' the
nucleus. The former gives a simple dipolar contribution
where M is the spin magnetization density at a point r, and r is a
8 0
unit vector parallel to r. We can write
where s^ is the spin of the ith electron and p its spin density (i.e. the
ei
square of the amplitude of its wave-function at the point r). Then
where
Here g = 2-0023 is the anomalous gr-factor of the electron spin, and the
8
negative sign in (7.42) arises from the negative charge on the electron.
Both here and in the orbital contribution there are small corrections
due to diamagnetic effects and the relativistic increase of mass. It is
generally convenient to absorb these, and also the difference between
g and 2, into effective values of (r~3) and of (r^f), so that the 'spin-
s
dipolar' part of the hyperfine interaction becomes

--- Page 424 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 409
This term is more complicated than the orbital interaction because it
involves components of the unit vector r . These can be replaced by
0
components of the orbital angular momentum, just as in the equivalent
operator method for representing the effect of the ligand field inter-
action. In doing so we must allow for the fact that components of r
0
commute while those of 1 or L do not. Thus for a single electron whose
orbital quantum number is I the operator
can be replaced by
and in L$-coupling the sum of the terms (7.46) for the several electrons
in the partly-filled shell can be replaced by
where
The Hamiltonian for the 'spin-dipolar' part of the magnetic hyperfine
interaction thus becomes either
in terms of single electrons, or in LS- coupling (assuming the values of
to be the same for all electrons in the open shell)
Here the notation (sC2)1 gives a useful shorthand for the operators in
(7.47), (7.48).
An important case where this interaction vanishes is that where the
electron spin density has spherical symmetry; classically it is easily
shown that the magnetic field at the centre of a thin uniformly
magnetized spherical shell is zero, since it involves the integral

--- Page 425 ---

410 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
where 0 is the angle between M and r in eqn (7.41). It follows that
s 0
the interaction (7.45) vanishes for a closed shell of electrons, and also,
in £$-coupling, for a half-filled shell; in particular, it vanishes for a
single s-electron, but in this case we must consider also the electron
magnetization 'inside' the nucleus. Conceptually it is easiest at this
point to regard the nuclear moment as due to an elementary current
loop immersed in a magnetized medium arising from the spin magnetiza-
tion density M at the nucleus. The latter gives rise to a magnetic field
0
where for a single s-electron
where />|0) is the spin density of the iih s-electron at the nucleus and is
equal to the square of its wave-function at the origin. On summing over
all s-electrons we obtain the Hamiltonian for this 'contact' interaction
In a many-electron atom the resultant hyperfine structure is the
sum of the contributions from the individual electrons, but since we
are summing vector quantities, the net effect depends on the balance
between the positive and the negative contributions. For example, in a
closed electron shell we have
but it does not necessarily follow that the sums
if different electrons in the same shell have different values of (^~3) or
t
of />|0). If all electron shells are closed, the summations in eqns (7.39),
(7.50), (7.57) are zero, so that there is no hyperfine structure. If the
atom has an open shell in addition to a number of closed shells, then
the electrostatic repulsion between the electrons ('configuration
interaction') gives rise to energy differences for electrons in the same
shell which result in changes in their radial wave-functions and hence
in the individual values of (r"3)^ For example, the electrostatic repul-
sion gives rise (through the exclusion principle) to an exchange inter-
action between electrons in the open shell and electrons in the closed

--- Page 426 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 411
shells. If the net spin S of the electrons in the open shell is cup', then
electrons in the closed shells whose individual spins are also 'up' will
have a slightly different energy from those whose spins are 'down', and
hence slightly different values of (r~3).
The differences between (r~3) and (r~£) which result from these
effects cannot easily be calculated. Experimentally, differences of order
10 per cent between (r~3) and (r~£) have been found by Harvey (1965)
for the ground terms of the oxygen atom (2p4, 3P) and the fluorine
atom (2p5, 2P), but these may be exceptionally large. For the samarium
atom (4/6, 1F) the difference is only 2 per cent (Woodgate 1966). In the
solid state there is no experimental evidence, and the possibility of a
difference between (r~3) and (r^3) is usually ignored (for a discussion,
see Watson and Freeman (1967a)).
A much more dramatic effect is the appearance of a'contact' term in
cases where it would not be expected, such as open shells of p, d, f
electrons which have no finite density at the nucleus. This is mainly due
to the effect of the exchange interaction on the s-shells, giving different
radial distributions of magnetization (and charge) for electrons with
spin 'up' and with spin 'down', which results in a non-zero value for the
second sum in (7.57). The effect is especially important for s-electrons
because a small degree of unbalance can give a rather large contribution
to the hyperfine structure, and because the contribution is different in
form from the orbital and spin-dipolar terms. Since it arises from the
exchange-induced magnetization of the closed shells or 'core electrons',
the effect (see §§ 17.5, 17.6) is known as 'core polarization'. The most
striking effect occurs for half-filled shells, such as Mn2+, 3d5, 6/S, where
zero hyperfine interaction would be expected because L = 0, the spin-
dipolar interaction vanishes because of spherical symmetry, and no
unpaired s-eleetrons are present. Nevertheless a hyperfine interaction
of the form
is observed whose size is not greatly different from that of other 3dn
ions.
As mentioned in § 4.7 and discussed in § 17.7, relativistic effects can
also give a contribution of the form (7.58), and can be included in A .
s
Since the quantity />(0) in eqn (7.55) has the dimensions r~3, we can
eliminate the factors (877/8) and (0/2) in that equation by writing it in
s
the form

--- Page 427 ---

412 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
where we have used s rather than c as superscript and subscript to
denote that all contributions of the form (S.I) are included. The
quantity (r~3) has no simple relation to the other parameters <r~3},
(r~3), and may be of either sign, though for 3dn ions it is found experi-
c
mentally to be always positive. With the notation
and using the approximation that we can write the full
magnetic hvpernne interaction as
where K = (/*3}/{^~3), and the third tensor operator is given by eqns
s
(7.48) and (7.49).
Orbital singlet ground state
In applying these formulae to the case of a singlet orbital ground
state resulting from the action of the ligand field we need just the
quantities l , A , A'^ already defined in eqns (7.21)-(7.25).
pq pq
For the orbital contribution we have, from (7.19), no diagonal term,
but from the cross term with the spin-orbit coupling we obtain
where A^ is the orbital contribution to g . If the external field is
a pq
along one of the principal axes of the ligand field interaction, such as
the z-axis, (7.62) is equivalent to a component of the electronic magnetic
field at the nucleus
in kilogauss if (r~3) . is expressed in atomic units.
a>u
For the spin-dipolar contribution we obtain
where the first term l needs a comment. If the cubic field itself
pq
gives a singlet orbital ground state, as for Cr3+, 3d3 in an octahedral
field, then all elements l = 0, and the spin-dipolar field at the nucleus
vq
vanishes because the orbital wave-function and hence also the distribu-
tion of spin magnetization has cubic symmetry. The situation is different
for an ion such as Cu2+, 3d9 where an octahedral field leaves a ground
orbital doublet that may be split by departures from exact octahedral
symmetry. The two components of the orbital doublet, with wave-
functions (3z2—- r2), (x2— y2) are by no means cubic (see Fig. 7.17) in

--- Page 428 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 413
their distribution of charge and spin magnetization, which are con-
centrated along the z-axis in the former case and in the #?/-plane in the
latter. In first order the components of orbital momentum are zero,
giving no orbital contribution to the hyperfine field, though there will
be a second-order effect given by eqn (7.62). However, for either
orbital there will be a first-order, anisotropic, spin-dipolar contribution,
because of the anisotropic distribution of spin magnetization. For the
orbital (3z2— r2), l = —2, l = l = +1, while the values for the
zz xx yy
orbital (x2—y2) are numerically the same but reversed in sign, thus
giving the appropriate cancellation for cubic symmetry, when the two
orbitals are degenerate and equally occupied, but not when they are
split by a departure from cubic symmetry.
The term in (S . I), due almost entirely to core polarization, gives
simply
Often another parameter # is used, such that
so that
The dimensions of # are r~3, and it is related to the electronic field at
the nucleus due to core polarization by
when x is in atomic units. Experimentally, it appeared for some time
that x was substantially constant (apart from covalent bonding effects)
throughout the iron group at about —3 a.u., giving a core polarization
field of 250 kG per unit of electron spin. Later measurements have
shown that # does increase with atomic number (by about 25 per cent
between 3d2 and 3d8), in accordance with Hartree-Fock calculations
(see Watson and Freeman 1967a). There are, nevertheless, some
surprising consistencies for ions of a given configuration 3dn (an
isoelectronic sequence) in the same compound, and for individual ions
in a given coordination but with varying ligand distance (see Geschwind
(1967); §7.10 and Table 7.21.) In general, # depends on the nature
of the ligand, falling with increasing covalency (cf. Table 7.17), a result
first noted experimentally by Van Wieringen (1955) for Mn2+ com-
pounds, 3d5, where the hyperfine interaction is virtually entirely due to
core polarization.

--- Page 429 ---

414 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
Orbital triplet ground state
As for the purely electronic interactions, it is difficult to give any
general formulae (for a fairly detailed discussion, see Chapter 19). If
the ground state is a Kramers doublet, represented by a spin Hamil-
tonian with effective spin 3 = J, the magnetic hyperfine interaction
will be of the form
where along a principal axis
the matrix elements being evaluated within the two states of the
doublet, as in eqn (7.33a).
In concluding this outline of the effects of magnetic hyperfine
interaction we note that a term of the form (7.69) should express the
interaction, not only for a Kramers doublet, but also (to a good approxi-
mation) for a singlet ground orbital state with a more than twofold
spin degeneracy. For this the terms discussed earlier can be summarized
in the form
but for manifolds of fourfold or greater degeneracy (S > f ) further
terms may be required, as discussed in § 4.7 and Chapter 18. Finally,
we mention that the values of (r~~3) are not necessarily the same as
those for a free ion, being generally reduced by covalency in a similar
manner to the reduction in the spin-orbit coupling.
7.7. Nuclear electric quadrupole and nuclear Zeeman
interaction
For the intermediate ligand field approach where we work in terms
of S,L the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction is conveniently
written in the form
This operator is similar in form to that for the electronic spin-spin
interaction, eqn (7.16), except that S is replaced by I. In practice the
nuclear electric quadrupole interaction is so small in magnitude
(~10~3 cm"1 or less) that we need only retain the diagonal terms,

--- Page 430 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 415
which give therefore (cf. eqns (7.20), (7.21)) for an orbital singlet state
which is obviously of the form (I.P.I) used in Chapter 3.
When the cubic field leaves an orbital singlet ground state, as for
Cr3+, 3d3 in an octahedral field, we have l = 0, reflecting the fact that
pa
in this approximation the electronic charge distribution has cubic
symmetry and thus has no electric field gradient at the nucleus. On the
other hand, in Cu2+, 3d9, each of the two F orbital states gives a first-
3
order contribution to the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
because of their non-cubic electronic charge distribution, in the same
way as the non-cubic spin magnetization contributes a first-order
spin-dipolar magnetic hyperfine interaction.
As discussed in § 5.5 and § 17.7, the value of (r~3) cannot be identified
with (r~3) because of electrostatic shielding effects. Similarly there may
be a direct contribution to the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction
from the ligand field if this is not exactly cubic, in which shielding
effects must also be allowed for. It is likely that shielding effects will
not be so important in the 3d as in the 4/ group, since they increase
considerably with atomic number (cf. Watson and Freeman 1967a).
For a ground electronic manifold of single or double degeneracy an
electric quadrupole interaction of the form (7.73) will suffice, but for
manifolds of three or more states with appreciable amounts of orbital
momentum an operator similar to that for a free ion may be required.
In such an operator, L (or J) is replaced by the effective spin S, but
two parameters rather than one may be needed (see the discussion in
Chapter 18). An example of such an interaction is given for Fe2+, 3d6,
in an octahedral field, in § 7.13.
The effective value of (^~3) will also be modified in the presence of
covalent bonding. It has sometimes been assumed that there will be a
reduction both in (r~3) and in (r~3> for the magnetic hyperfine inter-
action of the same magnitude as that in the spin-orbit coupling, but
in a proper treatment the various hyperfine interactions must be
evaluated using the appropriate bonding orbitals.
The nuclear Zeeman interaction
is usually of order 10~4 cm"1. In'addition to this direct interaction there
may be additional terms of the form H^ arising from cross terms

--- Page 431 ---

416 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
between the electronic Zeeman interaction and the hyperfine inter-
action. Essentially they arise from the modification of the electronic
wave-functions of the ground state by the action of the electronic
Zeeman interaction in admixing excited states, thus changing the
magnetic hyperfine interaction by an amount proportional to H. For
an orbital singlet ground state such terms are produced only by the
off-diagonal elements of the orbital momentum, giving a 'pseudo-
nuclear' Zeeman interaction
This must be added to the direct term (7.74), giving a resultant
equivalent to that used in Chapter 3
where g(/) is now a tensor.
For electronic manifolds of higher degeneracy, such as F quartets,
8
other additional terms of different form may be needed (see Chapter
18), but these are likely to be small. The latter is true also of
TABLE 7.8
Atoms of the 3d group, and nuclear properties of the stable isotopes that
have nuclear spin not equal to zero. The nuclear moments are quoted
to four or five significant figures (where justified from nuclear magnetic
resonance) and include the diamagnetic correction
Nuclear electric
quadrupole
Mass Abundance Nuclear Nuclear magnetic moment
z number (%) spin / moment (n.m.) Q( barns)
21 Sc 45 100 7 + 4-7564 + 4-7492 -0-22 -0-22
-2
22 Ti 47 7-28 -0-7884 -0-78710
f
49 5-51 -1-1040 -1-1022
1
23 V 50 0-24 6 + 3-3470 + 3-3413
51 99-76 I + 5-148 + 5-139 -0-052 -0-04
24 Cr 53 9-55 I -0-4744 -0-47354 -0-03
25 Mn 55 100 5 + 3-443 + 3-444 + 0-4 + 0-35
¥J
26 Fe 57 2-19 + 0-0903 + 0-09024
27 Co 59 100 3. + 4-649 + 4-6163 + 0-36 + 0-40
2
28 Ni 61 1-19 f ±0-75 -0-74868 ( + )0-16
29 Cu 63 69-09 t + 2-226 + 2-2206 — 0-18 -0-16
65 30-91 3. + 2-385 + 2-3789 -0-19 -0-15
2
(a) (b) (a) (b)
(a) Based on Nuclear moments (Fuller and Cohen 1965), Table of rounded-off values,
with some later corrections and additions.
(b) Based on A table of nuclear spins, moments and magnetic resonance frequencies (Lee
and Anderson 1967).

--- Page 432 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 417
'pseudo-nuclear electric quadrupole' terms produced by second-order
effects of the magnetic hyperfine interaction.
A list of nuclear data for ions of the 3d group is given in Table 7.8.
7.8. 3d1. Ti3+, V4+ in an octahedral field. 2J5, L = 2, 8 = %
For these chemically rather unstable ions there is little experimental
information. One of the few compounds measured is caesium titanium
alum, Cs Ti (S0 ) , 12H 0, which has the usual alum structure, space
4 2 2
group Pa3, with four molecules in unit cell. The electron paramagnetic
resonance spectrum observed at helium temperatures in the undiluted
salt is consistent with this structure, the four ions each having
|<7||| = 1-25, |<7| = 1-14 (accurate to ±0-02), the axis of symmetry
±
being one of the four threefold axes of the cube in each case.
X-ray crystallography shows that the Ti3+ ions are coordinated to six
water molecules in the form of a nearly regular octahedron, with a small
distortion symmetrical about the threefold axis. The crystal field
splittings would therefore be expected to be as shown in Fig. 7.4.
We must, however, include the spin-orbit coupling, and the fact that
the (/-factors are so far from the spin-only value suggests that this may
well be comparable with the trigonal field splitting of the ground
triplet. On the other hand, the spin-orbit parameter £ has the value
+ 154 cm"1 for the free Ti3+ ion, while optical data suggest that the
cubic field splitting (120 .B ) is some 20000 cm"1, so that any effect due
4
to admixture of the F states by the spin-orbit coupling should be
3
rather small. The trigonal field also has matrix elements (see Fig. 7.4)
between the ground F triplet and the excited F doublet, but if the
5 3
trigonal field splitting is comparable with the spin-orbit coupling these
can be similarly neglected, except in the somewhat unlikely case of
large second and fourth degree components that accidentally cancel as
far as the splitting of the F triplet is concerned (they then add in the
5
off-diagonal components). A tetragonal field has no such off-diagonal
matrix elements.
We shall see later that infrared measurements on Ti3+ and V4+ ions
in A1 0 have clarified the situation, and that a dynamic Jahn-Teller
2 3
effect is responsible for many features of the observed spectrum. In this
section we present only the static theory; this may be applicable in
some cases, but primarily it illustrates the chronological approach to
the problem, and the difficulties encountered in explaining just the
single early magnetic resonance measurement of the g-values for
caesium titanium alum.
28

--- Page 433 ---

TABLE 7.9
States and energy levels for the T triplet of dl in an octahedral field, with splitting due to
5
trigonal field and spin-orbit coupling. The orbital triplet has an effective momentum 1 = 1,
with effective orbital g-factor g = — 1 in the column labelled 'isotropic*. In the column labelled
l
'anisotropic' both the spin-orbit coupling (and g) are allowed to be anisotropic. The states can be
t
described similarly in each case, but with different formulae for tan 2d. In terms of this
parameter, the energy levels can be written in the form
WA = Ux/\/2)(<3ot 26 ± cosec 2<5); W c = 4 ± \/(2) cot 23 — Ay
B
states 'isotropic' levels 'anisotropic' levels
A+ = cos d \ + 1~> - sin (5 |0+> W = |A + iA + i(A2 + AA+|A2)i A+iA +J(A»+AA +iAJ + 2A«_)t
A 4 || || L
A- = cos<5|-l+> - sin(5|0->
B+ = sin<$| + l-> + cos 6 |0+> TT^g = -|A + !A-i(A2 + AA+!A2)* lA+JA,, -i(A2+AA,, +iAjj+2A^)4-
B- = sin(5|-l+> + cos d |0~>
C+ | + l+> W (7 = A — JA A-JA,,
c- |-i->
Value of 6 tan 25 = /(2)^/(A + l^) tan 25 = V(2)A,/(A + JA||)
v

--- Page 434 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 419
In the following treatment we neglect any admixture of the F
3
doublet, and operate just within the manifold of the F triplet with its
5
twofold spin degeneracy. We label the three orbital states by their
fictitious angular momentum components | ±1), |0), and introduce just
the spin-orbit coupling, plus an axial field which lifts the |±1) levels
above |0) by an amount A (where A is not to be confused with the
A = 10 Dq mentioned in §7.4) which may be of either sign. The axial
field may be either tetragonal or trigonal (in the latter case A = — v in
the nomenclature of Table 7.4). For the matrix elements of the fictitious
orbital momentum we must include the factor a — — 1 (see Table 5),
and the energy matrix is then
FIG. 7.21. Plot of the reduced energy (TF/A) against the reduced trigonal or tetragonal
field splitting (A/A) for the three Kramers doublets of the F orbital triplet of d1 in a
6
nearly octahedral field.

--- Page 435 ---

420 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.22. Plot of the reduced energy parameter (TF/A) as a function of <5 for the 'isotropic'
equations given in Table 7.9. Positive values of <5 have been plotted towards the left to
make the figure correspond to Fig. 7.21. Cubic symmetry occurs at cos 26 = J, or
6 = 35-5°.
where there are two sets of states (Kramers conjugates) shown to the
left and to the right with the same energy matrix. Table 7.9 gives the
general solution, consisting of three energy levels, each a Kramers
doublet. The behaviour of these three energy levels is shown in Fig.
7.21 as a plot of the reduced energy (TF/A) against the reduced axial
field splitting (A/A), and in Fig. 7.22 as a function of the angle 6 defined
in Table 7.9. If A is positive, as it is for d1, level A is always uppermost;
levels B, C intersect at the point (A/A) = 0, or cos 26 = ^, which
corresponds to exact cubic symmetry. The level C is higher than B for
positive values of (A/A), and just lower than B for negative values.
In magnetic fields such that the Zeeman energy is small compared
with the splittings between the three levels, each doublet is characterized
by an anisotropic g-factor, whose values are given in Table 7.10. The
result that g\\ = g± = 0 for level C is rather surprising, but results
from a cancellation that follows immediately from the states that
compose the doublet C. Remembering that the fictitious angular

--- Page 436 ---

TABLE 7.10
Values o/<7||, g±for the three doublets of F orbital triplet with S = -| of dl in an octahedral
5
field, with splitting by trigonal field and spin-orbit coupling. The two sets of values
correspond to those given in Table 7.9: 'isotropic9 means both A and the effective orbital
g-factor g = — 1 are assumed to be isotropic; 'anisotropic' means that parameters Ay,
l
A_L are introduced, together with parallel and perpendicular components of g = — k\\,
t
—fc_i_; in the latter case we have not made the approximation g = 2, so that the spin
B
and orbital contributions are immediately apparent. Note that the g-values for the doublet
A are obtained from those for the doublet B by changing the signs of cos 2d, sin 26; this
is equivalent to increasing d by Tr/2, and corresponds to the requirement that the two sets
of states given for doublets A, B in Table 7.9 must be orthogonal
Doublet energy ^ ^ ^
-1-3 cos 25 -1+3 cos 2(5 0
'isotropic'j101
101 |1— cos2(5 + V(2)sin2(5| |1 + cos 25 — V(2sin2(5| 0
{<7|, — <7 cos 2(5— A;., (1+ cos 2(5) ^B cos 25—^11 (1— cos 2(5) ^8-2^,,
'anistropic'gii 8
01 |i0 8 (l-cos2<5) + V(2)& L Bin2<5| igr s (l+ cos 2(5) -V (2)Aj ± sin 2£| 0

--- Page 437 ---

422 IONS OF THE U GROUP
momentum I = 1 for the F triplet is associated with the factor a = — 1 ,
5
we see that
so that gr|| =0, while g is also zero because the matrix elements of
L
L , S are each separately zero between the two states
± ±
For doublets A, B the values of g \\, g may be expressed in terms of a
L
single angular parameter 26, and a plot of g\\ against g has the form
L
of an ellipse, as shown in Fig. 7.23. The points on this ellipse include
all possible (/-values for either doublet, since the ellipse is completed
by allowing 2<5 to take all values from 0 to 27r, and the g-values for
doublet A may be regarded as corresponding to a value of 2d that
differs by TT from those for doublet B. At this point we see that some
care must be exercised in using this ellipse as regards the signs of the
FIG. 7.23. Plot of 0T|| against g for the doublets A, B, of Table 7.10 'isotropic'. The
L
left-hand portion (d = 0 to ?r/2) corresponds to doublet B, the right-hand portion
(d = 77/2 to TT) to doublet A. The thick portion indicates the range over which doublet B
is the ground doublet, lying below doublet C. X—experimental values of (gr,,, gr) for
±
caesium titanium alum. For doublet A it would be better to plot g as a negative
L
quantity, so that the point for cubic symmetry would lie at (—2, —2); see § 8.8.

--- Page 438 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 423
g-values. The sign of g^ is a physically real quantity, which can be
determined by experiment, while that of g is not, so that there will be
±
an ambiguity in plotting a point corresponding to an experimental
determination of (g\\, g ) in Fig. 7.23. (If the sign of g^ is not determined
L
experimentally, there will be a double ambiguity.)
Before applying our results to a special case, we make a few remarks
about some special features of the ellipse shown in Fig. 7.23. In order
to identify points on it unambiguously, we assume that g± is for this
purpose taken as positive towards the right (this corresponds to using
the expression for g given in the Table 7.10 above for the doublet B
L
rather than that for the doublet A). The ellipse passes through the
point (<7||,<7i) = (+2, +2), corresponding to the solution 6 = 0
appropriate to a positive infinite value of A. The doublet B is then
lowest, as can be seen at once from the energy matrix (7.77) or from
Fig. 7.22, and its two states are simply |0+), |0~), whose magnetic
moment is entirely due to the spin, giving an isotropic g-value of 2.
For this value of A the doublet A is the highest of the three doublets,
and its g-values correspond to the point (—4, 0) on the ellipse.
As the value of A diminishes from plus infinity the value of 2<5
increases from zero, and the plot of (g\\, g ) for the doublet B (which is
L
still the ground doublet) moves anti-clockwise round the top left-hand
part of the ellipse back towards the point (0, 0) which corresponds to
A = 0 and cubic symmetry. From Fig. 7.21 we see that energy levels
B and C cross at this point, and for negative values of A the ground
doublet is (7; since resonance is very rarely observed in an excited state,
we shall not consider the behaviour of the g-values of the doublet B in
this region. We can however check our results for the case of cubic
symmetry, for then the F triplet with its twofold spin degeneracy is
5
split by the spin-orbit coupling into a doublet and a quadruplet, which
we can denote by fictitious angular momenta (F , -|) and (F , f)
5 5
respectively. The gr-factors of doublet and quadruplet are of course
isotropic when the symmetry is cubic, and can be calculated using the
modified Lande formula given in eqn (7.32). On inserting the values
we get
and hence

--- Page 439 ---

424 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
The value of d appropriate to cubic symmetry is that for which
cos 26 = £, sin 26 = V(8)/3> for which the formulae in Table 7.10 lead
to isotropic values of —2 and 0 in agreement with (7.79b).
From this result we see that the quadruplet state has g = 0; in fact
it is formed by the crossing at A = 0 of the two doublets B and (7, of
which the latter always has g\\ = g = 0, while the former has
L
gr|l = g = 0 at the moment of crossing corresponding to the point
±
(0, 0) in Fig. 7.23. For the doublet A the fact that g, though isotropic,
is equal to —2, not to +2, reminds us that the orbital moment must
be contributing, a point to which we shall return later. (Unfortunately
this result corresponds to the point (—2, +2) in Fig. 7.23, because we
have made a choice of sign in labelling the value of g more appropriate
±
to the doublet B than to the doublet A; for this reason we shall later
redraw the ellipse (see Fig. 8.2) when considering the doublet A, which
is the ground state if the spin-orbit coupling parameter A is negative.)
We now return to the measured values g\\ = 1-25, g = 1-14 for
L
caesium titanium alum. Though the sign of g\\ has not been experi-
mentally determined, there is no ambiguity because the doublet C has
gril = g — 0, and the measured values must therefore belong to the
L
doublet B. They are plotted in Fig. 7.23, as a point which lies clearly
well inside the ellipse of allowed values; we must therefore conclude
that the approximations on which the ellipse was constructed are
inadequate. One such approximation is neglect of admixtures from the
F states, but these are unlikely to affect the </-values by more than a
3
few per cent, and an exact treatment (Bleaney, Bogle, et al. 1954) shows
that no acceptable fit can be obtained in this way.
A plausible alternative is that the simple crystal field theory must
be abandoned, and allowance must be made for the effects of bonding
to the ligand ions. As discussed in § 7.4, and shown in Chapter 20, this
leads to a reduction of the orbital moment; in the case of d1, if we confine
ourselves to the F states which can only take part in vr-bonding, this
5
means that the matrix elements of orbital momentum should be
multiplied by a factor k which for brevity we shall here write as k.
vv9
This factor is isotropic in the case of cubic symmetry, but not other-
wise; however to avoid introducing too many parameters we shall
assume that k is isotropic even in the presence of a small trigonal
distortion. Then for the doublet B

--- Page 440 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 42fi
For a given value of k (< 1) this gives an ellipse that passes (at (5 = 0)
through the point (+2, +2), which corresponds to spin-only magnetism,
but otherwise lies inside the ellipse shown in Fig. 7.23. However it
proves necessary to take rather a low value of k, about 0-7, in order to
obtain (/-values near those measured experimentally. The fit is not
exact, and in any case corrections due to admixtures of the F states
3
have been neglected; however it is not worth while carrying the analysis
further in the absence of experimental information for caesium titanium
alum about the positions of the levels A, B.
An equally difficult problem for simple ligand field theory is posed by
the experimental results for Ti3+ in the trigonal field of A1 0 ,
2 3
summarized in Table 7.11. The resonance results for the ground doublet
TABLE 7.11
Measured energy levels and g-values from infrared spectroscopy
for the three Kramers doublets of the F orbital triplet of two 3d1
5
ions in A1 0 . Data from Nelson, Wong, and Schawlow (1967);
2 3
Wong, Berggren, and Schawlow (1968); Joyce and Richards
(1969). Magnetic resonance has been observed in the ground
doublet o/Ti3+ in A1 0 , with \g\\\ = 1-07, \g \ < 0-1, by Kask,
2 3 ±
Kornienko, Mandel'stam, and Prokhorov (1964)
Ti3+ in A1O V4+ in A1O
2 3 2 3
Energy Energy
(cm-1) ^11 foil (cm-1) g\\ foil
107-5 1-9 (calc) 52-6 1-8 (calc)
37-8 — 2-00(6) <0-1 28-0 -1-43(4) <0-2
0 + M1(3) <0-1 0 + 1-43(4) <0-2
cannot sensibly be fitted to the (g\\, g ) curve of Fig. 7.23 for doublets
±
A, B. For the doublet C we have g = 0, giving no allowed transition
L
and we can only account for the low value of g\\ = 1*07 by using the
formula g\\ = g—2k \\ of Table 7.10 with the very low value lc\\ = 0-47.
s
Since the actual value of g± is not known, it is possible that resonance
is allowed through a third-order Zeeman effect arising through ad-
mixtures of the low-lying excited state at 38 cm"1.
The positions of the excited doublets are also difficult to fit to Fig.
7.21, where it is obvious that there is no negative value of (A/A),
for which alone C is the lowest doublet, where (W — W ) is roughly
A B
twice (W — W ). In addition, the minimum overall splitting of the
B c
three doublets is 1-46A; thus the measured overall splitting of 108 cm"1

--- Page 441 ---

426 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
leads to A ~ 74 cm"1, less than half the free ion value. This result is in
line with the low value of k^ but both are remarkably small.
9
We can extend the theory by allowing both A and k to be 'anisotropic',
obtaining the results thus labelled in Tables 7.9, 7.10. The spin-orbit
coupling and Zeeman interactions then have the form
in which the negative signs arise as before in using a fictitious orbital
momentum 1= 1 for the F triplet. In the energy matrix (7.77)
5
the only change is that 2,\\ appears in the diagonal elements and A in
±
the off-diagonal elements, so that the states given in Table 7.9 are still
valid, but with the formulae for the energy levels and gr-factors labelled
'anisotropic' in Tables 7.9, 7.10. The observed energy levels and value
of <7|| for the ground doublet are insufficient to determine all the param-
eters, but require A < 50 cm."1, Ay > 73 cm"1; k\\ = 0-47. The value
±
of the trigonal field splitting A = — v must be quite small, in contrast
to the relatively large values found for other ions in A1 0 , listed in
2 3
Table 7.4.
For the isoelectronic ion V4+ in A1 0 the splittings (Table 7.11) are
2 3
even smaller than for Ti3+, though the free ion value of the spin-orbit
parameter is larger. A static ligand field model is clearly inadequate,
and Macfarlane, Wong, and Sturge (1968) (see also Joyce and Richards
(1969)) have shown that the main features of the results can be accounted
for in terms of a dynamic Jahn-Teller effect. This produces a dynamic
quenching not only of the spin-orbit coupling and the orbital momen-
tum in the F triplet, but also of the splitting due to the trigonal
5
component of the ligand field. The theory allows values for the latter
of v = 700 to 1000 cm"1, which are in line with the values given for
other ions in A1 0 in Table 7.4. In addition, a considerable reduction
2 3
in the value of k (& 0-8) due to covalency is required. For further
discussion see Chapter 21 and Ham (1969), or the papers quoted above.
7.9. 3d2. V3+, Cr4+ in an octahedral field. »F, L = 3, S = 1
Again this ion is chemically rather unstable, and there is little
experimental information. One of the few compounds examined is
vanadium ammonium alum, V(NH )(S0 ) ,12H 0, which is expected
4 4 2 2
to have the usual alum structure, the local symmetry being octahedral
with a small trigonal distortion; we shall assume that this is the case.
(This guarded statement reflects the fact that X-ray crystallographic

--- Page 442 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 427
analysis shows this to be correct at room temperature, but a number of
alums have been found to undergo crystallographic changes associated
with ferro-electric effects at low temperatures.) In fact the main
results we shall discuss are not from magnetic resonance, but the
susceptibility measurements of van den Handel and Siegert (1937),
which can be interpreted in terms of a ground state whose Hamiltonian
is
with 8 = 1, D = +4-8 cm-1, g = 1-96, g = 1-82. No other levels
l{ L
are appreciably populated below room temperature. Thus the position
is that we appear to have a ground state that is an orbital singlet, with
threefold spin degeneracy that is lifted by a rather large initial splitting
D, and a somewhat anisotropic g-factor.
The ground state of a d2 ion is 3jP, whose orbital splitting in a cubic
field with a trigonal distortion is shown in Fig. 7.6. The cubic field
parameter _B is negative for a d2 ion in an octahedral field, so that the
4
F triplet lies lowest. This is split into a singlet and a doublet by the
4
trigonal distortion, and in view of the results quoted above we expect
the singlet to lie well below the doublet. This orbital singlet has a
threefold spin degeneracy, which is split through second-order effects
of the spin-orbit coupling, with a small contribution from spin-spin
interaction (eqn (7.16)).
We shall give an approximate analysis, using only the manifold of
F states, which is based on the work of Chakravarty (1959), which
4
follows the theory of Abragam and Pryce (195 la). The manifold is
treated as an orbital triplet with a fictitious angular momentum 1=1,
with effective orbital (/-values a, a' for the components of orbital
momentum parallel and perpendicular to the trigonal axis respectively.
We assume that the effect of the trigonal field splitting is to raise the
states | + 1), | — 1} by an amount A above the state |0), so that the
effective Hamiltonian operating within the F manifold with its three-
4
fold spin degeneracy (S = 1) is
where the reader should note that the signs of A, a, and a' are the
reverse of those used by Chakravarty. Taking A and the spin-orbit
parameters A, A' to be positive, one obtains a set of three low-lying
states corresponding to the ground 'spin' triplet of eqn (7.81). In the

--- Page 443 ---

428 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
5 absence of a magnetic field these three states are described by the
following functions:
States in terms of Energy
where
and
The first and third states (corresponding to S = ±1 in the spin
z
Hamiltonian for the ground triplet) are raised in energy above the
second state (S = 0) by an amount
z
In the limit where the spin-orbit coupling is small compared with A,
both d and € tend to the limit and D becomes
On evaluating the Zeeman energy as a perturbation
we find
where in the approximate formulae we have assumed e = d.
We see at once that the theory leads in the right direction in that it
predicts a first-order deviation from the spin-only value of 2 for g±,
but only a second-order deviation for g^, and also gives a positive value
for D. Making the assumption that A = A', Chakravarty fitted the
susceptibility of vanadium ammonium alum from room temperature
down to liquid helium temperatures, using the values
This value of A is markedly smaller than the value +104 cm"1 for the
free ion, a result also obtained by Siegert (1937), and suggests there is
considerable covalent bonding. However no reduction in the orbital
moment was made by Chakravarty, except in so far as this may be
disguised in the low values of a, a', which were ascribed to admixtures
of the 3P state.

--- Page 444 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 429
Magnetic resonance has been observed for the d2 ions V3+ and O4+
in a-A! 0 , and the results are summarized in Table 7.12. The most
2 3
accurate values are those obtained for V3+ by Joyce and Richards
(1969) using far-infrared Fourier-transform spectroscopy to observe the
|±1)<->|0) transitions in a magnetic field. The following discussion
(cf. §3.14) illustrates the approach needed in the work of Zverev
and Prokhorov (1960, 1961) at lower frequencies where the resonance
observed is the S = |+1> to | — 1) transition. In zero magnetic field,
z
with a field of trigonal symmetry, these two levels would be degenerate,
TABLE 7.12
Magnetic resonance and infrared spectroscopy results for some 3d2 ions
in a-ALOo
Ion D (cm-1) g A^ (10-*cm-i) Reference
*ll L
5iys+ + 7-0(3) 1-915(2) 1-63(5) 95-9(5) Zverev and Prokhorov
(1960, 1961)
8-29(2) Sauzade, Pontnau, Lesas,
and Silhouette (1966)
8-25(2) 1-92(3) 1-74(2) Joyce and Richards
(1969)
O4+ + 7 1-90 Hoskins and Soffer (1964)
and if a field is applied parallel to the trigonal axis, their separation
(including hyperfine structure) would be 2g \\J3H-\-2A \\m. This transition
has been observed with the radio-frequency field parallel to the trigonal
axis; in a field of pure trigonal symmetry the transition would be
forbidden, and the observation is attributed to a term of the form
E(Sl—S2) which is present due to strains and crystal defects. The value
J
of D is found from the temperature dependence of the intensity below
4°K, which falls sharply as the temperature is reduced and the popula-
tions of the excited | ±1) states decline. If the magnetic field is inclined
at an angle 6 to the trigonal axis, the transitions move to higher fields
since in a first approximation the splitting of the ± 1 states varies as
the component H cos 6 along the trigonal axis. However Zverev and
Prokhorov have observed a broad transition centred on 19800 G at
9300 MHz for V34" when the field is normal to the trigonal axis. Under
such conditions the two levels which are degenerate when E = 0 are
split by an amount (g ^H)2jD and the transition is partially allowed
± y
with the oscillatory field along the trigonal axis. This experiment gave
the first value of g listed in Table 7.12; the hyperfine structure was
L

--- Page 445 ---

430 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
not resolved. Zverev and Prokhorov interpreted the results in terms of
the theory outlined above with A = +38 cm"1, a = —1-40, a' = —1-17,
and a trigonal splitting of 280 cm"1 of the F orbital triplet. These
4
values differ considerably from those of Pryce and Runciman (1958),
who obtained a trigonal splitting of 1200 cm"1 and A ^ 70 cm"1
from the optical spectrum and fitting a ground state splitting of 8 cm"1.
In the formulae given above we have neglected the contribution of
the spin-spin interaction, which when A > A adds an amount 3p/2 to
D. However p is estimated to be about 0-26 cm"1 (see Table 7.6), so
that the contribution is not important.
7.10. 3d9. V2+, Cr3+, Mn4+ in an octahedral field. 4F, L = 3,
S=i
Extensive magnetic resonance and optical investigations have been
carried out on the Cr3+ ion in a predominantly octahedral field, and a
fair amount of data is available for V2+ and Mn4+. The resonance
spectrum observed in the ground state is generally that expected for a
spin quadruplet, with gr-value close to that of a free electron spin, and
a small initial splitting. In terms of a spin Hamiltonian
g is found to be about 1-98, with little or no anisotropy, and the initial
splitting parameter D is of order 0*1 cm"1. The magnetic hyperfine
structure is practically isotropic, and the electric quadrupole interaction
is very small.
These results point to the ground state of the ion being an orbital
singlet, with all excited states lying higher in energy by amounts large
compared with the spin-orbit coupling. This is consistent with crystal
field theory, which for octahedral coordination predicts a singlet
orbital ground state for d3, as can be seen from Figs. 7.5, 7.6 for positive
values of £ . Thus, neglecting spin-orbit coupling, we would expect the
4
ground state to be an unsplit spin quadruplet whose gr-value is equal
to the free spin value. There are however matrix elements of the spin-
orbit coupling between the ground orbital singlet F and the excited
2
triplet F (but not between F and the second excited triplet F ). If we
5 2 4
label the triplet F states in terms of a fictitious angular momentum
5
1 1), and use second-order perturbation theory, the results for the ground
spin quadruplet can be given in a form applicable to a distortion of the
octahedron with axial symmetry about either a tetragonal or a trigonal
axis.

--- Page 446 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 431
For this purpose we assume that the F , l = ± 1 states lie above the
5 z
ground orbital singlet by an amount A and the F , l = 0 state lies
1? 5 z
above the singlet by an amount A . The difference between A and A
0 x 0
is equal to the splitting of the F triplet by a tetragonal or trigonal
5
distortion. The off-diagonal matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling
then give the states for the ground 'spin' quartet listed in Table 7.13.
This quartet can be fitted to the spin Hamiltonian (7.81) with S = %
and
Correct to second order in perturbation theory, the energy levels are
which gives
but there is a third-order correction to D which is really of the same
size (see below) in the case of a trigonal distortion.
TABLE 7.13
States for ground spin triplet S — f of orbital singlet F of d3 ion in
2
octahedral ligand field, with tetragonal or trigonal distortion
If the ion is in a field of cubic symmetry, A = A so that g is isotropic
0 1?
and we have an unsplit spin quartet with a g- value slightly less than the
free spin value. This is observed for Cr3+ and Mn4+ ions in MgO with no
local charge compensation, as well as for V2+ (see Table 7.14). Similar
gr-values are observed in hydrated salts, and there is evidence that the
departure of the (/-value from the free spin value is less than predicted
by the simple formula. Optical absorption bands give a value of about
17500 cm"1 for A for the complex [Cr(H 0) ]3+, so that from the free
2 6
ion value of A we should expect g—2 = — 8A/A to be about —0-04
rather than the value of —0-02 generally observed; the discrepancy can

--- Page 447 ---

432 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
TABLE 7.14
Experimental results for 3d* ions in near octahedral symmetry. The spin
Hamiltonian is that of eqn (7.1). The hyperfine interaction is almost
entirely due to core polarization, which produces a field & —192 kG at
the nucleus, with a small orbital contribution of —4 to —6 kG. The
results for the ions in A1 0 are from Laurance and Lambe (1963)
2 3
Cubic symmetry
Host Ion g A (cm"1) Reference
MgO 51V2+ 1-9803(5) 0-00743(2) Low (1956)
MgO 53O3+ 1-9800(5) 0-00162(3) Wertz and Auzins (1957)
MgO 55Mn4+ 1-9941(2) 0-007082(10) Davies, Smith and Wertz (1969)
Trigonal symmetry
D
Host Ion g \\ g (MHz) (MHz) (MHz) (MHz)
±
A1 2 0 3 51V2+ 1-991 = ff\\ -4803-6 -220-62 -222-9 -0-02
A1 2 O 3 53Cr3+ 1-984(1) 1-9867(10) -5723-5 + 48-5 = A\\ -0-105
A1O 55Mn*+ 1-993 -5868 -208-83 -211-4 + 0-069
2 3
be attributed to bonding effects which produce a reduction in the
effective value of the spin-orbit coupling and also in the orbital moment.
The substance most extensively studied (because of its importance
as a laser material) is A1 0 , where there is trigonal symmetry at the
2 3
aluminium site. The electron paramagnetic resonance results are given
in Table 7.14, where for the Cr3+ ion the sign of D is given by measure-
ments on the optical spectrum (Sugano and Tanabe 1958). At first
sight the theoretical expression for D can be written down from the
second-order shifts of the F levels as in Table 7.13, but since A only
2 0
differs from A because of the trigonal field splitting of the F levels,
x 5
this expression is actually of the third order, <^2(A /A2). We must
trig
therefore be careful to include all third-order terms, and Sugano and
Tanabe (1958) have pointed out that a term comparable in magnitude
arises from an admixture through the trigonal field of the | F , 0} state
4
into F (cf. Fig. 7.6). The amplitude of this admixture, <5, is ~(A /A),
2 fcrig
and since the spin-orbit coupling has matrix elements between F and
4
F , there is a further contribution to D of order A2<5/A ^ A2(A /A2).
5 trig
By using simple crystal field theory explicit expressions for these
third-order terms could be written down in terms of J3°, J5°, and A (or
BZ). In practice this would be pointless for a number of reasons. Not
only is the crystal field so strong that we must allow for the presence of

--- Page 448 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 433
FIG. 7.24. The lowest energy levels of Cr3+ in a cubic field; the splittings are those
appropriate to O3+ in A1O with neglect of the trigonal distortion. The multiplicities
2 3
shown are those of orbit X spin.
excited doublet levels, some of which actually fall below the excited
triplet states belonging to the *F ground state (see Fig. 7.24), but it has
been shown (Sugano and Peter 1961) that configurational interaction
cannot be neglected; bonding effects must also be included. Any reason-
ably complete theory therefore contains a number of adjustable
parameters, and some approximations must be made to reduce these
to manageable proportions. Though an exact fit to the optical and
magnetic resonance data has not been obtained, it is clear (see Sugano
and Peter) that a considerable degree of covalency must be ascribed to
both the t and e-electrons, as well as a considerable reduction in the
2
spin-orbit coupling. This gives a reasonable approximation to the value
of <7u, but to obtain a value of D as large as that observed experimentally
it may be necessary to allow the spin-orbit coupling to be anisotropic.
29

--- Page 449 ---

434 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
.This corresponds to using different values of A in the two terms with
denominators A , A for the (/-values and second-order energy displace-
0 x
ments of the ground quartet in eqns (7.84). However, later calculations
,(Rimmer and Johnston 1966) suggest that such refinements may not
be necessary.
i The Endor results for 51V2+, 53Cr3+, 55Mn4+ in A1 0 given in Table
2 3
.7.14 make it possible to extract a value for the core-polarization field
.for this sequence (Geschwind 1967). After allowing for a small orbital
! contribution of —4 to —6 kG, calculated from g\\ using eqn (7.63), the
field at the nucleus H^ (eqn 7.68) is found to lie in the range — 192-3 ±1
ikG per unit of electron spin for all three ions. The negative sign means
.that H® is oppositely directed to the spin magnetization, and parallel
•to the electron spin S. For 53Cr3+ in MgO (cubic) some higher-order
terms, including a nuclear electric quadrupole interaction of the form
given in eqn (18.50), have been measured in the Endor spectrum by
Woonton and Dyer (1967).
7.11. 3d4. Cr2+ in an octahedral field. 5D, L = 2, S = 2
One of the few salts of this ion in which resonance has been observed
is CrSO , 5H 0, which has the same crystal structure as copper sulphate.
4 2
The resonance results of Ono, Koide, Sekiyama, and Abe (1954) show
that the ground state is a 'spin5 quintuplet described by the Hamiltonian
with 8 = 2, \D\ = 2-24 cm-1, \E\ = 0-10 cm"1, and g very close to 2.
From Fig. 7.3, using the negative sign of B± appropriate to a d4 ion
in an octahedral field, we see that the F states are lower and that
3
these are split by a tetragonal field. If an orthorhombic distortion is also
present, the two F states are not only split but also admixed, so that
3
the ground state will be an orbital singlet of the form
with a fivefold spin degeneracy. The latter will be slightly lifted by
matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling, which connect with the F
5
states but not with the other F orbital state. These also cause the
3
(/-factor to fall below the free spin value, and on including the spin-
spin interaction, second-order perturbation theory gives the following

--- Page 450 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 435
relations:
Here the orbital corrections to the (/-factors are given only to the first
order in (A/A), where A is the spin-orbit splitting parameter and A the
amount by which the F states (whose splitting is neglected) lie above
5
the ground state; p is the constant of the spin-spin interaction (see eqns
(16.43), (16.44)).
These formulae show that EjD = 3~* tan 2d, and the experimental
result that \E\ is small compared with \D\ means that d must be close
to 0 or 77/2. The correct choice depends on the sign of Z>, but unfor-
tunately this was not determined experimentally. However in the
isomorphous crystal CuS0 , 5H 0 the results point unambiguously to a
4 2
value of d close to zero, and it may be assumed that this is the correct
choice also for CrS0 , 5H 0. Using X = 58 cm"1, the results can be
4 2
fitted with A = 10000 cm."1, which is a reasonable order of magnitude
for WDq (see Table 7.3). We then expect g = 1-95, g & g = 1-99.
z x y
A d4 ion in a purely octahedral field presents a situation of some
interest. The orbital states |2S), |0) are then degenerate; when we
include the spin 8 = 2 we have a manifold of 10 states that are split by
second-order effects of the spin-orbit coupling (of order A2/A) and the
spin-spin interaction. In zero magnetic field the states and energy levels
are given in Table 7.15, where we have used the abbreviations
for the spin states as well as for the orbital states. Here the zero of
energy has been taken to lie at the centre of gravity of the states. The
Zeeman effect in such a manifold is obviously rather complicated. In
weak fields, such that fiH < (/> + A2/A), only the triplets have a first-
order Zeeman effect, and each behaves like a triplet with zero initial
splitting and an isotropic g = 1, if we neglect corrections of order A/ A.
Since the separation between successive energy levels in zero field
would be 2-3 cm"1, the weak field condition is the one most likely to be
encountered in a magnetic resonance experiment. These calculations
may often prove to be no more than a pedantic curiosity (but see §7.17,
3cZ6 in a tetrahedral field). Certainly this approach is quite unrealistic

--- Page 451 ---

436 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
TABLE 7.15
Energy levels and states for the orbital doublet F with
3
spin S = 2, which is the ground state of d* in an exactly
octahedral field. The ground orbital states are |0), \2S) =
(l/\/2){| +2} + \— 2)}; second-order admixtures of states
through spin-orbit coupling to the excited F orbital
5
triplet are omitted, but their contribution to the energy
splitting is included. The nomenclature \2S), \2a) is also
used for the spin states, with
Energy Multiplicity States
Singlet
Triplet
Doublet
Triplet
Singlet
for Cr2+ in MgO, where the ion is so strongly coupled to the lattice that
the energy levels are completely altered by the Jahn-Teller effect and
by lattice strains. This problem is discussed by Fletcher and Stevens
(1969) in connection with acoustic paramagnetic resonance measure-
ments of Marshall and Rampton (1968).
7.12. 3d5. Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3+ in an octahedral field. 6&, L = 0,
S=i.
If the ground state of these ions were a pure 6$5, the magnetic
resonance spectrum would be remarkably simple. The sextet would
have no splitting other than that due to the Zeeman interaction, and a
single line would be observed at the free spin value g = 2-0023. In
practice the spectrum is rather complex, with both 'fine structure' and
hyperfine structure. The fine structure can be represented by a series of
spin operators 0%, where k is even and cannot have a value greater

--- Page 452 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 437
than 4. In the case of predominantly cubic symmetry with a small
axial distortion about the tetragonal or trigonal axis, the appropriate
forms of the spin Hamiltonian are
Tetragonal:
Trigonal:
In most published work the results have been expressed in terms of the
equivalent spin Hamiltonian
where the coordinate system £??£ refers to three mutually perpendicular
axes which are the fourfold axes of the crystal field, and the z-axis lies
along the trigonal axis of the crystal, which is also the [111] axis of the
£77 £ system, or along a tetragonal axis, in which case the £77 £ system
can be taken to coincide with the xyz system of axes. The relations
between the parameters in the two types of Hamiltonian are:
The gr-value would be expected also to have axial symmetry, but in
practice any anisotropy is generally within the experimental error.
The energy levels and strongly allowed transitions have been
evaluated (Bleaney and Trenam 1954), assuming the Zeeman inter-
action to be dominant, by perturbation theory, including second-order
terms due to a and D but only first-order terms from F, which is
generally small. The strongly allowed transitions occur at fields:
In these formulae H is the field at which a line is observed at the
frequency v of the applied radiation, and H = hv/gfi is the field at
Q
which it would have occurred if all the fine-structure terms had been
zero. The parameter j9 which appears in the terms due to the cubic field
is given (see Kronig and Bouwkamp 1939) by the equation

--- Page 453 ---

438 IONS OF THE U GROUP
where <f> = (l2m2-{-m2n2-\-n2l2), (I, m, n) being the direction cosines of
H referred to the axes of the cubic crystal field. The second-order terms
due to the cubic field are
(7.91)
The angle that H makes with the trigonal axis is denoted by 6, and the
following abbreviations have been used:
In zero magnetic field the levels fall into three Kramers doublets,
whose energy and states are given in Table 7.16.
For the case of strong external magnetic field it is readily seen from
TABLE 7.16
Energy levels and states in zero magnetic field for S = f, with
fine structure Hamiltonian given by eqn (7.87) for a tetragonal
splitting and (7.88) for a trigonal splitting, in each case combined
with a cubic splitting. The parameters used are
Tetragonal distortion
Energy State
where
Trigonal distortion
Energy State
where

--- Page 454 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 439
the formulae given above that the different parameters representing the
fine structure terms are associated with different angular variations,
so that they can be determined uniquely (except for the overall sign)
by making measurements in a sufficient number of directions. In the
case of trigonal symmetry the first-order terms in a, F occur always in
combination as an integral or half-integral multiple of (pa+^Fq)\
along the trigonal axis (pa+r^Fq) takes the value — f(a — F), while
for any direction perpendicular to the trigonal axis its value is
— J(a — F). Thus measurements with the magnetic field parallel and
normal to the trigonal axis are not sufficient to determine a and F
separately, and only the values of D and (a—F) can be found. The
determination of a and F separately requires measurements in some
intermediate direction, a fourfold axis of the cube often being the most
convenient. A further result is that in a crystal such as CaC0 , which
3
has D* symmetry with two ions in the unit cell which are related by a
d
reflection in the plane normal to the trigonal axis, the spectra of the
two Mn2+ ions which substitute for Ca2+ are identical if the magnetic
field lies in this plane or parallel to the trigonal axis. Since the value
of a is rather small, the fact that there are two ions with different cubic
axes shows only as a small doubling of the resonance lines at inter-
mediate directions of the magnetic field.
A wide range of experimental magnetic resonance data exists for
3d5 ions, of which a representative selection is given in Table 7.17.
This table contains the values of g, the cubic splitting parameter a, and
the hyperfine parameter A (where measured) for the isotopes 53Cr,
55Mn, and 57Fe in the ions Cr+, Mn2+, and Fe3+ respectively. In a number
of cases the sign of a has been determined from the change in the
relative intensities at low temperatures between different fine structure
lines, and the sign of A is then found from the variation in hyperfine
spacing due to second-order effects (see Chapter 3). In other cases only
the relative signs of a and A have been determined, and the signs given
in parentheses are based on the plausible assumption that A is negative,
since no instances to the contrary are known. When the symmetry is
not exactly tetrahedral, octahedral or cubic (4-, 6-, or 8-fold coordina-
tion), terms in D and F are needed in the spin Hamiltonian, but the
values of these parameters (which vary rather widely) have not been
included. In such circumstances a small anisotropy in g and A would be
expected; the latter has been observed in the more accurate measure-
ments, but seldom exceeds 1 or 2 per cent and has been omitted in the
table.

--- Page 455 ---

TABLE 7.17
Representative values ofg, the cubic splitting parameter a and the hyperfine parameter A for
3d5, BS ions. The values of a, A are in units of 10~* cm-1, which can be converted into MHz
by multiplying by 2-998
a A
Ion Host 9 (10~ cm~^) (10~ cm~^) Symmetry
53O+ NaF 2-001(1) 2-2 octahedral
KMgF 2-0005(5) 4-5 octahedral
3
ZnS 1-9995(5) 3-9 tetrahedral
55Mn2+ KMgF 2-0015(5) ( + )6-5 / \Ql octahedral
3
MgO 2-0014(5) + 18-6 -81-5(2) octahedral
CaO 2-0011(5) ( + )5-9 ( — )81-640(1) octahedral
SrO 1 -80-9(2) octahedral
CdF 2-0026(6) 4 (-)93 cube
2
ZnO 2-001(1) (+)2 to 5 (-)75 tetrahedral (distorted)
ZnS 2-0025 ( + )7-8 -64 tetrahedral
ZnSe 2-0069(2) 19-3 -62 tetrahedral
ZnTe 2-0105 30-0 -56 tetrahedral
CdTe 2-0075(10) ( + )28-0 (-)57 tetrahedral
57 Fe s+ KMgF 3 2-0031(2) 51 octahedral
KCdF 3 2-0027(2) 53 octahedral
MgO 2-0037(7) + 205 10-059(1) octahedral
CaO 2-0059(6) + 65 10-05(5) octahedral
AlRb(SO), 12HO 2-003(2) + f!34 octahedral (distorted)
42 2
AlK(SeO), 12HO 2-003(1) + J127 octahedral (distorted)
42 2
Yttrium iron garnet 10-083(10) octahedral (distorted)
Yttrium gallium \ 2-003(1) + 185 octahedral (distorted)
garnet j 2-0047(5) + 62 tetrahedral (distorted)
ZnS 2-019(1) + 127 7-7 tetrahedral
f Sign corrected.

--- Page 456 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 441
Measurements of the nuclear moments of 57Fe and 55Mn, more
accurate than previous determinations because of the negligible size of
the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect, have been made by Endor on Fe3+
(cubic) in MgO (Locher and Geschwind 1965), on Mn2+ in CaO, ZnS
(Mims, Devlin, Geschwind, and Jaccarino 1967), and on Mn2+ in MgO
(Dyer and Woonton 1967). Some small higher-order terms have also
been detected.
Table 7.17 shows that the g-values are very close to the free spin
value of 2'0023 (for this reason, anisotropy, which can only appear in the
deviation from the free spin value, is very difficult to observe). To a
good approximation the (/-value would be the same as for the free ion;
the spin-orbit coupling produces a slight breakdown of LS- coupling,
introducing a small admixture of the excited state 4jR> into the
ground state 6/S^, but the expected deviation A<7 = g— g is only about
s
-0-0003 for Fe3+ and -0-0004 for Mn2+ (Watanabe 1957). The
observed deviations are of either sign, the larger ones being positive
rather than negative. The latter are observed in compounds where a
fair amount of covalent bonding (or a decrease in 'ionicity') would be
expected. Fidone and Stevens (1959) have suggested an explanation
of this which has been elaborated by Watanabe (1964). In the presence
of covalent bonding excited sextets of symmetry *T are present, whose
lg
single electron states will tend to be full or empty according to whether
electrons are transferred to or from the central ion by the bonding
action. A second-order shift (linear instead of quadratic in spin-orbit
coupling) is then possible in the (/-value, whose sign depends on the
direction of electron transfer.
Table 7.17 shows also that in the cases where the sign of the cubic
splitting parameter a has been determined it has been found to be
positive, both for fourfold and for sixfold coordination. The cubic field
splitting arises through perturbation of the free ion state by inter-
actions involving both the cubic crystalline potential and the spin-orbit
coupling; since the former is of opposite sign for fourfold and sixfold
coordination the results suggest that a varies as an even power of the
crystal field. There is, however, no theoretical reason why odd powers
of the crystal field should be excluded, as pointed out by Powell,
Gabriel, and Johnston (1960). The configuration d5 may be regarded as
made up either of five electrons or five holes; energy splittings due to
either crystal fields or spin-orbit coupling are of opposite sign for the
configurations dn and dlo~n, so that for d5 we can only conclude that the
sum of the powers of crystal field and spin-orbit coupling must be even.

--- Page 457 ---

442 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
Assuming that the nucleus and the 'argon' core of electrons in closed
shells can be regarded as a source of a rigid spherically symmetrical
scalar potential F, the motion of the five ^-electrons is described by the
Hamiltonian
where V denotes the crystal field seen by the ith electron, and W is
t BB
the spin-spin interaction, which makes a small contribution. Watanabe
(1957) treated the case where T^ has cubic symmetry by means of a
perturbation expansion based on the spin-sextet and spin-quartet
states of the free 3d5 configuration, using V as a perturbation relative to
i
the 2 e*lrij term. It was shown, however, by Powell, Gabriel, and
Johnston (1960) that the spin-doublet contribution to the ground state
manifold, via the spin-orbit interaction, is of major importance; using
a value of £ = 400 cm."1, they found that for a range of values of Dq
between +1200 and —1200cm"1, the cubic splitting parameter a
varied very widely but was positive except for a narrow range of Dq
between 0 and about +200 cm"1. In a later and more detailed paper
(Gabriel, Johnston, and Powell 1961) it was found possible to fit both
the observed value of a for Mn2+ in MgO and the optical spectrum of
MnO, using rather smaller (and probably more realistic) values of
£ < 300 cm"1. (A value for £ of 320+10 cm"1 has been obtained from
the optical spectrum of Mn2+ in RbMnF (Mehra and Venkateswarlu
3
1967).) In the range +1000 cm"1 < Dq < +1500 cm"1 the parameter
a was found to be a sensitive function of £ and Dq, varying approxi-
mately as £4 and (Dq)n, where n varies between 3-5 and 6.
A distinctive feature of the results for Mn2+ is the sharp rise in the
value of the cubic parameter a with the atomic number of the anion in
the II-VI compounds with fourfold coordination, as can be seen in the
progression ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe. This is accompanied by a significant
rise in the g-value above the free spin value, and a fall in the value of
the hyperfine constant A. Each of these two effects would be expected
to be associated with a progressive decrease of 'ionicity' of the Mn2+
ion, and the results suggest that we may also associate the rise in a with
this decrease. A noticeable increase in the value of a occurs generally in
the progression Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3+; this may be partly due to the fact that
the increase in spin-orbit coupling with higher nuclear charge may
outweigh any reduction in Dq due to shrinkage of the electronic orbits,
but a change in ionicity (e.g. in ZnS) may also play a role.

--- Page 458 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 443
7.13. 3d6. Fe2+ in an octahedral field. 5A L = 2, S = 2
In an octahedral field the F triplet is the orbital ground state,
5
corresponding to the fact that d6 can be regarded as a single electron
outside a half-filled shell. We consider first the case of a purely octa-
hedral field, with no distortion. Under the influence of the spin-orbit
coupling, the orbital triplet with its fivefold spin degeneracy (S = 2),
breaks up into a triplet, quintet, and septet, as shown in Fig. 7.19(b).
The triplet is the lowest level, and its wave-functions in terms of \L, S)
functions are
in computing the Zeeman interaction within this triplet, we anticipate
that it will be necessary to allow for some covalent bonding by including
a reduction factor for the orbital moment. Since the F orbital wave-
5
functions take part only in vr-bonding, the appropriate factor is
k , making the Zeeman operator equal to k L+g S. Evaluation of the
vv vv 8
matrix elements within the triplet functions given in eqn (7.93) shows
that the (/-factor is isotropic and equal to J(3<7 +&mr)- (The phases of the
S
wave-functions in eqn (7.93) have been chosen to make the off-diagonal
components of the Zeeman operator positive, like the diagonal
components.)
These results can be obtained easily by using the fact that the F
5
triplet may be described by an effective angular momentum 1=1,
with a = — 1 (see § 7.5). Then the 'term5 with I = 1, S = 2 breaks up
through the spin-orbit coupling into states with effective angular
momenta J = 1, 2, and 3. Since the spin-orbit parameter A is negative
for d* we would have expected an inverted multiplet, but because
a = — 1 we in fact get a normal multiplet, with the triplet state lowest.
(The Zeeman splitting within each component of the multiplet can be
.described by means of an effective Lande factor, writing g = —k^in
l
• order to include both the factor a = — 1 and the reduction due to
covalency. The results are

--- Page 459 ---

444 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
In passing we note that the states whose real orbital angular momen-
tum component is specified by |+1), |2°), | — 1) must be identified in
terms of the fictitious angular momentum I as | —1), |0), ( + 1) respec-
tively. If we apply this change of nomenclature to eqns (7.93), we see
that each state \J ) is a mixture of states \l, S) such that for each
Z z z
3 = l +S , as is the case in the coupling of real angular momenta in
z z z
multiplet states.
We now consider the effect of off-diagonal elements of the spin-orbit
coupling, which admix some of the excited F states into the F states
3 5
(more exactly, since we shall allow for bonding effects, we should speak
of admixing some of the e-states into the t states). This will produce
2
downward shifts in the F (£ ) energy levels; in the case of J = 1 the
5 2
shift is the same for all three states so the triplet remains unsplit, but
in the cases of J = 2 and J = 3 there will be a splitting (to which the
spin-spin interaction may also be expected to contribute). As these
are excited states in which it is unlikely that resonance will be observed,
we shall not evaluate such splittings in detail, but note that (assuming
cubic symmetry) we expect the J = 2 state to split into a doublet
and a triplet, and the J = 3 state into two triplets and a singlet. (We
may also anticipate that such splittings can be represented by cubic
spin operators of the fourth degree.)
In addition to the energy shifts and splittings, there will be correc-
tions to the g values ~(A/A), where A is the energy of the excited
orbital doublet F . These arise from cross terms of the form
3
where one matrix element comes from the spin-orbit coupling and the
other from the orbital angular momentum. From Chapter 20 we find
that the matrix elements of the former involve the parameter (X k )
va va
instead of A, and for the latter we have Tc instead of unity, in order to
va
allow for bonding effects. Hence for the ground triplet, on evaluating
the matrix elements, we find the result
The paramagnetic resonance spectrum and also the optical spectrum
of the Fe2+ ion in MgO have been studied by Low and Weger (1960)
and others. The Rvalue of the ground triplet is found to be 3-428,
while A = 10000 cm-1. The value of A for the free Fe2+ ion is —100

--- Page 460 ---

; IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 445
cm"1, and if we make the approximation that (A /A) ~ k ~ k in
k ffcr vff ffff
s evaluating the small correction term of order A/A = 0-01, we find we
. must assume that k, = 0-80 ±0-02. The 0-value of Fe2+ in NaF with
v
. cubic symmetry (Hall, Hayes, Stevenson, and Wilkens 1963) has been
found to be 3-420, and although the size of the cubic field splitting in
this case is not known it is clear that the value of k must be about the
vv
same as in MgO.
The only stable isotope of iron with non-zero nuclear spin is 57Fe,
and a number of studies of hyperfine structure in the paramagnetic
state have been made using the Mossbauer effect. For Fe2+ in an
exactly octahedral field, the triplet electronic ground state J = 1 will
have a magnetic hyperfine interaction of the simple form
where
in which the three contributions come from the orbit, the core polariza-
tion, and the spin-dipolar interaction respectively.
Since the ground nuclear state of 57Fe is / = ^, it will have no nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction, but for the excited nuclear state
/ = f we have a term of the form given in eqn (18.50) with J = 1
where
On evaluating the matrix elements we find m == —n = +1/35. This
differs from the usual result for a free ion in that the latter has n = m;
this emphasizes the point that, since the sign of n depends on the
phases given to the wave-functions in (7.93), it is essential to choose
these so that the off-diagonal elements of J are consistent in sign with
those of L, S.
In relating the hyperfine Hamiltonian to the observed Mossbauer
spectrum, allowance must be made for the presence of small static
strains which broaden the resonance lines (see Ham 1967). The
quadrupole splitting disappears above 14°K, and Ham suggested this
arose from spin-lattice relaxation through an Orbach process (see

--- Page 461 ---

446 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
§ 10.4) involving an excited level at about 100 cm"1. A level at 105
cm"1 (Wong 1968) has been observed for Fe2+ in MgO, which is a good
deal lower than the value |2A| ^ 200 cm"1 expected from static crystal
field theory. This is ascribed to quenching of the spin-orbit coupling by
a dynamic Jahn-Teller effect (Ham, Schwarz, and O'Brien 1969); the
orbital momentum is not quenched so effectively in this case as it is for
Fe2+ in CaO (see §21.12), although covalent bonding is likely to be
smaller in the latter compound which has a larger interionic spacing.
7.14. 3d7. Fe+, Co2+, Ni3+ in an octahedral field. *F, L = 3,
8=i
For a d1 ion in an octahedral field the F triplet is lowest; this is
4
split by the spin-orbit coupling and, if the octahedron is distorted, by
crystal field terms of tetrahedral, trigonal, or lower symmetry. In most
hydrated salts the latter are comparable in magnitude with the spin-
orbit coupling, a problem that has been treated in some detail by
Abragam and Pryce (1951c). We shall restrict our discussion almost
entirely to the case of undistorted octahedral symmetry.
As shown in §14.2, the orbital triplet F formed from *F can be
4
assigned a fictitious angular momentum 1=1, with which must be
associated a value of a = —|. There is however a low lying 4P term
(some 14000 cm"1 higher in the free Co2+ ion), also arising from the d7
configuration, which is also a F state, and which is admixed to the 4J\
4
F state by an octahedral crystal field. The ground triplet will therefore
4
be of the form
for which the value of a is
In the presence of weak covalent bonding there will be a further reduc-
tion in the orbital moment, whose effect is allowed for by the introduc-
tion of a factor k. Thus the effective orbital (/-factor is g — afc.
v
On including the spin we have a twelvefold multiplicity in the
ground state, corresponding to I = 1, S = f. On introducing the
spin-orbit coupling this splits into a doublet, a quartet, and a sextet as
shown in Fig. 7.20(b), to which may be assigned fictitious angular
momenta J = \, f, and f respectively. The energy splittings are shown
in Fig. 20(b); the doublet J = ^ is lowest because within the orbital
triplet the effective spin-orbit parameter I, which is od apart from any
reduction due to covalent bonding, is positive because both a and A are

--- Page 462 ---

IN INTEKMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 447
negative. The energy matrices for the spin-orbit interaction, and the
transformation matrices which diagonalize them, are given in Table
7.18, where A' is the *F spin-orbit parameter modified by admixture of
the 4P state and any covalent bonding, but not including the factor
a = —f. The 3x3 matrices belong to the states J = ±4, the 2x2
z
matrices to the states J = ±f, and the 1x1 matrix to J = ±f. From
z z
the matrices we see that the states belonging to the ground doublet
are
Evaluation of the Zeeman effect within this doublet using the operator
(7il+(7S shows that it has the isotropic ^-factor
s
which for g — 2, g = —f becomes 4-33; these results agree with the
a l
simple calculation given in § 19.3.
Second-order effects arise from the matrix elements of the spin-orbit
coupling between F and F . They give rise to: (1) a depression in
4 5
energy of the F levels; (2) a splitting of the J = f sextet into a doublet
4
and a quartet; (3) a small change in the g-values, of which only this
last is important as far as resonance in the ground doublet is concerned.
If in evaluating the correction we neglect the admixture of 4P into the
4JFr, F triplet and assume that the F triplet lies an amount A higher in
4 5
energy than the ground doublet, we obtain
where X" and kf refer to the reduced values of the spin-orbit parameter
and orbital fc-factor appropriate to matrix elements between F and
4
r .
5
Endor measurements on 59Co2+ (/ = -J) in MgO give g = 4-280(2),
A = ( + )290-55(6) MHz, and g(I)lg = 1-39(1) (Fry and Llewellyn
T
1962). In an appendix to this paper Pryce gives the formulae (where
the sign of a has been reversed to agree with that adopted above)
where <5 is the energy of the J = f level, assumed to be ^305 cm"1
above the ground J = % doublet. The results are interpreted using the

--- Page 463 ---

TABLE 7.18
Matrices of spin-orbit coupling within *F, F , I = 1, S = f
4
Transformation Diagonal
Energy matrix matrix states Energy
ITI, ±t> |o, ±i> |±T, Ti>
SA' -3V(f)A' 0 Vi -Vi Vi l/-i,J.= ±t> W
-3V(f)A' 0 -3V(i)A' Vf VA -Vt% R = l,^=±i> W
0 -3V(i)A' fA' Vh VI Vf^ 0 |«7 = f,j, = ± j> _|A'
|±1, ±i> |0, ±t>
-fA' -3V(f)A' V* -VI k = f,J, = ±$> U'
-3V(f)A' 0 VI Vf \J = t,J.= ±i) -IA'
|±T, ±t>
I-IA1 1^ = 1,^, = ±f> -fA'

--- Page 464 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 449
values a = -1-406, g = k<* = -1-22, A = 8400 cm-1, Jc = k' = 0-82
l
and -15A"£'/2A = 0-160. The effective value of <7-3) is 5-12 a.u., which
is close to k times the Freeman and Watson value (Table 7.6), and
ic = 0-320.
The absence of any appreciable dynamic Jahn-Teller quenching of
the orbital momentum for this ion is discussed in § 21.12.
In conclusion, we digress a little to show why cobaltous salts
commonly show very high anisotropy. If the octahedron has a small
tetragonal or trigonal distortion, the effect is to add terms on the
diagonal of the energy matrices given in Table 7.18; identical matrices
are obtained for either type of distortion provided of course that the
basis functions are defined by taking the polar axis as a fourfold or
threefold axis of the octahedron respectively. The effect of the additional
terms is to split the quartet and sextet, so that J is no longer a good
quantum number, giving a number of Kramers doublets for which
3 = -j-i, -£-§-, -J--S-. Provided that the additional terms are small
z
compared with the spin-orbit coupling the ground doublet may be
written in the form
where a, and still more so 6, are small compared with unity. The
Zeeman operator has no matrix elements between J = J and J = f,
and to the approximation where terms of order a2, 62 are neglected we
have
showing that g\\+2g± ^ 5g—2g ^ 13. This relation is roughly
s l
obeyed by the results for a number of hydrated cobalt salts. The degree
of anisotropy is illustrated by taking a = 0-2; then for
we have g\ = 6-42, g = 3-27.
} L
7.15. 3d8. Co+, Ni2+, Cu3+ in an octahedral field. 3^, L = 3,
8 = 1
In an octahedral field the orbital F state splits in the same way as for
dz (Cr3+, etc.), with the singlet F lowest. The paramagnetic resonance
2
' spectrum is that expected for a spin triplet, but because the spin-orbit
coupling has the reverse sign from that for rf3, and is rather larger, the
gr-value is appreciably greater than the free spin value, being commonly
'in the range 2-15 to 2-35. In compounds such as the tutton salts, where
30

--- Page 465 ---

450 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
the symmetry is not exactly octahedral, the spin triplet is split through
the action of the non-cubic part of the crystal field and the spin-orbit
coupling; the effective spin Hamiltonian contains a term of the form
(S . D . S), where D may be of order of a few cm"1.
The simple crystal field theory follows very closely that for d3 in an
octahedral field, except that S = 1 instead of f, and the results for the
ground spin triplet can again be given in a form applicable to a distor-
tion of the octahedron with axial symmetry about either a tetragonal
or a trigonal axis. The spin-orbit coupling only couples the ground
orbital singlet F to the lower orbital triplet F , and using the same
2 5
nomenclature as in Table 7.13, the states and energies for the ground
spin triplet listed in Table 7.19 are obtained.
TABLE 7.19
States and energy levels for ground spin triplet state
(1*2, S = 1) for ds in a nearly octahedral crystal field,
with tetragonal or trigonal distortion. The F , l = ±1
5 z
orbital states are assumed to lie at an energy A! above F ,
2
and the F , l = 0 orbital state at an energy A ; they are
5 z 0
admixed through the spin-orbit coupling A(L . S)
giving
but there is a third-order correction to D of comparable size in
the case of a trigonal distortion (see 3d3, §7.10).
In this table it has been assumed that (^/A) is so small that quantities
of order (A/A)2 can be neglected. In this approximation the Zeeman
effect in the F spin triplet is characterized by formulae which are the
2
same as for d3:
If the symmetry is accurately cubic, then g\\ = g±. In practice

--- Page 466 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 451
anisotropy in g has rarely been detected even in cases of lower sym-
metry, presumably because sufficiently accurate measurements of g
are difficult to make when the spin triplet has an initial splitting of
appreciable magnitude. For the tutton salts (Griffiths and Owen
1952a) the average value of g is close to 2-25, while the value of A for
the [Ni(H 0) ]2+ complex in solution is found from optical absorption
2 6
to be about 8400 cm"1; this leads to an apparent value of X of about
—270 cm"1 (see Owen 1955), which is noticeably smaller than the free
ion value. The discrepancy is attributed to bonding effects.
As in the case of d3, the splitting of the triplet states is really of third
order A2(A —A)/A2, and in the trigonal case there may be other
X 0
contributions of the same order (see § 7.10), which should be included
in any comparison of the observed value of D with the difference
between W±i and W as listed in Table 7.19. In practice no such com-
0
parisons have been made except in A1 0 (see below), and even here the
2 3
splitting of the excited states has not been measured. The observed
values of D for trigonal compounds of M2+ vary widely. In
Zn La (N0 ) , 24H 0 there are two types of sites in which Ni2+ ions
3 2 3 12 2
can replace Zn2+; in one of these D is about +0-05 cm."1, in the other
about —2-2 cm"1 (Culvahouse 1962). D also varies with temperature,
a conspicuous example being NiSiF , 6H 0, where it falls from —0-5
6 2
cm"1 at room temperature to —0-12 cm-1 at 20°K and below (see
Penrose and Stevens 1950). The value of D has also been measured as a
function of pressure (Walsh and Bloembergen 1957), and of uniaxial
stress (Walsh 1958).
The most detailed studies of ds ions in a trigonal field have been
made using A1 0 as a host lattice; the results are given in Table 7.20.
2 3
The crystal field splitting for Cu3+ is found from the optical absorption,
and is over twice as large as that estimated for Ni2+ in the same lattice.
This partly accounts for the g-values of Cu3+ being much closer to the
free spin values than those of Ni2+, but from eqns (7.106) for the g-value
(ignoring the small anisotropy) Blumberg, Eisinger, and Geschwind
(1963) find that the effective values of the spin-orbit coupling parameter
A need to be taken as —214 cm^1 and —240 cm."1 for Cu3+ and M2+
respectively, which amount only to about 50 and 75 per cent respec-
tively of the free ion values. As in the case of Cr3+ in A1 0 , the
2 3
anisotropy of the g-values and the value of D are difficult to explain on
. the simple theory given above; in particular they appear to require a
sign for the trigonal field splitting (A —A) of the F triplet different
0 x 5
from that observed for other ions in A1 O .
2 3

--- Page 467 ---

452 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
TABLE 7.20
Data for 3d8, Cu3+ and Ni2+ in A1 0 , fitted to the spin Hamiltonian
2 3
(7.1) with 8 = 1
Cu3+ Ni2+
A = WDq 21000cm-1 10000 cm-1(a)
2-0788(5) 2-1948(10)
*\\
g 2-0772(5) 2-1853(10)
±
9 \\—9± 0-0016 0-0095
D —0-1884 cm-1 -1-312 cm-1
A^ («Cu) -192-947(1) MHz (61Ni) ( + )36-767(2) MHz
(65Cu) -206-679(1) MHz
A (63Cu) -180-10(5) MHz (61Ni) (+)32-55(4)MHz
±
(65Cu) -192-92(5) MHz
PH (63Cu) -0-042(1) MHz (61Ni) -0-170(2) MHz
(«Cu) -0-036(1) MHz
Notes, (a) Estimated by comparison with MgO:Ni2+.
References
Cu3+. Blumberg, Eisinger, and Geschwind (1963).
Ni2+. Marshall, Kikuchi, and Reinberg (1962); Locher and Geschwind (1963).
Endor measurements have been made to determine accurately the
hyperfine constants of the stable isotopes 63Cu, 65Cu, and 61Ni (in the
last case considerably enhanced in abundance above the natural value
of 1-25 per cent). Each of these isotopes has spin / = |, and the
anisotropic values of the magnetic hyperfine constants (A^ and A )
L
and the quadrupole interaction parameter P\\ (= ie2qQ for / = f) are
given in Table 7.20. Comparison of the ratio of the values of A\\ for
the two isotopes of copper with the known nuclear moment ratio gives
a hyperfine anomaly of about 0-015 per cent, very close to that found
in atomic beam experiments for the 4s state of unionized copper. This
suggests that the main contribution to the magnetic hyperfine structure
comes from s-electrons through the core-polarization effect, the
d-electron contribution being rather small. The latter would be expected
because the electron density distribution in the F state has almost
2
cubic symmetry, so that the spin density would give zero magnetic
field at the centre, and the orbital momentum in a pure F state is
2
quenched. The residual orbital momentum due to the admixture of the
F states produces a field at the nucleus which cannot be neglected,
5
however, being positive and in the case of M2+ about twice as large as
the observed field, which is negative. The various contributions to the
magnetic hyperfine structure are summarized in Table 7.21 for Cu3+,

--- Page 468 ---

TABLE 7.21
Hyperfine fields for 3d* ions, from Locher and Geschwind (1963) and ref. (d)
Hyperfine field at nucleus
(kG)
Calculated
H || or _L
to c-axis Measured Spin Core
3d8-ion Compound of A1 2 O 3 A# = g— g B <x r-3> 'a (c . ) u. total Orbit dipolar polarization
Co+(a) MgO 0-1705 5-35 (-)160 (1) + 114 «*0 -274
Co+(d) CaO 0-2720 5-35 (-)93 (1) + 182 f&O — 276
Ni2+(a> MgO 0-2122 7-09 (-)63 (3) + 188 ^0 -251
Ni2+(d) CaO 0-327 — — — —
M2+ A1 0 11 0-1925 7-09 -96-8 + 171 -12 -256
2 3
Ni2+ A10 _L 0-1830 7-09 -85-7 + 162 + 6 -254
2 3
Cu3 + (b> A1 2 0 3 || 0-0765 9-02 -171-0 + 86 -8 -249
Cu3+<b) A1 2 0 3 J_ 0-0749 9-02 -159-6 + 84 +4 -248
The (—) sign indicates that the sign is assumed, not measured.
(a) Orton, Auzins, and Wertz (19606); Orton, Auzins, Griffiths, and Wertz (1961).
(b) Blumberg, Eisinger, and Geschwind (1963).
(c) Free ion values, from Freeman and Watson (1965); see Table 7.6.
(d) Low and Suss (1965).

--- Page 469 ---

454 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
Ni2+, and Co+, and it will be seen that the estimated core polarization
contribution is remarkably constant.
The Endor line widths observed in these experiments were of order
20 and 60 kHz, but the e.s.r. spectrum line width was 180 and 20 G (in
each case for Ni2+ and Cu3+ respectively). The width in the latter case
is ascribed to inhomogeneity in the value of D, and Locher and
Geschwind (1963) were able to show (see §4.10) by measuring the
Endor frequency as a function of position in the microwave line that
the variation in D also entailed a variation in the orbital contribution
to the (/-value and hence in the orbital contribution to the hyperfine
field. Similar large line widths have been observed for ds ions in cubic
fields (e.g. in MgO and CaO), where D should be zero, and attributed
to local departures from cubic symmetry. As pointed out by Orton,
Auzins, Griffiths, and Wertz (1961) this interpretation, which assumes
a distribution of zero field splittings centred upon zero, is supported by
two pieces of evidence.
(1) A resonance line is observed at approximately half the field of the
main line, whose shape is asymmetrical, with a sharp cut-off on the
high-field side and a much more gradual tail on the low-field side. This
line corresponds to single quantum transitions between the | +1} and
| —1} levels, whose spacing is just 2g/3H in energy and independent of
D in first order, unlike the main line whose frequency depends directly
on D (cf. eqns (3.28)). The transition probability for the half-field line
is zero in an exactly cubic field, and any departure from cubic symmetry
moves the half-field line to lower fields, thus accounting for the sharp
cut-off on the high-field side. These features of the half-field line are
similar to those observed for non-Kramers doublets (see §3.14 or
§ 18.5).
(2) A much more striking feature is the occurrence of a single sharp
line (divided into 27 +1 sharp lines if a hyperfine structure is present)
at the centre of the broad main line. This is attributed to a 'two-
quantum' transition, which can only be observed in a three-level system
if the three levels are nearly equally separated. The latter occurs in a
cubic field, so that the two-quantum transition is confined to those ions
for which the departure from cubic symmetry is virtually zero, and the
line width is correspondingly narrower. The rather precise values of g
and the hyperfine constant A for ions in MgO and CaO in Table 7.21
have each been obtained from the e.s.r. spectrum using the precision
available through these two-quantum transitions. Orton, Auzins, and
Wertz (19606) have shown that such two-quantum transitions can be

--- Page 470 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 455
observed for Ni2+ in MgO using two separate frequencies, which implies
that the level spacings differ through the existence of a zero-field
splitting. They have also shown (Orton, Auzins, Griffiths, and Wertz
1961) that the intensity of absorption falls off with increasing difference
between the two applied frequencies at a rate consistent with the
observed shape of the broad (single-quantum transition) main line.
7.16. 3d9. Ni+, Cu2+ in an octahedral field. 2Z>, L = 2, 8 = \
In an octahedral field the orbital D state splits into a F doublet and
3
a F triplet, the former being the lower. The pattern for d9 is thus
5
inverted from that for d1, corresponding to the fact that we are now
dealing with a hole in a closed shell rather than an electron. The F
3
doublet is not split by a trigonal distortion, resulting in some unusual
properties which will be discussed after we have considered the case of
a tetragonal distortion, which does split the F orbital doublet. If the
3
second-degree tetragonal field has the same sign as the fourth-degree
field (i.e. B^B^ > 0) the sign of the second-degree field determines
which of the two orbital states, |2S) or |0), will be the lower, as can be
seen from Fig. 7.3. If the two orbital states are well separated, the
lower singlet with its twofold spin degeneracy will behave in a first
approximation like a spin doublet. However the spin-orbit coupling
mixes some of the F states into the ground state, making the g-values
5
depart from the free spin value and introducing some anisotropy. In
Table 7.22 the formulae given are correct to order (A/A), where A is the
spin-orbit parameter and A is mainly determined by the cubic field
splitting; in most cases (A/A) is of order —0-1, or less, —0-05 being a
typical value. The formulae in Table 7.22 are given for both of the
possible ground states, \2S) and |0); the parameters are those for the
spin Hamiltonian (with S = J, and / = f for each of the stable
isotopes 63, 65)
Formulae to the next order (A/ A)2, for the more general case of a rhombic
distortion which admixes the |2S) and |0) orbital states, are given
in Bleaney, Bowers, and Pryce (1955), from which the formulae in
this table can be obtained as special cases. With a typical value of
(A/A) ~ —0-05, corrections <^(A/A)2 are small but not negligible.
Apart from a few salts with trigonal symmetry, the majority of the

--- Page 471 ---

456 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
TABLE 7.22
Formulae for ground state of d9 in octahedral field with tetragonal
distortion
(a) Ground state \ 2*>, with twofold spin degeneracy. The states | + >, | — > are
The orbital states |2«>, |2°>, |+1>, | -1>, |0> are those shown in Fig. 7.25.
A is the energy by which |2°> lies above |2*>, and AI the energy by which the
0
| ±1> states lie above |2S>.
(b) Ground state |0), with twofold spin degeneracy. The states | +)' | —> are
A is the energy by which the | ±1) states lie above |0).
2
hydrated salts of copper contain a [Cu(H 0) ]2+ complex with a distor-
2 6
tion of tetragonal or somewhat lower symmetry in which typical
g- values are g\\ ~ 2-4, g ~ 2-1. This shows that in a tetragonal approxi-
±
mation, the orbital ground state must be |2S>. In aqueous solution the
optical absorption spectrum of the cupric ion shows one broad peak at

--- Page 472 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 457
FIG. 7.25. Orbital energy levels and states for a dg ion in a crystal field of octahedral
symmetry with a tetragonal distortion.
about 12300 cm"1 (Dreisch and Trommer 1937), which may be inter-
preted as arising from transitions from the ground orbital state to the
F triplet. If this value is taken as the mean value of A , A! then the
5 0
observed g-values can be fitted if X is assigned a value of about —710
cm"1 (see Bleaney, Bowers, and Pryce 1955), which is considerably
smaller than the free ion value of about —830 cm"1. The difference is
ascribed to bonding effects.
The hyperfine structure of copper is of interest as being the first to be
discovered in the solid state by the method of electron paramagnetic
resonance. In a diluted tutton salt Penrose (1949) found that the four-
line hyperfine structure was markedly anisotropic, being a maximum
when the external field was directed along the axis in which the g-value
was a maximum (i.e. the parallel direction for a |2S) ground orbital
state). It was pointed out by Abragam and Pryce (1949) that this
anisotropy was in the reverse direction from that predicted by a first-
order calculation of the contributions from electron spin and orbit. The
latter is almost 'quenched5 and contributes amounts proportional to
(<7l|—2) and (g±—2) in the parallel and perpendicular directions
respectively. With the same factor of proportionality, the spin-dipolar
contributions are —f- and +f respectively, so that the spin and orbital
contributions oppose one another in the parallel direction, and add in

--- Page 473 ---

458 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
the perpendicular direction. This discrepancy between theory and
experiment was overcome (Abragam 1950, Abragam and Pryce 19516)
where the importance of the unpaired spin density at the nucleus was
pointed out; this effect is represented by the additional parameter K
which occurs in the formulae for A\\ and A given in Table 7.22. The
L
small terms of order (A/A) in these formulae are partly due to the
residual orbital contribution, and partly to the modification of the spin
contribution through the admixture of other states by the spin-orbit
coupling, which alters the shape of the electron distribution in the
ground state.
In the expressions for the magnetic hyperfine structure the small
terms involving (A/A) can be evaluated from measurements of the
g-values. Measurements of the values of A \\ and A can then be regarded
L
as determining two unknowns, (r~3) and the core polarization param-
eter /c, since g is known accurately from nuclear magnetic resonance
n
in diamagnetic cuprous salts. From the spectrum of the Cu2+ ion in
La Mg (N0 ) ,24D 0 (which is discussed further below) Bleaney,
2 3 3 12 2
Bowers, and Pryce (1955) obtained the values 0-32 for K (with slightly
5
smaller values for other salts), and 6-3 a.u. for (r~3). These give a value
of — 250 kG for the core polarization field per unit of electron spin,
which is very close to that found for other neighbouring ions of the 3d
group (see Table 7.21). The value of (r~3) is rather smaller than that of
7-5 a.u. estimated for the free cupric ion; the diminution (which is of
the same order as that in A) is again attributed to bonding effects.
The electron magnetic resonance spectrum of the cupric ion is also
noteworthy as the first example in which an effect due to the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction was observed (Ingram 1949). This has
been analyzed in some detail (see, in particular, Bleaney, Bowers, and
Ingram (1955) and Bleaney, Bowers, and Trenam (1955)), and the
value of P| | in both tutton salts and lanthanum magnesium nitrate is
found to be about 0-0011 cm"1 or 33 MHz (this is a mean value for the
two isotopes 63, 65, which differ only by 8 per cent). Values of the nuclear
electric quadrupole moments of — 0-15 and — 0-14 barns have been
9 7
estimated (see Bleaney, Bowers, and Pryce 1955) for the isotopes 63
and 65 respectively, using the same value of 6-3 a.u. for (r~z) as that
deduced from the magnetic hyperfine structure. The spin Hamiltonian
parameters for Cu2+ in La Mg (N03) , 24H 0 (or D 0), including some
2 3 12 2 2
later and more accurate values, are listed in Table 7.23.
The d9 ion in an octahedral field with a small trigonal distortion (or
no distortion) is of particular interest because the two ground orbital

--- Page 474 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 459
TABLE 7.23
Measured parameters for Cu2+ in La Mg (N03) ,
2 3 12
24D 0. The hyperfine constants are weighted
2
mean values for the two stable isotopes 63Cu, 65Cu,
The data at 90°K are from Bleaney, Bowers, and
Trenam (1955); those at 20°K are from Breen,
Krupka, and Williams (1969)
Hyperfine constants
Temperature (/-values (in units of 10~4 cm"1)
levels of the F doublet are not split (see Fig. 7.4) by the ligand field.
3
In addition the spin-orbit coupling has no matrix elements within the
doublet, even when the twofold spin degeneracy is included, and a
magnetic field has no matrix elements between the two orbital states.
Thus the ground state of a d9 ion in a trigonal field has a fourfold
degeneracy of an unusual kind. As we have seen above, a distortion of
tetragonal or rhombic (or lower) symmetry will split the orbital
doublet, and the system is peculiarly susceptible to strain. We should
not therefore be surprised to observe a spectrum appropriate to an
effective spin of | with anisotropic g-values and hyperfine structure
corresponding to some symmetry lower than trigonal. If there is little
or no strain, we may expect a static or dynamic Jahn-Teller effect;
the theory of this is rather complex (see §§ 21.3 to 21.8). We shall give
below only a rather over-simplified presentation in an effort to interpret
the observed spectra.
Experimentally the spectrum of a salt containing a d9 ion in a site
of trigonal symmetry generally has the following characteristics (the
parameters are appropriate to the Cu2+ ion):
(a) at high temperatures the spectrum is isotropic, with a gr-value of
about 2-2 and a rather small magnetic hyperfine structure
(|J.| & 0-002 cm"1), and no observable quadrupole splitting;
(b) as the temperature is lowered a transition region sets in where
the nature of the spectrum changes with temperature reversibly.
The temperature region in which this occurs varies from salt to
salt, being between 20°K and 60°K for the diluted salts

--- Page 475 ---

460 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
(Cu,Mg)SiF ,6H 0 and (Cu,Mg) Bi (N0 ) ,24H 0, and between
6 2 3 2 3 12 2
20°K and 12°K in (Cu, Zn)(Br0 ) ,6H 0 (in all of which trigonal
3 2 2
symmetry at the Cu2+ site would be expected), and below 4°K
in (Cu, Mg)0 (where the symmetry should be cubic);
(c) at still lower temperatures (except in MgO) three spectra are
observed with anisotropic g-values, magnetic hyperfine structure,
and a nuclear electric quadrupole interaction typical of an ion
subject to a tetragonal distortion from octahedral symmetry
(<7n ~ 2-4, <7 ^2-1; A^ ~ 0-01 cm"1 with a smaller value of
±
0-001 to 0-003 cm-1 for A \ P ~ 0-001 cm."1), of such a sign
L (|
that the ground state is the |2S) orbital singlet (see Fig. 7.25).
The three spectra have axial symmetry about each of the
three mutually perpendicular fourfold axes of the XY complex.
Q
Attention was first drawn by Van Vleck (1939) to the peculiar
features which might be expected for a d9 ion in a crystal field of
octahedral symmetry with a trigonal distortion as a result of the
Jahn-Teller effect. The F orbital states |2S) and |0) may be written in
3
the form \x2— y*} and |3z2— r2}, and it can be shown that they are
sensitive to distortions of the octahedron with similar symmetry, i.e.
to distortions of the type associated with the two normal modes of
vibration Q and Q defined by Fig. 7.26. If the calculation of the
2 3
Jahn-Teller effect is carried only to the second order (i.e. to order Q2),
it is found that the kinetic energy depends on Q\+Q\, and not on the
ratio of Q to Q so that there are an infinite number of possible
2 3)
displacements which will yield the same energy. If we write (see eqn
(21.15))
then the kinetic energy is independent of </>, and is proportional to p2.
FIG. 7.26. The two normal vibrations of an octahedron that take part in the Jahn-
Teller distortion for a d9 ion. If Cartesian axes are taken through the ligands at the
vertices of the octahedron, and if X is the outwards displacement of a ligand on the
positive or negative #-axis and so on, then Q and Q are defined by
2 3
if all the other normal coordinates are zero. (After O'Brien, 1964.)

--- Page 476 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 461
Since the 'potential energy' associated with the coupling between the
magnetic electrons and the ligand nuclei depends (in a first approxi-
mation) linearly on p, there is a minimum energy known as the Jahn-
Teller energy W (see § 21.4) whose locus is a circle in the Q , Q plane.
JT 2 3
The corresponding eigenstates are
which is the ground state for Cu2+, together with the orthogonal
excited state
which lies higher in energy by 4J^ .
T
A given value of </> corresponds in general to a rhombic distortion
whose principal #-values are, to order A/A and neglecting the dif-
ference between the various values of A in Fig. 7.25,
The directions of g g , g% are the three mutually perpendicular fourfold
l9 2
axes of the XY complex. Tetragonal distortions are included as special
6
cases; thus values of <f> = 0, 277/3, 477/3 correspond to tetragonal
distortions about each of the three tetragonal axes in which the complex
is elongated along the tetragonal axis, and values of </> = 77, 577/3, 77/3
to similar distortions in which the complex is compressed along each of
the three tetragonal axes. Since all values of cf> give the same energy, and
are equally probable, the complex moves continuously through the
whole range of distortions corresponding to all values of (/>. Since
the vibrational frequency (of order 1013 Hz) is large compared with the
frequency at which spin resonance is observed (of order 1010 Hz), only
time average values are observed. Setting
in eqns (7.110), one obtains the result
which corresponds to the experimental observation in the high tempera-
ture spectrum (Abragam and Pryce 1950). This result can also be
written in the form

--- Page 477 ---

462 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
showing that the g-value in the high temperature spectrum is just the
average of those appropriate to tetragonal distortions of opposite sign,
as can be verified from Table 7.22 on putting A = A = A = A.
0 t 2
Similarly one finds
and
which give an isotropic value of
to order (A/ A), and P\\ = 0. These two results correspond to what would
be expected in cubic symmetry, where the electric field gradient at the
nucleus vanishes, as also does the magnetic field at the nucleus due to
the electron spin apart from the core-polarization contribution (the
term in A/ A is here due entirely to the residual orbital contribution).
It will be seen also that these values of g, A satisfy the relations
g = i(gr 11+20^), A = %(A\\+2A ) for either of the ground states in
±
Table 7.22; a comparison with experiment is given in Table 7.23.
Though this theory apparently gives a satisfactory explanation of the
high temperature spectrum, it does not account for the changes
observed at lower temperatures. Also, the result that the energy is
independent of the value of <$> holds only to the second degree in Q, and
corresponds to complete axial symmetry whereas we have only three-
fold symmetry. Opik and Pryce (1957) showed that on expanding the
energy in a Taylor's series in the distortions, a term varying as cos 3^
is obtained, whose coefficient is plausibly expected to be negative for a
complex such as [Cu(H 0) ]2+. The states of lowest energy are then
2 6
those for which <f> = 0, 2?r/3, 4?r/3 corresponding to the stable state
being one in which the octahedron suffers an elongation of tetragonal
symmetry, about one of the fourfold axes. This is clearly the position
observed in the low temperature spectrum, and corresponds to a
'static' Jahn-Teller effect.
Even at 0°K the picture we have drawn is an over- simplification for
three reasons: tunnelling between the three potential wells; zero point
energy of vibration within a well; and the effects of strain. Of these, the
first two are features of the 'dynamic' Jahn-Teller effect; the third
results from imperfections within the crystal, and has the drawback
that it obscures the effects in the magnetic resonance spectrum which
might be expected from the tunnelling mechanism.

--- Page 478 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 463
In such a triple potential well, vibrational states in each well are
mutually orthogonal and have the same energy only if the potential
barrier is infinitely high. With a finite potential barrier the quantum-
mechanical tunnelling effect lifts the degeneracy, giving (on including
the twofold spin degeneracy) a ground quartet (F ) and an excited
8
doublet with a separation in zero magnetic field which is small in the
ground state but large in excited vibrational states. When a magnetic
field is applied, the magnetic resonance spectrum will be rather complex,
except in the limiting cases where the splitting due to tunnelling is
either very small or very large compared with the difference in Zeeman
energy (g\\—g )/3H, where g\\ and g are the principal ^-values appro-
± L
priate to a static tetragonal distortion. In the former case the spectrum
should be similar to that of an assembly of complexes with static
tetragonal distortions where the axes are distributed randomly
between the three fourfold axes of the octahedron. However, some
extra lines should be observable when the magnetic field is not along
the threefold or any of the fourfold axes; careful measurements by
Breen, Krupka, and Williams (1969) reveal no such effects for Cu2+ in
lanthanum magnesium nitrate, and it is probable that the tetragonal
distortions are stabilized by strains. This will be the dominant effect if
the strain energy is large compared with the energy splitting due to
tunnelling.
The effect of zero-point motion within a potential well means that
the angle <£ is not localized at the points 0, 277/3, 477/3 (or 77, 677/8, 777/3)
but oscillates about these mean values. If the electronic state is
assumed to have the form given in eqn (7.109a),
cos |<£ \x2-y2)+ sin %<f> |3z2-r2),
where <f> is a function of time because the distortion that couples the
states is an oscillating one, then the mean value of </> may be (for
example) zero, when the equilibrium position is at <f> = 0, but it will
have a mean square value that is not zero. As in the explanation given
earlier for the high temperature spectrum, the observed (/-values and
other constants will be the time averages, since the vibrational
frequency (in this case of the zero point motion) is large compared with
the electron spin resonance frequency. Since (cos J<£ sin f <£} = 0, the
observed constants will be
with a similar expression for P.

--- Page 479 ---

464 IONS OF THE 3d GKOUP
The presentation of the Jahn—Teller effect given above is based
mainly on the work of O'Brien (1964). This paper gives also an explana-
tion of some effects observed in the spectrum of the Ni+ ion in LiF by
Hayes and Wilkens (1964). The impurity ion enters the lattice as Ni2+;
after irradiation Ni+ ions are formed and occupy cubic lattice sites,
substituting for Li+ in LiF (and for Na+ in NaF). Thus the Ni+ ion with
its d9 configuration is situated at the centre of a regular octahedron of
six F~ ions, on a site of cubic symmetry. In fact a number of spectra are
observed, depending on the conditions of irradiation and the tempera-
ture ; the majority of these show tetragonal symmetry, but with 0-values
corresponding to distortions of either sign. Typical results in LiF are
(a) £,,, 2-53 to 2-62; g±, 2-10 to 2-11;
(b) gr , 2-06 to 2-08; g & 2-35.
|( ±
The orbital contributions to the (/-values are larger than for most
cupric salts because the cubic field splitting is smaller (A = WDq is
estimated as 6200 cm"1 for Ni+ in LiF and 5500 cm"1 in NaF). The
spectra characterized by the gr-values in (a) clearly belong to the orbital
state |2S) = (\x2— y*)) while those in (b) are attributed to the orbital
state |0) = (|3z2 —r2)). However the observed value of g\\ in the latter
case is greater than 2, while theory gives just 2 to order (A/A) and
somewhat less than 2 to order (A/A)2, as can be seen from Table 7.22(b)
on introducing the factors (1+3A2/2A2)~^ required to normalize the
states. The experimental result can be explained on the basis of zero-
point motion in the Jahn-Teller effect, since the observed g-values will
then be given by eqn (7.116). By taking
(cos2^) = 0-10, (sin2^) = 0-90
this gives g\\ = 2-05, g = 2-36 instead of the values g\\ = 1-98,
±
g = 2-42 which would be obtained with no vibrational admixture.
L
Rather similar but less detailed results are obtained for Ni+ in NaF; in
this case an isotropic spectrum was also observed above 130°K,
associated with one of the anisotropic spectra.
Since nickel consists almost entirely of isotopes with no nuclear spin,
no hyperfine structure due to the nickel nucleus is observed in these
experiments, and this makes it easier to observe and measure the
hyperfine structure due to the fluorine ligands. As shown in Chapter 20
(see also Fig. 7.17), the |3z2 — r2) orbital bonds to all six ligands in
octahedral symmetry (though not in equal amounts), while the
\x2—y2) orbital can bond only to the four ligands along the x-, ?/-axes,

--- Page 480 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 465
apart from a weak interaction with the two ligands on the z-axis which
arises from the admixture of 7r-bonding (t ) states through the spin-
2g
orbit coupling. Thus with a static tetragonal distortion which makes
\x2—y2) the ground state only a very small hyperfine structure due to
the ligands on the z-axis should be observed, apart from simple dipolar
interaction. However the effect of the zero point motion in the Jahn-
Teller effect is to admix the \x2— y2) and |3z2 — r2} states, so that some
bonding with all six ligands becomes possible. This is observed in the
experiments of Hayes and Wilkens (1964).
We now return briefly to the high temperature spectrum. As the
temperature rises, excited vibrational states become occupied which
should have different magnetic resonance spectra because of their much
larger splittings due to tunnelling. The rise in temperature, however,
also results in a rapid increase in the rate at which transitions between
the various vibronic levels are induced by the phonon spectrum. These
may be accompanied by spin-flips in the ground state, and Breen
Krupka, and Williams (1969) have found that the spin-lattice relaxa-
tion time at helium temperatures is some four orders of magnitude
faster for Cu2+ in lanthanum magnesium nitrate than in tutton salts
where the ligand field has tetragonal or lower symmetry. This result has
been related by Williams, Krupka, and Breen (1969) to the rate (1/r)
at which relaxation occurs between equivalent distortions without
re-orientation of the electron spin. The latter is comparable in its
effect on the magnetic resonance spectrum with motion of the nuclei in
a nuclear magnetic resonance. If the relaxation rate is fast compared
with the frequency difference between resonance lines from the different
states, these lines disappear and are replaced by a single line at the
average frequency. It is probable (see §§ 21.7, 21.8) that such motional
narrowing is responsible for the single isotropic line observed at high
temperatures. It means that the resonance lines from the different
levels will be replaced by a single line with a g-value equal to the mean
of all the ^-values, as in the original theory of Abragam and Pryce
outlined earlier in this section.
In the absence of other forms of broadening, the width of this
averaged line should be approximately equal to T{(g\\—g )f}Hlh}*,
L
where r is the relaxation time for phonon-induced transitions between
equivalent distortions without re-orientation of the electron spin. If a
hyperfine structure is present, the width of each hyperfine line under
such conditions should be, in frequency,
31

--- Page 481 ---

466 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
FIG. 7.27. Derivative of the Cu2+ spectrum in MgO at 77°K, showing decrease in width,
and consequent increase in amplitude, of the hyperfine components towards higher
magnetic field. (Orton, Auzins, Griffiths and Wertz (1961); see also Coffman (1968a).)
showing that the line width should depend on the nuclear magnetic
quantum number m. An effect of this kind has been observed by Orton,
Auzins, Griffiths, and Wertz (1961) in the spectrum of Cu2+ in MgO, as
shown in Fig. 7.27; as pointed out by these authors, similar observa-
tions have been reported for Cu2+ ions in solution (McGarvey 1956), for
which an explanation was proposed by McConnell (1956) on the basis
of a rapid tumbling motion that in many ways resembles the Jahn-
Teller effect, A feature of the spectra of both Cu2+ and the isoelectronic
ion Ni+ in MgO is that the isotropic spectrum persists down to 4°K,
but at 1-2°K is replaced by an anisotropic spectrum; thus in these cases
the transition occurs at an unusually low temperature. Details of the
spectra of Cu2+ in MgO and CaO at 1*2°K, which are quite different from
those discussed above, are given in papers by Coffman (1968) and
.Coffman, Lyle, and Mattison (1968); the results are briefly discussed
in §21.8.

--- Page 482 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 467
7.17. 3d ions in tetrahedral symmetry
Under the title of 'tetrahedral' symmetry (fourfold coordination)
we include 'cubic' symmetry (eightfold coordination). In the latter case
we have a cage of eight ligand ions at the corners of a regular cube, with
the paramagnetic ion at the body centre of the cube (cf. Fig. 5.3); in
tetrahedral symmetry ligand ions at alternate corners are missing, so
that the ligands consist of four ions in a regular tetrahedron. The host
lattices of these types for the transition ions most studied are
(i) the cubic zinc blende structure, space group T%, in which each
dipositive ion is surrounded by four dinegative ions in a regular
tetrahedron. The lattice constant increases with atomic number
of either cation or anion, as shown in Table 7.24;
(ii) the wurtzite structure, with space group C\ , which is similar
v
to the preceding class except that the tetrahedron is distorted
but retains trigonal symmetry (C point group) about a line
Sv
joining the paramagnetic ion to one of the four ligand ions;
some typical crystals are also listed in Table 7.24;
TABLE 7.24
Space group and lattice constants of various compounds used
as host lattices for paramagnetic ions in fourfold and eight-
fold coordination
Space Host Lattice constant
Type group lattice c (nm) a (nm)
Cubic Tl ZnS(£) 0-543
(fourfold ZnSe 0-565
coordination) ZnTe 0-607
CdO 0-469
CdS(/5) 0-582
CdTe 0-641
Cubic O\ CaF 0-545
2
(eightfold SrF 0-586
2
coordination) BaF 0-618
2
Hexagonal (7j BeO 0-439 0-270
v
(fourfold ZnO 0-519 0-324
coordination) ZnS(oc) 0-628 0-384
CdS(a) 0-672 0-414
CdSe 0-702 0-430
Tetragonal /4/wcm CoCsCl 1-455 0-922
3 5
(fourfold CoCsBr 1-516 0-962
3 5
coordination)
Tetragonal ^4j/a CaWO 1-138 0-524
4
(eightfold SrWO 1-190 0-540
4
coordination)

--- Page 483 ---

468 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
(iii) the fluorite structure CaF , etc., 0^, in which the Ca2+ ion is
2
eightfold coordinated to the cube of F~ ions (see also § 5.1).
Distorted tetrahedral/cubic sites occur in spinels, garnets and in
crystals isomorphous with CaW0 (see also §5.1); in the last
4
case the distortion is tetragonal, as is also true for crystals of the
type CoCs Cl .
3 5
On a point charge model (see eqns (16.15)-(16.17)) the size of the
cubic field potential of the fourth degree is — f for eightfold coordina-
tion and — f for fourfold coordination of that for octahedral coordina-
tion to six ligand ions of the same charge and at the same distance from
the paramagnetic ion. On this basis we would expect a cubic splitting
10Dq of opposite sign to that discussed previously in this chapter, and
noticeably smaller in numerical value for tetrahedral coordination;
this is confirmed by a number of optical measurements (see Table 7.25).
TABLE 7.25
Values of the, cubic splitting parameter Dq (in cm"1) for some
3dn ions in tetrahedral coordination. The values are those
quoted by Slack, Ham, and Chrenko (1966) and have been
deduced from optical measurements, except that the last figure
for Cu2+ in ZnO is from Dietz, Kamimura, Sturge, and
Yariv (1963). Typical anion-cation distances are 0-189 nm
in ZnO, 0-252 nm in CdS, 0-236 nm in CaF ; these distances
2
are <\/(3)/4 times the lattice constant of the cubic crystals listed
in Table 7.24
Ion Host lattice ZnO ZnS CdTe MgAl 2 O 4
3d6 Fe2+ -340 -248 -447
3d7 Co2+ -390 -340 -400
3d8 Ni2+ -405
-420
3d9 Cu2+ -480
-500
-570
The important result of the change in sign of 10Dq compared with
octahedral coordination is the inversion of the splitting of the orbital
levels, which means that the pattern for dn in tetrahedral coordination
is the same as that for c?10~n in octahedral coordination. However we
cannot take over the results obtained previously for octahedral
compounds completely, because the sign of the spin-orbit parameter X
is also opposite for dw~n to that for dn. This is most important in triplet
orbital ground states, where the splitting into J states is inverted (see

--- Page 484 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 469
Figs. 7.19, 7.20); in orbital singlet states the orbital contribution to the
g- value will be of opposite sign. The smaller overall cubic splitting
makes the use of LS- coupling less of an approximation in crystal field
theory, but it results in larger second-order splittings (< — >)i2/10Dq) in
ground states, and in larger departures (<^A/10Z)g) in the ^-values
from the values given by first-order theory.
A detailed discussion of each ion on the lines of that for octahedral
symmetry in §§ 7.8-7.16 will not be attempted here. Instead we give
just a brief resume, with a reference to a typical result (usually for
undistorted tetrahedral/ cubic symmetry) where available.
3d1, 2D; lowest orbital level, doublet F ; S = \
3
Sc2+ in CaF , SrF (Hochli and Estle 1967) shows a dynamic Jahn-
2 2
Teller effect (cf. Cu2+ in octahedral symmetry) that is discussed in
§21.8.
3d2, ZF; lowest orbital level, singlet F ; S = 1
2
A narrow double quantum line is observed (cf. Ni2+ in octahedral
symmetry, § 7.15) within the spin triplet, split only by strains in cubic
ZnS(/9). Typical results are:
Schneider and
Rauber (1966)
Holton, Schneider,
and Estle (1964)
3d3, *F; lowest orbital level, triplet T ; 8 = f
4
The triplet I = 1, S = f manifold is split into J = %, J = %, J = i
as for Co2+ in an octahedral field, but the sextet J = f is lowest. In an
exactly cubic field it will split into a doublet and triplet, separation
~A2/(10.Dg). However, for 51V2+ in cubic ZnS, spectra with symmetry
about the four (111) axes are attributed to a Jahn-Teller distortion
(Schneider, Dischler, and Rauber 1967). The spin Hamiltonian
constants are (S = f, 1=1): g\\ = 1-9613(10), g = 1-9133(10),
L
\D\ = 2-02 cm-1, \A\\\ = 120-9(10) MHz, \A \ = 147-0(10) MHz.
L
3d4, 5Z); lowest orbital level, triplet F ; S = 2
5
The I = 1, S = 2 ground manifold is split by the spin-orbit coupling
into states with J = l, J = 2, J = 3 as for Fe2+ in octahedral

--- Page 485 ---

470 IONS OF THE 3d GROUP
symmetry, but with the J = 3 state lowest. In a purely cubic field this
will split by amounts ^vA2/(10D^) into two triplets and a doublet.
In hexagonal CdS(oc) a spectrum corresponding to a slightly split
non-Kramers doublet of Cr2+ is observed by Morigaki (1964a) and
Estle, Walters, and de Wit (1963), and is attributed to a rhombic
distortion (static Jahn-Teller effect).
3d5, 6$; lowest orbital level, singlet (L = 0); S = |-
Representative values for g and the cubic field splitting of the 6$
state for Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3+ in tetrahedral symmetry are listed in Table
7.17.
3d6, 5D; lowest orbital level, doublet F ; S — 2
3
In an exactly tetrahedral field the manifold of 2(28 + 1) = 10 states
is split into five equally spaced levels just like 3d4 in an exactly octa-
hedral field (see Table 7.15). The splitting between successive levels is
found to be 15.2(4) cm-1 for Fe2+ in ZnS(/?), 10(2) cm.-1 for Fe2+ in
CdTe, and 13(2) cm"1 for Fe2+ in MgAl 0 (Slack, Ham, and Chrenko
2 4
1966; Slack, Roberts, and Ham 1967).
3d7, *F; ground orbital state, singlet F ; S = f
2
The ground spin quartet is similar to that for Cr3+ in octahedral
symmetry, but with a (/-value larger than g. Typical (/-values for Co2+
s
range from 2-248 in cubic ZnS(/3) to 2-309 in CdTe, with small extra
terms typical of a F quartet (Chapter 18); these were the first such
8
terms to have been observed (Ham, Ludwig, Watkins, and Woodbury
1960).
In trigonal symmetry the spin quartet splits into two Kramers
doublets, split by 1-34(2) cm.-1 for Co2+ in CdS(oc) (Morigaki 19646); in
tetragonal symmetry rather larger splittings of 2D = —8-60(8) cm"1
and —10-7 cm"1 for Co2+ in CoCs Cl and CoCs Br respectively are
3 5 3 5
quoted by Wielinga, Blote, Roest, and Huiskamp (1967).
3d8, *F; ground orbital state, triplet F ; S = 1
4
The ground manifold of I = 1, 8 = 1 splits through spin-orbit
coupling into states J = 0, J = 1, and J = 2, the singlet level J = 0
being lowest.
3d9, 2D; ground orbital state, triplet F ; S = \
5
The ground manifold I = 1, S = \ is the same as that for d1 in
i octahedral coordination (see § 7.8), but with the reversed sign of the

--- Page 486 ---

IN INTERMEDIATE LIGAND FIELDS 471
spin-orbit coupling. This makes the doublet labelled A in Figs. 7.21,
7.22 the ground state, whatever the sign of a trigonal or tetragonal
distortion.
Resonance has been observed by Dietz, Kamimura, Sturge, and
Yariv (1963) for Cu2+ in hexagonal ZnO, with the following parameters
for the doublet ground state, F (more accurate values are given by
6
Hausmann and Schreiber (1969)):
The hyperfine constants are for the unresolved structure due to the two
isotopes 63, 65 each with / = f; the hyperfine interaction is attributed
mainly to the orbital contribution. If the g-values are plotted at the
point (—0-74, +1-531) on Fig. 7.23 they are found to lie well within the
ellipse, suggesting considerable orbital reduction. This is consistent
with the g-values for a doublet belonging to the excited states at lODg,
which they find to be g\\ = 1-63, g = 0 instead of the simple crystal
±
field values of g^ = 2, g = 0. The theory is discussed by the authors
±
in some detail; they find a reasonable interpretation using molecular
orbitals in which the hole in the t (r ) orbital triplet spends only some
2 5
60 per cent of its time on the Cu2+ ion, and the t wave-functions (but
2
not the e-functions) are expanded radially relative to the c?-electron
wave-function in the free ion.
Rather different values are obtained for Cu2+ in hexagonal BeO by
de Wit and Reinberg (1967). They are:
The results are interpreted with a positive sign for g^ giving a point
9
near the top of the (g^, g ) ellipse in Fig. 7.23. A number of other spin
±
resonance spectra for 3d9 ions (including Ni+) in tetrahedral coordination
have been measured (see references in de Wit and Reinberg 1967).

--- Page 487 ---

8
IONS OF THE d-GROUPS
IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
8.1. The ions and their compounds
THE palladium (4d) and platinum (5d) groups are transition groups
of the same general type as the 3d group, but on which very much less
experimentation has been carried out, mainly because their compounds
are less easy to prepare. The ions take up a number of valencies,
corresponding to varying numbers of electrons in the partly-filled
^-shells that lie 'outside' a core of closed shells. For the 4d group the
core is like that of the krypton atom with configuration
Is22s22^63s23p63d104s24d6 (36 electrons).
Thus, for the 4d group the position resembles that of the 3d group,
where the open 3d shell lies outside an argon core, Is22s22,p*3s23p* (18
electrons), but for the 5d group the position is more complicated. The
core is xenon-like, with configuration
ls22s*2p«3s23pB3dlQ4s24p«4;d105s25p« (54 electrons)
only for the ion La2+ for which, like the neutral atom La, it is ener-
getically favourable for the odd electron to enter the 5d shell rather
than the 4/shell. The main group of 5d ions have a core corresponding
to Lu3+, Hf4+, Ta5+, or W6+, with configuration
Is22s22p«3s*3p«3dlQ4:S24;p«4:d1Q4fU5s25p* (68 electrons)
in which the lanthanide 4/ shell is also filled.
The stable isotopes of the main 4d, 5d groups (together with the
long lived isotope 99 of technetium, which has no stable isotopes) are
listed in Tables 8.1 and 8.2, together with their nuclear spins and
moments. The ionic species principally studied in magnetic resonance
are given in Table 8.3, together with a number of 3d ions which form
'strong ligand field' compounds in octahedral coordination. The ionic
size for 4e? ions, and more so for 5d ions, tends to be somewhat larger
than that of comparable 3d ions in the same charge state, but it will
be seen from Table 8.3 that the stable ions tend to carry a rather
larger positive charge, so that their size is comparable with that of 3d
ions with the same number of electrons in the d-shell.

--- Page 488 ---

IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS 473
TABLE 8.1
Atoms of the 4d group, and nuclear properties of the stable isotopes that
have nuclear spin not equal to zero. Technetium has no stable isotopes,
and the one radioactive isotope quoted is that for which magnetic resonance
has been observed. The nuclear moments are quoted to four significant
figures (where justified from nuclear magnetic resonance), and include the
diamagnetic correction
Nuclear electric
Nuclear quadrupole
Mass Abundance Nuclear magnetic moment
Z number (%) spin / moment (n.m.) Q (barns)
39 Y 89 100 i -0-1373
40 Zr 91 11-23 1 -1-303
41 Nb 93 100 9. + 6-167 -0-2
2
42 Mo 95 15-72 5 -0-9135 0-12
¥
97 9-46 — 0-9327 M
f
43 Tc 99 (radioactive) + 5-680 + 0-3
f
44 Ru 99 12-7 -0-63
f
101 17-1 5. -0-69
2
45 Rh 103 100 -0-0883
i
46 Pd 105 22-2 -0-6015
f
47 Ag 107 51-35 -0-1136
i
109 48-65 -0-1305
i
' TABLE 8.2
Atoms of the 3d group, and nuclear properties of the stable isotopes that
have nuclear spin not equal to zero. The nuclear moments are quoted to
four significant figures (where justified from nuclear magnetic resonance),
and include the diamagnetic correction, except for the two iridium isotopes
Nuclear electric
Nuclear quadrupole
Mass Abundance Nuclear magnetic moment
Z number (%) spin, I moment (n.m.) Q (barns)
74 W 183 14-4 \ + 0-117
75 Re 185 37-1 5 + 3-172 + 2-6
2
187 62-9 5 + 3-204 + 2-6
2
76 Os 187 1-64 + 0-067
k
189 16-1 3 + 0-6566 + 0-8
T
77 Ir 191 37-3 3 + 0-1440 + 1-5
¥
193 62-7 +0-1568 + 1-5
f
78 Pt 195 33-8 1 + 0-6060
79 Au 197 100 3 + 0-1449 + 0-58
¥

--- Page 489 ---

474 IONS OF THE cZ-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
TABLE 8.3
Ions of the 4d and 5d groups, together with ions of the 3d group known
to occur in 'strong crystal field' octahedral coordination
dl d2 d* d* d5 d6 d7 d8 d9
Ions of the 3d Mn4+
group O3+ Mn3+ Fe3+ Co3+ Ni3+ Cu3+
V2+ Mn2+ Fe2+
Ions of the 4c? Mo54"
group Nb4+ Mo4+ Tc4+ Ru4+ Rh4+
Zr3+ Nb3+ Mo3+ Tc3+ Ru3+ Rh3+ Pd3+ Ag3+
Y2+ Zr2+ Nb2+ Mo2+ Tc2+ Ru2+ Rh2+ Pd2+ Ag2+
Rh+
Mo+
Rh°
Ions of the 5d Re4+ Os4+ Ir4+ Pt4+
group Ir3+ Pt3+
La2+
TABLE 8.4
Free ion values of <r~3}, (r2), (r4) for ions of the 4d group,
from Freeman and Watson (1965); values of £ from Blume,
Freeman and Watson (1964), with additional values of £
exp
from estimates of Dunn (1961)
<r-8) <r-28) <r-24) £ (exp) £ (calc)
(a.u.) (a.u.) (a.u.) (cm-1) (cm-1)
4:dl Y2+ 2-034 5-588 59-00 300 312
Zr3+ 3-160 3-857 25-33 500 507
Nb4+ 750
Mo5+ 1030
4d2 Zr2+ 2-706 4-526 37-86 425 432
Nb3+ 3-913 3-308 18-60 670 644
Mo4+ 950
±d* Nb2+ 3-414 3-829 26-98 555 560
Mo3+ 4-707 2-905 14-39 800 812
Tc4+ (1150)
4c?4 Mo2+ 4-175 3-319 20-22 695 717
Tc3+ (990)
Ru4+ (1350)
4d5 Mo+ 3-662 3-954 32-98 (630)
Tc2+ 5-015 2-903 15-41 (850)
Ru3+ 6-496 2-313 9-17 (1180) 1197
Rh4+ (1570)
4c^6 Ru2+ 5-858 2-628 12-87 1000 1077
Rh3+ 7-447 2-117 7-79 1400 1416
4d7 Rh2+ 6-804 2-374 10-60 1220 1291
Pd3+ 8-487 1-939 6-59 1640 1664
4^8 Pd2+ 7-814 2-158 8-83 1600 1529
Ag3+ 9-611 1-782 5-61 1930 1940
4d» Ag2+ 8-905 1-972 7-41 1840 1794

--- Page 490 ---

IONS OF THE (/-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS 475
The wave-functions for 4rf, 5d electrons have the same angular
dependence as for 3d electrons, but their radial wave-functions differ
in that the 4d functions have one node, and the 5d two nodes, while
the 3d have none. Near the nucleus the radial wave-functions have
an amplitude which increases rapidly with the atomic number Z, so
that larger values of the hyperfine interactions, particularly in the 5/
group, are to be expected than for 3d ions. This can be seen from Table
8.4, by comparing the values of (r~B) obtained by Freeman and Watson
(1965) by Hartree-Fock calculations for the 4d group, with the corre-
sponding values for 3d ions in Table 7.6. Values of the spin-orbit
coupling parameter f, which is similarly dependent on the amplitude
of the wave-functions near the nucleus, are also noticeably larger for
4td ions, the values given in Table 8.4 being due to Blume, Freeman,
and Watson (1964) and Dunn (1961). No detailed calculations have
been made for 5d ions, but values of £ in the range 2000-3000 cm"1
have been estimated, and correspondingly large values of (r~3) for the
hyperfine interaction must be expected.
Amongst the host lattices used for electron paramagnetic resonance
experiments on these ions are MgO(cubic), Al 0 (trigonal), and
2 3
CaW0 (tetragonal), which have also been used extensively for other
4
transition ions. For strong ligand field octahedral complexes the
configuration (rfe)6 behaves as a 'diamagnetic' ion (though it has a
small temperature independent susceptibility) with a closed shell (see
§ 8.2). Examples of this kind which have been used in host lattices are
as follows:
The point symmetry at the magnetic ion in the platinum compounds is
exactly octahedral, the Pt4+ ion being surrounded by a regular octa-
hedron of chlorine ions. In the other host lattices the point symmetry
is rhombic or lower, and this is true also of a number of other substances
that have been used as host lattices.
We shall discuss the theory and results for the octahedral complexes
first, followed by one case of eightfold coordination (Sd1, La2H~ in
CaF ) in § 8.13. Historically the explanation of the magnetic properties
2
of the iron group cyanides in terms of a strong ligand field was first
given by Van Vleck (1935). The contributions from the orbital magnetic

--- Page 491 ---

476 IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
moments, including the effects of spin-orbit splitting, were calculated
by Kotani (1949) for octahedral symmetry. The theory has been
extended by Kamimura (1956), Bleaney and O'Brien (1956), Kotani
(1960), Tanabe (1960), and Sugano (1960); and, with particular
reference to 4c?, 5c? compounds, by Kamimura, Koide, Sekiyama, and
Sugano (1960).
8.2. The strong ligand field octahedral complex
The strong crystal field approach using single electron states has
been outlined in § 7.3, and the effects of bonding in § 7.4. The most
important parameter is the octahedral ligand field splitting, which is
denoted by 10 Dq in the crystal field approach or, more generally,
by A. A number of calculations indicate that the effect of covalent
bonding is greatly to increase A over the value that is obtained in a
purely cionic' approach; certainly, the latter gives a value that is
only about one-third of that observed experimentally for Ni24~ in
KNiF . The theoretical situation is outlined by Owen and Thornley
3
(1966), who also quote experimental results showing how A increases
for different ligand ions for the transition ions Cr3+, 3d3 and Ni2+, 3d*
(see Table 8.5). In general, the value of A appears to be larger by
TABLE 8.5
Variation of the octahedral crystal field splitting A
(in units of 10s cm-1) for various ligands and two
different ions of the 3d group (quoted by Owen and
Thornley (1966) from Jorgensen (1962))
Ligand Br- 01- F~ HO NH CN~
2 3
lon Cr3+, 3d3 13-8 15-2 17-4 21-6 26-7
M2+, 3d8 7-0 7-2 7-3 8-5 10-8
a factor of about 2 for the tripositive ions compared with the dipositive
ions (cf. also Cu3+ and M2+, 3d8 in A1 0 , Table 7.20). In the 3d group
2 3
the cyanides have unusually large values of A, values over 30000 cm."1
being reported for Fe3+(CN-) by Naiman (1961) and for Fe2+(CN-)
6 6
by Jorgensen (1962). Since the values of the Racah parameter B are
probably less than 1000cm"1 for these ions in the solid state (see
Table 7.5), it may be expected that such values of A (= WDq) are
sufficient to make the configurations (de)n the ground states (see Figs.
7.13, 7.14).
Calculations of A for the 4d, 5d groups will obviously be much more

--- Page 492 ---

IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS 477
difficult than for the 3d group. However, the values of (r4) for the 4=d
group in Table 8.4 are very much larger than for analogous ions of the
3d group (Table 7.6), so that a larger ionic contribution to A would be
expected. It is not surprising that, experimentally, all ions studied in
both the 4:d, 5d groups are found to belong to the 'strong ligand field'
configurations.
Whatever the origin of A, its magnitude relative to the Racah
parameter B determines the order in which the dt-orbitals are filled.
As can be seen from a comparison of Fig. 7.7 (applicable to small A)
and Fig. 7.8 (applicable to large A), the configurations are the same for
d1, d2, d3, d8, and d9, and we shall expect only rather small differences
between the results of paramagnetic resonance experiments for these
ions in weak and strong ligand fields. The main differences occur for
the ions d4 to d7; in a strong ligand field it is energetically preferable
for the electrons first to occupy the de or t shell, so that filling of this
2
shell continues subject to the restraints imposed by the Pauli principle.
This gives a closed (de)Q or (£)6 sub-shell at d6, and such ions have
2
singlet ground states, both for orbit and spin, giving only a small
temperature independent susceptibility. This makes it possible to
use them as diluents in a number of strong ligand field complexes
containing other paramagnetic ions in electron paramagnetic resonance
experiments. The ion (de)5 resembles (de)1, except that it has one 'hole'
instead of one electron in the (de) shell; similarly, (de)4 resembles
(de)2, with two holes instead of two electrons. The remaining ion (de)3
has an orbital singlet state, with 8 = f which is the maximum spin-
multiplicity allowed in the (rfe) shell; its magnetic properties are
virtually 'spin-only', as for the half-filled shell d5 in a weak ligand
field complex.
The four ions (de)1, (^e)2, (de)4, and (de)5 all have triplet orbital
ground states that can be regarded as manifolds with I = land</ = — 1,
z
though the latter may be reduced by a factor k to allow for bonding
effects. The effective spin-orbit coupling is reversed in sign for the
'hole' configurations (<ie)4, (de)5 from that for the 'electron' configura-
tions (rfe)1, (de)2, and in an exactly octahedral field the states J into
which the (I, S) manifold splits are shown in Fig. 8.1. Again, the value
of the spin-orbit coupling is likely to be lower than the free ion value,
because of bonding effects. Within the (de) manifold, only ?r-bonding
orbitals can be formed, so that the value of k above should be just
k as given by eqn (7.7).
vv9
For d7 in a strong octahedral field we have just one electron in a

--- Page 493 ---

478 IONS OF THE ^-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
FIG. 8.1. Splittings of the (I = l,S) manifolds under spin-orbit coupling £(1 . s) for
the strong octahedral configurations (de)1, (de)2, (de)4, and (de)5, all of which have a
triplet orbital ground state 1 = 1. The effective spin-orbit coupling is /l(l . S), with
I = -J for (de)1 and +£ for (de)5, and 1 = ±£/2S is -f/2 for (de)2 and +£/2 for
(de)4. The splittings shown for (de)2, (de)4 assume that f is small compared with the
electrostatic repulsion between the electrons, measured by the Racah parameter
(3B-\-C); exact formulae are given by Kamimura, Koide, Sekiyama, and Sugano (1960).
dy orbital 'outside' the closed sub-shell (de)6, and the behaviour of this
ion (with S = %) is more akin to that of d9, with one hole in the (dy)
shell, than to that of d7 in a weak octahedral field.
8.3. Hyperfine interaction
The hyperfine interaction must also be calculated using one-electron
wave-functions, as in eqns (7.37), (7.45), or (7.47), and (7.55) for the
magnetic interaction. Values for (r~3) computed for the free 4d ions
are given in Table 8.4, but smaller values are probably required for
the ion in a magnetic complex owing to bonding effects. Values of %
(see eqn (7.66)) have been computed (see Watson and Freeman 1967a)
for a number of 4d ions; they are found to lie in the range —8 to —9
a.u., which is about three times as large as for the 3d ions, but again
smaller values are likely to hold for the complexes. For the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction an appropriate form is found by com-
bining eqns (17.10) and (17.12), with
for a d-electron (see Table 18).
8.4. d1 in a strong octahedral field; (de)1, (t), S = -|
z
The theory for this ion is essentially similar to that for d1 in an
intermediate ligand field, discussed in § 7.8.
Measurements have been reported on 4^*, Mo5+ in K (InCl ),3H 0
3 6 2

--- Page 494 ---

IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS 479
by Owen and Ward (1956); in Ti0 by Kyi (1962) and Chang (1964);
2
and in K SnCl by Low (1967). Ignoring small departures from axial
2 6
symmetry, we can summarize the results by saying that g\\ lies between
1-9 and 2, with g somewhat lower. This indicates that distortions of
L
the octahedron give an axial field that splits the orbital triplet by an
amount large compared with the spin-orbit coupling, making the ground
state a Kramers doublet that is mainly IQi) in the nomenclature of
§ 7.8 (see Tables 7.9, 7.10). We can then expand the formulae (7.80)
for the g-values in the limit of small <5, giving
which shows that we would expect a larger departure of g than of g^
±
from the free spin value, since the former depends on d and the latter
only on d2. The same result is also clearly to be expected from Fig.
7.23, since we are near the top of the ellipse where g\\ has its maximum
value.
8.5. d2 in a strong octahedral field; (de)2, (£)2, S = 1
2
The theory for the ground state of this ion is similar to that for d2
in intermediate octahedral ligand fields. In exact octahedral symmetry
the splitting of the (?, S) manifold by the spin-orbit coupling is shown
in Fig. 8.1(b). However, for the 5d group the spin-orbit coupling may
be so large that it competes with the electrostatic repulsion between
the two electrons; in putting the two electrons into different (de)
orbitals with parallel spin we have assumed the latter is overwhelming,
giving a modified form of Hund's rule. Explicit formulae for the
energy levels including both electrostatic repulsion and spin-orbit
coupling can be written down in terms of the two parameters £ and
(3B+C), where B, C are the Racah parameters (see Kamimura,
Koide, Sekiyama, and Sugano 1960).
8.6. d3 in a strong octahedral field;
The ground state is an orbital singlet with fourfold spin degeneracy,
the same as for d3 in intermediate octahedral fields (cf. Fig. 7.11).
Typical 0-values are 1-992 for V2+, Cr3+ (3d3) in the complex cyanides
(Baker, Bleaney, and Bowers 1956); 1-9896(5) for Tc4+ (4d3) in K PtCl
2 6
(Low and Llewellyn 1957). These are closer to the free spin value
than the corresponding g-value for 3d3 ions in hydrated salts because
the orbital contribution is more effectively quenched by the stronger

--- Page 495 ---

480 IONS OF THE ^-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
cubic field. The magnetic hyperfine constants are almost isotropic,
and arise mainly from the core polarization effect. For V2+, Cr3+ the
value of A is about 80 per cent of that observed in hydrated salts,
the reduction being attributed to the effect of covalent bonding. In
Tc4+ the large hyperfine constant \A\ = 0-0135 cm"1 for the isotope
"Tc, / = f, leads to a value of about —5 a.u. for the core polarization
parameter #, rather smaller than the values of 8 to 9 a.u. calculated
by Watson and Freeman (1967a).
The resonance spectrum of Re4+, 5d3 has been observed in K PtCl
2 6
by Rahn and Dorain (1964). Only the M = +%<-> — J transition was
visible, but assuming exact cubic symmetry they deduced the values
g = 1-815(1), \A\ = 389(1) XlO~4 cm-1 (unresolved value for isotopes
185, 187, each with / = f), together with appreciable higher-order
terms of the form given in eqn (18.21) for a F quartet. However the
8
observed anisotropy may be due to small distortions from octahedral
symmetry (see Dorain and Wheeler (1966)). The low value of g illus-
trates the considerable role played by intermediate coupling in the 5eZ
group.
8.7. d4 in a strong octahedral field; (de)4, (J)4, S = 1
2
This ion resembles (de)2, except that with two holes instead of two
electrons in the cZe shell the effective sign of the spin-orbit coupling
is reversed. In the rather low symmetry of the Mn3+ ion in the
K Mn(CN) complex the energy levels are split into a number of
3 6
singlets, but the susceptibility (Cooke and Duffus 1955) follows roughly
the variation with temperature predicted for octahedral symmetry.
The latter gives a ground orbital triplet state I = 1 with gl — — 1,
which combines with the spin S — 1 through the spin-orbit coupling
to give states J = 0, 1, and 2, the singlet state J = 0 being lowest as
shown in Fig. 8.1. A rather better fit to the temperature variation of
the susceptibility is obtained using a value of £ somewhat smaller
(60 to 80 per cent) than the free ion value. At very low temperatures
only a temperature independent susceptibility due to the J = 0 state
is observed, and the salt has been used as a diluent for K Co(CN) by
3 6
Baker, Bleaney, and Bowers (1956).
For an ion such as Os4+, 5d4, the spin-orbit coupling is so large that
only the singlet ground state is occupied at room temperature. The
effect of its temperature independent susceptibility in shifting the
nuclear magnetic resonance of 19F in K OsF through the formation
2 6
of bonds has been studied theoretically, and compared with experiment,

--- Page 496 ---

IONS OF THE rf-GBOUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS 481
by Greenslade and Stevens (1967). The temperature variation of the
susceptibility of K RuCl and K OsCl has been fitted theoretically by
2 6 2 6
Kamimura, Koide, Sekiyama, and Sugano (1960).
8.8. d5 in a strong octahedral field; (de)5, (£ )5, 8 = \
2(7
This ion can be regarded has having just one hole in the (de) shell,
so that the spin 8 = |; this corresponds in Fig. 7.13 to a cubic field
so strong (Dq/B > 2-9) that a doublet state attains a lower energy
than the sextet state BS&, which is the ground state in weak and inter-
mediate cubic fields. For one hole in the (de) shell we have again a
triplet orbital ground state 1=1, with an effective g = — 1 ; however
l
the effective spin-orbit coupling constant will be reversed in sign to
that for (de)1, so that within the triplet we have just £(1 . S). It has
been shown by Bleaney and O'Brien (1956) that if all matrix elements
to (dy) states are neglected, an energy matrix can be obtained somewhat
similar to (7.77), irrespective of the symmetry of any distortion of the
octahedron, by a suitable choice of axes. In general a set of three
Kramers doublets is then obtained under the combined effect of the
distortion and the spin-orbit coupling. In the nomenclature of Bleaney
and O'Brien the three orbital states are |6 ), \a), and |6_); the ground
+
doublet can be written (with superscripts for the spin orientation) as
and the principal (/-values, using an orbital reduction factor k that is
of course k in the nomenclature of § 7.4, are given by
vv
Here the identification of the states |+), |— } has been chosen to
make g , g have the same sign; for a given value of a this fixes the
x y
sign of g, since the sign of (ggg) is invariant (see § 15.6).
z x y z
Corresponding formulae for the magnetic hyperfine structure are
more complicated because they are not independent of the symmetry
of the distortion away from octahedral symmetry. Formulae are given
by Bleaney and O'Brien (1956) for two cases, one in which the z-axis
is along a fourfold axis of the octahedron and the other in which it is
along a threefold axis; even so the magnetic hyperfine term (S.A.I)
32

--- Page 497 ---

482 IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
with 8 = J for the ground doublet is one in which A is not necessarily
a 'symmetric tensor' (see the discussion in §§ 15.6 to 15.8).
3d5 ions, Mn2+, Fe3+, in the complex cyanides
Paramagnetic resonance measurements have been made by Baker,
Bleaney, and Bowers (1956) on the 3d5 ions, Mn2+in K Fe(CN) , 3H 0
4 6 2
and Fe3+ in K Co(CN) . The results are summarized in Table 8.6.
3 6
These results are characteristically different from those for 3d5 in the
weak field state 6& (see Table 7.17) in that there is no sign of any
fine structure (i.e. S = J), and the ^-values are markedly anisotropic,
diverging widely from the free spin value. If we take g = 2, k = 1, we
s
obtain from (8.3) the following simple relationship between the principal
<7-values,
showing that both the unknown constants 6 and a can then be found
just from the ratios of the g-values. However, if this procedure is
followed for K Fe(CN) (diluted), one obtains values for the constants
3 6
which give (/-values in the correct proportions but whose actual values
are about 8 per cent too high. This is a simple demonstration of the
fact that the strong crystal field model cannot be used without making
allowance for a reduction in the orbital moment because of bonding.
If all the (/-values are assumed to be negative, they can be fitted using
cot oc = 1-01, tan 0 = —0-028, k = 0-87 , and a reasonable fit can
5
then be obtained for the temperature variation of the susceptibility
of a single crystal of K Fe(CN) using a value of about 280 cm"1 for
3 6
|£|, which is a good deal smaller than the free ion value of about
486 cm-1 (see Table 7.4).
An alternative set of parameters is obtained if we assume that g
2
is positive, and g , g both negative, but these require a very low value
x y
of k = 0-56 and give a less good fit to the susceptibility.
4eZ5 ions, Ru3+
Not many results are available for 4d5, a typical set being shown
: in Table 8.6. These are for Ru3+ in Co(NH ) Cl , which is monoclinic
3 6 3
and shows three pairs of magnetically inequivalent complexes (Griffiths,
Owen, and Ward 1953; Griffiths, O'Brien, Owen, and Ward 1955).
The results resemble those for the 3d5 ions in the same table. The hyper-
. fine constants are an average for the two isotopes 99,101, which each

--- Page 498 ---

TABLE 8.6
Representative values of g and A (signs undetermined) for a number of ions in (de)5 or (£)5
2
configurations. The hyper fine constants given for Ru and Ir are from the unresolved structures
due to the pairs of odd isotopes "Ru, 101Ru and 191Ir, 193Ir respectively. In each case the spins
of the pair are the same, and the nuclear magnetic moments differ by less than 10 per cent.
The results for Ir4+ are from Thornley (1968), where further values are given
Ion and host \9x\ \ff,\ \ff,\ \AZ\ \A V \ \A Z \
lattice "(in units of 10~4 cm-1)
3d5 Mn2+ 2-624(8) 2-182(8) 0-63(10) 84-5(5) 46-5(5) 104(20)
KFe(CN), 3HO
4 6 2
Fe3+ 2-35(2) 2-10(2) 0-915(10)
KCo(CN)
3 6
4d5 Ru3+ 2-06(1) 2-02(1) 1-72(1) 48(2) 48(2) 49(2)
Co(NH)Cl 1-80(1) 1-90(1) 2-06(1) 48(2) 48(2) 50(2)
36 3
1-15(1) 1-84(1) 2-66(1) 45(2) 41(2) 54(2)
5d5 Ir4+ 2-168(5) 2-078(5) 1-050(3) 25-5(10) 25-5(10) 24-9(5)
NaPtCl, 6HO
2 6 2
Ir4+ (cubic) ( — ) 1-786 (4), isotropic 26•3(6), isotropic
(NH)PtCl
42 6

--- Page 499 ---

484 IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
have / = -f and whose nuclear magnetic moments differ only by about
9 per cent (see Table 8.1). The rather small variation in the hyperfine
constants suggests the main contribution comes from core polarization,
though even the latter does not give an isotropic contribution because
of the varying way in which spin and orbit are admixed in different
directions. Although the hyperfine constants appear to be of the same
order as those for 55Mn in the same table, the nuclear moments of the
two ruthenium isotopes are only about i of that of 55Mn (for which
also / = i), so that the electronic parameters in the hyperfine structure
for 4d5 are considerably larger than those for 3d5, as would be expected.
The spectrum of Ru3+ in A1 0 has been observed by Geschwind and
2 3
Remeika (1962), who find
The (/-values can be fitted with k = 0-837 in eqns (8.3).
5d5 ions, Ir4+
Octahedral complexes of the type [IrCl ]2~, [IrBr ]2~ containing the
6 6
ion 5d5, Ir4+ have been studied extensively by Griffiths and Owen,
following the early discovery of complex hyperfine structure due to
the ligand ions (Owen and Stevens 1953). Some representative results
are included in Table 8.6, those for the complex in Na [PtCl ],6H 0
2 6 2
which is not exactly octahedral being again rather similar to the results
discussed above for the 3d5, £d5 ions. The </-values for a number of
salts (taking g as an average of the values of g , g) can be fitted onto
L x y
an ellipse similar to that in Fig. 7.23, but with a reduced value of
k = 0-83, as shown in Fig. 8.2.
The case of cubic symmetry is of particular interest. If in eqns (8.3)
we put 6 = 0, sin a = (-§-)*, cos a = (-§•)* we obtain
The same result follows from Table 7.10 on putting cos 26 = J and
taking g to be negative for the doublet A, which is always the lowest
±
doublet for (de)5 because of the change of sign in the spin-orbit coupling;
see Fig. 7.22. Here we have again identified the spin contribution by
writing g and not just 2. If k = 1 we obtain g = — 2, where the
a
negative sign again emphasizes the fact that there is a large orbital
contribution, and that this is not a spin-only value. If k < 1, we can
fit the measured value of \g\ = 1-786 for Ir4+ in the exact octahedral
symmetry of (NH ) PtCl by again taking k = 0-84, and this point is
4 2 6
also included in Fig. 8.2.

--- Page 500 ---

IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS 485
FIG. 8.2. Plot of gr,| against g for a number of iridium (5d5), (de)5 compounds. The
±
curves correspond to eqns (8.3) with g^ = ^(g~\~ffv}» (^e- ^ = 0)« r^-"le °u^er curve is
x
drawn for k = I, and is the same as that in Fig. 7.23 for a range of values between
d = 7T/2 and TT. The inner curve is drawn using a value of & = 0-83. (After Griffiths and
Owen 1954).
In exact octahedral symmetry the magnetic hyperfine constant A
is of course also isotropic, and from the formulae of Bleaney and
O'Brien (1956) it is given by
In exact octahedral symmetry the spin-dipolar contribution vanishes,
and the first term in (8.6) is the orbital contribution and the second
that from core-polarization plus other effects that may contribute to
a term of the form A (S . I). In terms of the parameter # = —f Ac(r~3)
8
of eqn (7.66), and using a mean value of g = 0-10 for the two odd
n
iridium isotopes 191, 193, for both of which / = f and whose moments
differ by less than 10 per cent (see Table 8.2), so that the hyperfine
parameter in Table 8.6 is the mean for the unresolved structure, we
find
Since both # and (r~3) are likely to be fairly large for ions in the 5d
group, it is difficult to find a reasonable hypothesis about the relative
sizes of the two contributions with which to extract further information.
Analysis of the complex hyperfine structure (cf. Fig. 1.16) due to
both chlorine and bromine ligands has been attempted by Griffiths
and Owen (1954). The t orbitals on the central ion can bond only to
2
Px electrons on the ligand ions, so that eqn (7.10) reduces to

--- Page 501 ---

486 IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
In cubic symmetry the ligand hyperfine parameter A is isotropic, its
v
value being
where, from eqns (7.7), (7.11), f = %tfN~l = \(\—k) is a measure
t
of the strength of the 77-bonding (in octahedral symmetry it is the
probability of finding the magnetic electron on one particular ligand
ion if the region where overlap of a ligand ^-orbital onto a central ion
d-orbital is assumed to be small). The isotropic ligand hyperfine struc-
ture \AL\ = 26(1) MHz measured by Griffiths and Owen (1954) for
Ir4+ in (NH ) [PtC ] suggests that J. can be neglected, and gives a
4 2 6 d
value of f = 0-066 in reasonable agreement with the value of
t
0-080 obtained from the measured g-value. For bromine ligands the
value of A1" is about 5 times larger, consistent with the increased value
of (r~*) for 4p orbits on a bromine ion and the larger nuclear magnetic
moment.
The theory of the (IrX )2~ complexes has been extended by Thornley
6
(1968), who finds that the inclusion of admixtures from excited states
appreciably affects the analysis given above of the experimental
results, leading to a larger covalent character than previously assumed.
8.9. d* in a strong octahedral field; (de)6, (J)6, S = 0
2
At this point the (de) shell is filled, giving as ground state an orbital
and spin singlet when the octahedral ligand field strength is large
enough to outweigh the effects of the electronic electrostatic repulsion
(see Fig. 7.14). Under these conditions only a small temperature-
independent susceptibility is observed for the ground state, and (de)6
ions have been used as diluents for other paramagnetic ions in strong
octahedral field complexes.
8.10. d7 in a strong octahedral field; (de)G(dy), (t )Qe, S = %
2
With one electron more than can be accommodated in the (de)
shell, the extra electron must enter the (dy) or e-shell, giving a net spin
S = J. Since matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling vanish within
the e-manifold, the configurations (deY(dy) or (t)*e with one electron
2
in the e-shell and (de)Q(dy)3 or (£ )6e3 with one hole in the e-shell have
2
similar ground states and are experimentally difficult to distinguish.
The 0-values are close to the free spin value, lying above it only through
spin-orbit coupling to excited (de)5(dy)2 states. As can be seen from the
experimental results in Table 8.7, a Jahn-Teller effect is to be expected

--- Page 502 ---

IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS 487
TABLE 8.7
Experimental results for d1, (d€)6(dy) or (t)*e, in strong octahedral co-
2
ordination. In two cases all three g-values are unequal, and an average is
given for g . Values of g are for the isotropic spectrum observed at higher
±
temperatures in cubic or trigonal symmetry. The resonance values given
here for Ni3+ in MgO, CaO were attributed in the references quoted to
M+, 3c?9, but are ascribed to M3+ by Hochli, Mutter, and Wysling (1965)
Ion Host lattice l?||l 1*1 1*1 Reference
3d7, Ni3+ MgO 2-1693(5) Orton, Auzins,
Griffiths, and
Wertz (1961).
CaO 2-282(2) Low and Suss (1963).
A10 2-045(5) 2-146(2) Lacroix, Hochli, and
2 3
(powder) Miiller (1964).
4d7, Pd3+ A1O 2-163(1) Lacroix, Hochli, and
2 3
Miiller (1964).
4d7, Rh2+ ZnWO 2-375(2) 2-12 Whiffin and Orton
4
(average) (1965).
5d7, Pt3+ A1O 2-011(6) 2-328(4) 2-220(1) Geschwind and
2 3
Remeika (1962).
Yttrium 1-962 2-39 Hodges, Serway, and
Aluminium (average) Marshall (1966).
Garnet
BaTiO 1-950(5) 2-459(3) Simanek, Sroubek,
3
Zdansky, Kaczer,
and Novak (1966).
in cubic or trigonal symmetry, giving a change from an isotropic to
an anisotropic spectrum as the temperature is lowered.
8.11. d8 in a strong octahedral field; (dt)«(dy)*9 (£2)6e2, S = 1
As can be seen from Fig. 7.16, the ground state of this ion is the
same in a weak or a strong octahedral field; it is an orbital singlet with
spin S = 1, for which formulae are given in Table 7.19. The g-value
is almost isotropic even in a trigonal environment such as A1 0 , but
2 3
a strong octahedral splitting A reduces the departure of g from the
free spin value, and the splitting of the triplet state. This is exempli-
fied in the comparison of results for Cu3+ and Ni2+ in A1 0 , given in
2 3
Table 7.20.
8.12. d» in a strong octahedral field; (de)6(dy)3, (£)6e3, 8 = J
2
Again, the properties of this ion in the ground state are similar
irrespective of the strength of the octahedral field, so that the discussion
of §7.16 is valid.

--- Page 503 ---

TABLE 8.8
Resonance parameters for two 4d9 ions. The values of A\\, A are mean values for the unresolved hyper fine
L
structure of the two isotopes 107Ag, 109Ag (both I = -J; see Table 8.1); no hyperfine parameters for Rh° (103Rh,
/ = i) are given
\ff\\\ I0J M,,l I^J
Ion Host Lattice (in units of 10~4 cm"1) Reference
4d9 Ag2+ KC1 (77°K) 2-193(1) 2-035(1) 40-9(5) 30-3(5) Delbecq, Hayes, O'Brien, and Yuster (1963);
(300°K) 2-09(1) (isotropic) Sierro (1967).
Kh° AgCl(110°K) 2-015(2) 2-417(2) Wilkens, de Graag, and Helle (1965).
(160°-350°K) 2-436(5) 2-207(5)
(200°-430°K) 2-287(5) (isotropic)

--- Page 504 ---

TABLE 8.9
Resonance parameters for some 4C?1, 3d1 ions in eightfold and fourfold coordination. The nuclear
spins are f for both Mo isotopes, and %for 139La
Temperature ff\\\ b±l M||l Mil
Ion Host lattice (°K) (in units of 10~4 cm"1) Isotope
4d\ Y2+ CaF 2 4-2 2-00 1-958
20 1-971 (isotropic)
20 1-948 1-987
4CZ1, Mo5+ CaW0 4-2 1-987 1-887 8-39 41-18 (isotope 95)
4
8-64 42-52 (isotope 97)
5dl, La2+ CaF 4 2-00(1) 1-904(2) 37(9) 62-6(10) (isotope 139)
2
20 1-937(2) (isotropic) 52(1) (isotropic)
Refs: Y2+, O'Connor and Chen (1964).
Mo5+, Azarbayejani and Merlo (1965)
La2+, Hayes and Twidell (1963)

--- Page 505 ---

490 IONS OF THE d-GROUPS IN STRONG LIGAND FIELDS
Resonance parameters for Ag2+ and Rh° (both 4d9) ions are given
in Table 8.8. These are in sites of cubic symmetry, with static Jahn-
Teller distortions at low temperatures; in each case an isotropic (/-value
resulting from the dynamic Jahn-Teller effect is observed at higher
temperatures. Very similar results are obtained for Ag2+ in LiCl and
NaCl (Sierro 1967).
8.13. dl in cubic (eightfold) coordination
The spectrum of the ion La2+, Sdf1, replacing Ca2+ in CaF has been
2
observed by Hayes and Twidell (1963). Because the sign of the cubic
field is reversed in eightfold compared with sixfold coordination, the
single d-electron is in one of the (dy) or e-states that form the ground
state, and the behaviour of La2+ is similar to that of a d9 ion in an
octahedral field, except that its spin-orbit coupling parameter is
positive, so that the gr-values are smaller than the free spin value. At
4°K an anisotropic spectrum characteristic of a static Jahn-Teller
effect with symmetry about a fourfold axis of the cube is observed;
at 20°K this is replaced by an isotropic spectrum characteristic of a
dynamic Jahn-Teller effect, whose resonance parameters are equal to
the mean values of the previous spectrum. The resonance results are
listed in Table 8.9, together with values for 4dl, Y2+ in CaF . For the
2
latter, one set of results is very similar to those for La2+, where
the value of g\\ = 2-00 in the anisotropic spectrum indicates that the
orbital |3z2— r2) has the lower energy. However, for Y2+ a spectrum
with gr || < g could also be observed which must be ascribed to the
L
\xz—y*) orbital (cf. Table 7.22(a) and (b)); it is suggested that this is
stabilized by a tetragonal distortion caused by an interstitial compensat-
ing ion.
The tetragonal spectra of ^d1, Mo5+ in CaW0 observed by
4
Azarbayejani and Merlo (1965) presumably originate from a Mo5+ ion
replacing a W6+ ion in a W0 distorted tetrahedron; the g-values again
4
suggest one c?-electron in a |3z2— r2) orbital.

--- Page 506 ---

9
SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
9.1. Introduction
IN previous chapters we have been concerned primarily with the
interactions of paramagnetic ions with external magnetic fields, treating
them as single ions and ignoring any mutual interaction between the
ions. We now consider the nature of such mutual interactions, and
their effect on the paramagnetic resonance spectrum.
Since we are concerned with magnetic dipoles, the simplest and
most obvious interaction between them is magnetic dipole-dipole
interaction. If we know the location of each ion in the crystal lattice,
and the magnetic properties of each ion, the magnetic dipole-dipole
interaction between any pair can be calculated quite accurately.
Unfortunately this is seldom true for interactions of other types, which
may be of comparable or greater importance.
Since our magnetic moments are associated with electrically charged
particles, there exists also an electrostatic interaction. It is well known
that the quantum-mechanical treatment of this interaction leads to
terms of two types, one of which is similar in form to the Coulomb
interaction of classical physics, and which we shall call for brevity the
'Coulomb' interaction. The best known example of this is the 'electric
quadrupole-quadrupole' interaction. Such interactions are of interest
to us only in so far as they give an interaction energy that depends on
the orientation of the magnetic dipoles. This requires that the magnetic
moment be due in part to the orbital motion of the atomic electrons,
since only the sub-states corresponding to different orientations of the
orbital magnetic moment have different distributions of electric charge.
The spin sub-states are involved only in so far as they are strongly
coupled to the orbital sub-states by the spin-orbit coupling. Calculation
of such 'Coulomb' interactions is handicapped by uncertainty in the
magnitude of shielding (or anti-shielding) effects due to intervening
ions, and by the lack of good radial electronic wave-functions. The
same considerations apply to another type of multipole interaction
in which one ion is coupled to another through the medium of the
'phonon radiation field' instead of the 'photon radiation field'.
Similar problems arise for a better known type of interaction, the
'exchange interaction', which involves the spin more directly. In most

--- Page 507 ---

492 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
cases of interest to us this interaction arises through partial electron
transfer to intervening ('ligand') ions, and in magnitude the exchange
interaction varies widely. If its energy is large or comparable with the
microwave quantum involved in a magnetic resonance transition, the
spectrum may be altered quite drastically. If the exchange energy is
small compared with the microwave quantum, it affects primarily
the shape and width of the resonance line. The latter is true generally
for the magnetic and Coulomb interactions mentioned above, which
seldom exceed 10"1 cm"1 in energy.
In §§ 9.2-9.4 we consider the form of these interactions in more
detail. In the later sections we shall restrict the discussion to interactions
of the form
where p, q = x, y z and S Sj are the effective spins for ions i, j.
y i9
Obviously fl may be different for every pair of ions, and suffixes
m
(i, j) are needed but were omitted here for simplicity. The magnitude
of / embraces all contributions to spin-spin interaction which take
the form (9.1), whatever their source.
9.2. Magnetic dipole-dipole interaction
In an ordinary paramagnetic crystal the magnetic ion is surrounded
by other magnetic ions at minimum distances ^0-3 to 0-8 nm. There is
therefore an appreciable interaction between them, since the field
acting on one ion due to its neighbour is of order /?r~3, which may be
102 G or so. This interaction is known as dipole-dipole coupling, since
it is in a first approximation the same as the coupling between two
localized magnets. From classical theory the energy of two point
magnetic dipoles m and m, a distance r apart, is
i ;
For a pair of isotropic electronic dipoles we can write
so that (9.2a) becomes, in operator form,
If the direction cosines of r are (I, m, n), this can be expanded:

--- Page 508 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 493
which is a symmetric tensor type interaction. Here it has been assumed
that the dipoles are isotropic, but electronic dipoles in a solid are often
anisotropic. We then require an expression for the energy of interaction
of one anisotropic magnet in the field of the other (anisotropic) magnet.
For a field component H in the ^-direction the energy of such a
x
magnet is
and it can be shown that (9.2a) is correct provided that for a component
of a dipole moment such as m we write
x
The resultant formula can be written in the form
where each of the suffixes p, q, s, t takes the values x, y, z, and the
usual summation rules are to be observed whenever a suffix occurs
twice. This is not in general a symmetric tensor, though it may be
symmetric in special cases. Two such examples are:
(a) the two ions are identical and the principal axes of their (/-tensors
are parallel. The tensor is symmetric provided that the coefficient of
8^8^ is the same as that of 8^8^; since 8 Sj commute, interchange
i9
of (p, q) is equivalent to interchange of (i,j), and provided that all
components g = g such an interchange has no effect on the coeffi-
i j9
cients of each term. This result can also be obtained directly by taking
the principal axes as the (x, y, z) axes, in which case the components
in (9.2a) are all of the simple form m = — {}gS, etc., giving
x x x
which is clearly symmetric provided that g = g , etc.
ix jx
(b) the two ions have parallel principal axes for their (/-tensors, and
the line joining them lies along one of these common principal axes.
Taking the latter as the z-axis, we have I = m = 0, n = 1, and (9.5a)
becomes
where the 0-values are not necessarily the same for the two ions.

--- Page 509 ---

494 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
It is readily verified that (9.3) is a traceless tensor, but in general
(9.5), (9.5a), and (9.5b) are not.
So far we have considered only the interaction between point dipoles,
but in a magnetic ion the dipole moment is distributed, and in a
magnetic complex it may be distributed over the ligands. If the distribu-
tion is spherically symmetric, as in the spin magnetism of an ion in
the $-state of a half-filled shell, simple magnetostatic theory shows that
its magnetic potential at exterior points is the same as that of a point
dipole at the centre. If it does not have spherical symmetry, the
magnetic potential can be expanded in a power series where the leading
term corresponds to the potential of the equivalent point dipole. If
the magnetic moment distribution has a centre of symmetry, terms in
the expansion of the potential with odd powers in r will vanish, and the
next most important term after the dipolar term in the magnetic
energy of interaction between two ions will vary as r~5. At small
inter-ionic distances where this term might be significant the magnetic
interaction energy is generally unobservable because of exchange
interaction.
Hitherto we have assumed that the magnetic moment of an ion is
given by m = — /?(g . S) of which a typical component is given in
eqn (9.4). This assumption is justified if only the first-order Zeeman
interaction of an ion with a magnetic field is important. More generally
the Zeeman interaction can be written as a power series of the form
(for S = i)
In a resonance experiment we have for the | + } <->• | — ) transition
and the third and higher odd-order Zeeman terms appear as small
corrections to the (/-factor. However the effective magnetic moment
at field H is
-(dW/dH) = =F4^+2a ^T3a ^2, etc.
1 2
and in an experiment at high magnetic field the second term may well
be significant, giving changes of opposite sign in the apparent magnetic
moment for the | +) and | — ) states. An extreme case is the F doublet
3
in a cubic field, such as the ground state of Dy2+ in CaF ; this is non-
2
magnetic (g = 0) at H = 0, but the presence of low-lying excited
states gives the rather complicated Zeeman splitting shown in Fig. 5.6.
Clearly the magnetic dipolar interaction of such an ion with another
ion is more complex than (9.3), and in general it may be necessary to

--- Page 510 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 495
allow for a field dependence in the ionic magnetic moment, with
different effective moments in reversed orientations in the presence of
an external magnetic field. Of course similar effects arise from the
mutual magnetic interaction of two ions, but the magnetic field of one
ion acting on a neighbouring ion is ~102 G, while the external field may
be 104 to 105 G.
9.3. Exchange interaction
The theory of exchange interaction in insulators has been extensively
reviewed by Anderson (1963), and the complexities of this subject will
not be explored here. A common assumption is that the main interaction
is of the form
where S«, S, are the true spins and not the effective spins. When
t
S > \, this equation may only be the leading term of a series expansion
in which higher terms (Stevens 19536) such as (S^ . S.)2 occur; the
;
effect of such a term is considered briefly at the end of § 9.10.
In most paramagnetic crystals exchange interaction is not of the
simple type arising from direct overlap of the electronic wave-functions
discussed by Heisenberg and Dirac, but is due to super-exchange.
The theory of Anderson (1959) has been extended by Moriya (1960)
to include spin-orbit coupling, and the exchange energy then no
longer takes the simple scalar form of eqn (9.6) ('isotropic exchange')
but becomes 'anisotropic'. Moriya shows that in addition to the scalar
term there may be other terms of the form
and
where the second term has the nature of a symmetrical tensor while the
first is an antisymmetric tensor, with components of the form
It is obvious that the form (9.1) can include both (9.6) and (9.7) if
we allow / ^ to have the form of a general tensor that is not necessarily
symmetric nor traceless.
The term (9.7) was proposed on symmetry grounds by Dzialoshinski
(1958) and vanishes for pairs of ions embedded in a lattice under certain
symmetry conditions. Moriya showed that it is of order (kg/g) times
the isotropic super-exchange energy, while the magnitude of the

--- Page 511 ---

496 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
interaction (9.8) is of order (&g/g)2 times the isotropic exchange, on
the assumption that the ground state is an orbital singlet and the
; spin-orbit coupling is small compared with the crystal field splitting
of the orbital states. This latter condition means that the departure
Agr of the (/-value from the spin-only value is rather small. However in
'many salts the orbital moment is far from quenched, and in these
cases the anisotropic exchange interaction, expressed in terms of the
effective spins, can easily become as important as the isotropic
exchange, or even predominate. This can easily be seen by taking two
examples.
Example 1: a rare-earth salt
We assume an isotropic interaction of the form (9.6) between the
true spins. If admixture of states of different J can be neglected, so
that only matrix elements within the ground manifold with a single
value of J need be considered, the spin S can be projected onto J.
From the equivalences L + S — J, L+2S = gjJ, this projection is
(gj — 1)J, and for a pair of identical ions the interaction may be
written as
Suppose that the crystal-field splitting leaves ground states of effective
spin S, with an anisotropic splitting factor g, whose principal values
are (g, g, g). Then since we have the equivalence between the matrix
x y z
elements
the exchange interaction between a pair of identical ions in the ground
doublet becomes, in terms of the effective spins,
where
This interaction is of the form of eqn (9.1). It has the same principal
axes as the ^-tensor, but can be highly anisotropic; for example, in
cases with axial symmetry, such as the ethylsulphates, we may have
Qx = 9v — 0> while g* may be of order 100.
Example 2; a cobaltous salt
Similar relations can be deduced for salts of the iron group when
the orbital momentum is not completely 'quenched'. We take as an

--- Page 512 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 497
example a cobaltous ion, Co2+, 3d7, in an octahedral crystal field, where
the orbital degeneracy of the L = 3 manifold is partially lifted, leaving
a F orbital triplet as the lowest level. This triplet behaves like a
4
manifold with effective orbital momentum I = 1 (see §§7.14, 19.3),
and an effective orbital g-f actor g which for our purposes we can
l}
assume to have the unconnected value — f . We have also a fourfold
spin degeneracy, with S — -f .
Under the action of spin-orbit coupling, the orbital triplet (I = 1)
with 8 — f splits into a doublet, a quartet, and a sextet with effective
angular momenta J = |, f , and f respectively. The doublet is lowest,
and its Zeeman splitting corresponds to a gr-factor given by an equiva-
lent Lande formula
To find the effective exchange interaction for a pair of ions both in
this doublet state, we project the true spin S onto J, using the relations
from which
Using the values ^ = — f , g = 2 we find that g = V3 and S = (f )J.
s
The latter factor enters twice in evaluating the exchange interaction
for a pair of ions, and on reverting to our usual nomenclature of
effective spin S instead of J we find that we have the equivalence
/(S, . S,) EE (*)«/(S, . S,). (9.15)
Thus the effective exchange interaction for the ground doublet is
isotropic, as we should expect from our initial assumption of cubic
(octahedral) symmetry and an isotropic exchange interaction between
the true spins. The latter is not, however, necessarily correct (see
below).
A multiplying factor that is so simply related to the (/-factor is no
longer to be expected in the presence of lower symmetry. If there is a
small distortion of axial symmetry, we may write the ground state as
a Kramers doublet of the general form
where each state \l, S) belongs to the F triplet with effective orbital
z z 4
33

--- Page 513 ---

498 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
angular momentum I = 1 and S = f. The Zeeman interaction within
the doublet can be evaluated using either the usual operator L+gr^S or
its equivalent form for the F triplet, §JL+g& with g = — f and
4 s 9 l
g = 2 as above. In terms of an effective spin S = J, the doublet then
s
has the principal values for its anisotropic g-factor
However to convert an exchange interaction ^(St . Sj) into the
equivalent interaction in terms of the effective spins S, the matrix
elements of S are needed. It is easily found from (9.16) that we have
then
from which it is clear that the coefficients are not simply related to
the (/-values, unlike the formulae (9.11) for the rare-earth salt. The
case of cubic symmetry is, of course, an exception; the coefficients then
are a = l/\/2, b = —1/^/3, c = 1/\A>> f°r which it can be verified
that (9.18) reduces to (9.15).
These two examples illustrate how an exchange interaction, isotropic
in terms of the true electron spins, can become highly anisotropic
when expressed in terms of the effective spins provided that the
orbital momentum is not completely quenched. Under the latter
circumstances it is not necessarily true that the exchange interaction
is isotropic even when expressed in terms of the true spins, as can readily
be seen by considering the case of direct exchange due to overlap of
the orbital wave-functions of two ions. Anisotropy arises when the
spin and orbit are closely coupled, so that a given component of the
spin may be associated with a given orbital wave-function that has a
lobe extending in the direction of a neighbouring ion, while a different
spin component may be associated with an orbital wave-function
with minimal extension in this particular direction. It is clear that the
overlap, and hence the exchange integral itself, can then change
markedly according to the orientation of the true spin, and the exchange
interaction will be anisotropic in the true spins, as in eqn (9.8).
Similar remarks hold for indirect exchange. It has been shown
theoretically (Judd 1959c) and experimentally (Griffiths, Owen, Park,
and Partridge 1959) that, even for magnetic complexes that individ-
ually have octahedral symmetry, the exchange interaction is not

--- Page 514 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 499
necessarily isotropic in terms either of the true or the effective spins
when considerable orbital momentum is involved. The only symmetry
restriction is that the exchange interaction must have a form compatible
with the overall symmetry, which is necessarily less than cubic for an
assembly of two complexes.
9.4. Multipole interactions
In addition to magnetic dipole and exchange interactions between
a pair of ions, there may also be a 'Coulomb' interaction between
them. Suppose we have two ions, i, j separated by a distance R, as
in Fig. 9.1. Then each electron on ion i will be subjected to an electric
field set up by the electronic and nuclear charges on ion j. The electro-
static energy of a pair of electrons, one at a point (x y z) relative
i9 iy t
to the centre of ion i, the other at a point (x y z,-) relative to the
j9 j9
centre of ion j, is
if for simplicity we take the line joining the centres of the two ions
to lie along the z-axis of the coordinate system. In this equation e is a
'dielectric constant' that allows for shielding effects due to the induced
charges on intervening ions; it may be <1, corresponding to an
anti-shielding effect. If the 'medium' is anisotropic the 'dielectric
constant' may also be anisotropic but this is a complication that we
shall neglect.
If R ^> x Xj, etc., we can expand (9.19) in inverse powers of R.
i9
We are, of course, interested only in those terms that vary with the
magnetic sub-state of each ion. If the charge distribution on each ion
does not have inversion symmetry, there may also be an electric dipole
moment and an electric-dipole interaction. As an example, we take a
pair of ions with non-Kramers doublets as ground states, such as
Pr3+ in LaCl . For nearest neighbours along the symmetry axis, the
3
net interaction may be of the form
where the first term is due to electric dipole-dipole interaction and the
last to magnetic dipole and/or exchange interaction.
The next term in the expansion of (9.19) is the quadrupole-quadrupole

--- Page 515 ---

500 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
FIG. 9.1. Coordinate systems used in evaluating the electrostatic interaction between a
pair of ions i, j whose centres are a distance R apart. The coordinate systems (a?;, y z),
i9 t
(x y Zj) have parallel axes but their origins are at the centre of each ion respectively;
j9 it
the z -axes are taken to be parallel to the line joining the two centres.
interaction
Here the interaction energy has been written in a form such that the
equivalent quantum-mechanical expression can be found by replacing
the spatial coordinates by angular momentum operators. For a pair
of rare-earth ions, where for present purposes it is sufficient to work
in terms of the ground manifold J for each ion, the Hamiltonian
equivalent is
where
The value of the coefficient A is

--- Page 516 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 501
where (r2) is the mean square radius of the 4/ ions on each ion, and
(J|| a || J) is the numerical coefficient of Elliott and Stevens listed in
Table 20.
The terms given above and higher-order terms, arising either from
exchange or from other multipole interactions, are conveniently
summarized in spin operator form by Birgeneau, Hutchings, Baker,
and Riley (1969).
The terms in (9.20), (9.21) do not change sign under the parity
operation, or under time reversal, and are thus essentially different
from the interactions considered in §§9.2 and 9.3. They give rise to
no first-order effect for ions whose states are Kramers doublets, or
non-Kramers doublets in which each state has the same electric charge
distribution. On the other hand, a first-order effect may occur for the
non-Kramers doublet F , where the two states have electric quadrupole
3
moments of opposite sign. First-order effects may arise also between
ions in states of higher degeneracy, such as triplet states (F , F ) or
4 5
quadruplet (F ) states in ions with cubic symmetry. Possible examples
8
arise in the lanthanide nitrides and analogous compounds with the
NaCl structure; U0 , Np0 , and similar compounds of the 5/ group
2 2
with the CaF structure; and ions of the 3d group with unquenched
2
orbital angular momentum such as Fe2+ in MgO. In accidental cases
of near degeneracy, such as cerium ethylsulphate with two low-lying
doublet states, the quadrupole-quadrupole interaction energy may be
of the same order as the separation between the two doublets, giving
first-order effects (Bleaney 1961).
Second-order effects may arise in ions whose ground states are
doublets, but which have fairly low-lying excited states, provided that
(9.21) has matrix elements between the ground and excited states.
The resultant interaction is similar in form to anisotropic exchange
interaction, making it difficult to distinguish unambiguously between
the two (Baker 19646). At first sight it would seem possible to calculate
accurately the size of the coefficient A in eqn (9.21), but this is hampered
by lack of reliable values of (r2) for the 4/ ions, and of shielding (or
anti-shielding) effects due to the intervening ions.
All the spin-spin interactions considered hitherto have arisen through
electro-magnetic interactions between the ions. Sugihara (1959) has
suggested that another type of spin-spin interaction may arise by
coupling through the 'phonon field', corresponding to the virtual
emission and absorption of phonons. When the coupling between
the magnetic ions and the lattice waves or phonon field is quadrupolar

--- Page 517 ---

502 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
in form, the Virtual phonon interaction' may resemble a quadrupole-
quadrupole interaction, and McMahon and Silsbee (1964) have shown
that for a pair of Fe2+ ions in MgO the interaction Hamiltonian has
the same form as eqn (9.21). A further theoretical treatment of the
virtual phonon interaction is given by Orbach and Tachiki (1967).
Although we have primarily considered above the quadrupole-
quadrupole interaction, in the case of ions (such as the 4/, 5/ions) with
large amounts of unquenched orbital momentum there may well be
interactions involving other multipole moments (including those of
odd degree). These may result from the cCoulomb' interaction (see,
for instance, Wolf and Birgeneau (1968)) or from the 'exchange'
interaction (Levy 1964, 1968; Elliott and Thorpe 1968). The experi-
mental problem of distinguishing between interactions that have the
same form in the effective spin Hamiltonian but arise from different
sources (including virtual phonon effects) is illustrated in the work of
Wickersheim and White (1962), Baker and Mau (1966), Allen (1968),
and Baker, Birgeneau, Hutchings and Riley (1968).
9.5. Interaction between a pair of similar ions
The general problem of magnetic resonance in a system of many
interacting ions is extremely complicated and before discussing it in
§§ 9.7-9.11 we consider the much simpler problem of a pair of interact-
ing ions. Not only does this yield some useful insight into the more
general problem, but the spectra of such pairs are themselves a direct
method of investigating the nature of the spin-spin interaction, and
almost the only method by which quantitative measurements of this
interaction can be obtained. In this section we consider an isolated pair
of identical ions, each with effective spin $- = S; = \ and with gr-tensors
t
TABLE 9.1
Normalized states and energy levels for a pair of identical
interacting ions with the spin Hamiltonian (9.24). The
normalization coefficients are given by tan 2a. = (/ — /^)\^G
X Z
Symmetric states Energy levels
Antisymmetric state Energy level

--- Page 518 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 503
whose principal values and principal axes are the same. We further
simplify the problem by assuming that the spin-spin interaction has
the simple form given in eqn (9.10), whose principal axes (x, y, z) are
the same as the principal axes of the (/-tensors. If the system is sub-
jected to an external field H directed along one of these principal axes
(which we take to be the z-axis), the appropriate Hamiltonian for the
pair of ions is
jr=g,pH.(St,+8»)+SJ3lJ3i.+S1l8iy8i,+SJStjSi,. (9.24)
This Hamiltonian gives the energy matrix
in which G = g^H, and a state such as |H—> is one in which ion i
z z z
is in the Siz = +| state and ion j in the Sjz = — \ state, etc. The
diagonal states and energy levels are given in Table 9.1. This table
shows that the four states of the two ions can be classified into three
symmetric states and one antisymmetric state; it is convenient to
refer to these as the 'triplet' and 'singlet' respectively, though the
triplet levels are not degenerate in zero magnetic field unless the
exchange interaction is isotropic. Magnetic resonance transitions are
allowed only between states belonging to the triplet, and no singlet-
triplet transitions are allowed, because the perturbation Hamiltonian
is symmetric with respect to interchange of the two ions; that is,
where H is the amplitude of an oscillatory magnetic field used to
t
produce resonance transitions.
The division into symmetric and anti-symmetric states suggests
that the system can be regarded as having two spectroscopic states,
one a triplet with total effective spin T = 1, the other a singlet with
total spin T = 0. This can be shown formally to be correct as follows.
Let T , T, T be the components along each of the three axes of the
x y z
total effective spin of the system, so that (S +8 ) = T , etc. Then
ia ix x
each of the terms in the exchange interaction can be transformed in
the following way:

--- Page 519 ---

504 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
where we have used the fact that the values of S^ , 82 are each |;
x jx
similar expressions hold for the y, z components. Hence the Hamiltonian
becomes
If we now write
we can regard / as the 'isotropic' part of the interaction, and f the
'anisotropic' part, for which the trace is zero:
Then, since T^+T^ + T* = T(T+l), the Hamiltonian becomes
The allowed values of T are T = 0, a singlet level at — 3^/4, and a
triplet T = 1 whose behaviour is identical with that of a spin triplet,
the mean energy of the three levels being + ^/4.
If the exchange is isotropic, /' = /' = /' = 0 and the second
x y z
term in (9.31) vanishes. All three triplet levels have the same energy
( + ^//4) in zero magnetic field, and are equally spaced by gfiH when
z z
a field is applied, as shown in Fig. 9.2. The allowed transitions within
the triplet are found from the oscillatory Hamiltonian
which is obtained from (9.26) by writing T = S^ + S,-. The allowed
transitions are of the usual type &T = ±1, and occur at
Z
This is independent of the value of /, showing that isotropic exchange
has no effect on the spectrum except at temperatures where kT ~ /,
when the intensity will no longer vary inversely as the absolute tem-
perature because of the triplet-singlet splitting. If / is positive, and
/ > g@H, the triplet states lie higher in energy and their populations
z z
will tend to zero at sufficiently low temperatures where kT < /", so
that the spectrum will then decline in intensity and ultimately vanish
as the temperature is lowered. If / is negative, the singlet state is
the higher in energy, and will become depopulated at sufficiently low
temperatures; if g{$H<^kT< /, the intensity of the spectrum line
z z
at hv = gzfiHz will be greater by a factor | when the singlet state is
completely depopulated than it would have been in the absence of the

--- Page 520 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 505
FIG. 9.2. Energy levels and allowed transitions for a pair of ions each with S = J and
coupled by isotropic exchange interaction:
exchange interaction. Thus intensity measurements in the region where
kT ~ fl can be used to estimate the value of fl.
When the exchange interaction contains anisotropic components, the
second term in (9.31) does not vanish and gives an initial splitting of
the triplet levels in zero field similar to the 'fine structure' splitting
discussed in § 3.5. This splitting arises only from the anisotropic part
of the exchange, and is the same as that given by eqn (3.25) if we write
If gfiH > /', the allowed transitions are just those within the triplet
z z i
for which &T = ± 1 > and occur at (in first approximation)
Z
Hence the magnitude of /' can be found from the separation of the
z
two resonance lines under these conditions, and similarly /' , /' can
x y
be found from measurements with the external magnetic field along
the axes x, y. If gfiH is comparable with /, the spectrum is more
z z
complicated in its behaviour as discussed in § 3.5, but the values of
/'*> #'v> /'* can be found by fitting it to the Hamiltonian (9.31). The
value of the isotropic part of the interaction fl can be found only
by intensity measurements as a function of temperature in the region

--- Page 521 ---

506 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
where TcT >—' ^, as mentioned above. Thus the isotropic and aniso-
tropic parts of the spin-spin interaction produce significantly different
effects in the spectrum of a pair of identical ions.
The spectrum of copper acetate
A spectrum of this type was discovered in copper acetate mono-
hydrate, Cu(CH COO) ,H 0 by Bleaney and Bowers (1952&, b) and Abe
3 2 2
and Shimada (1953, 1957). The cupric ion, 3d9*D is expected to have
a doublet ground state, but the spectrum observed corresponded to
that for an effective spin of 1. It was suggested by Bleaney and Bowers
that the copper ions must occur in isolated pairs in this salt, and this
was later verified by an X-ray determination of the structure by van
Niekerk and Schoening (1953), which showed that the copper-copper
distance in a pair is only 0-264 nm.
The constants of the triplet spectrum in copper acetate and of the
doublet spectrum in zinc-doped copper acetate are given in Table 9.2.
The 'fine structure' constants D, E follow the customary nomenclature
for a spin 1 spectrum (eqn (3.26)), and are related to the anisotropic
parts of the exchange interaction discussed above:
The intensity of the triplet spectrum passes through a maximum,
and declines rapidly at temperatures below 90°K. From this intensity
TABLE 9.2
Parameters of the triplet spectrum of copper acetate and
of the doublet spectrum in zinc-doped copper acetate
CuAc,2H 0 ZnCuAc, 2HO
2 4 2 4 2
Effective spin T = 1 T = 1 8 = i
Temperature 90°K 300°K 77°K
9x 2-08(3) 2-053(5) 2-052(7)
2-08(3) 2-093(5) 2-082(7)
9y
gz 2-42(3) 2-344(10) 2-344(5)
\D\ (cm-1) 0-34(3) 0-345(5)
E (cm-1) 0-010(5) 0-005(3)
A (cm-1) <0-001 <0-0018
x
A (cm-1) <0-001 <0-0023
v
A (cm-1) 0-008 0-0147(6)
z
Ref. BB, 1952 AS, 1957 KAG, 1965
References: BB, Bleaney and Bowers (19526).
AS, Abe and Shimada (1957).
KAG, Kokoszka, Allen, and Gordon (1965).

--- Page 522 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 507
variation an estimate of (260 ±50) cm"1 was obtained for the singlet-
triplet splitting, which is equal to /. A more accurate value of
(310 ±15) cm"1 is obtained by fitting the susceptibility measurements
FIG. 9.3. The susceptibility of copper acetate monohydrate (per g mol of copper). The
continuous line is the function
where C is the Curie constant and a the temperature -independent susceptibility. The
experimental points are those of Foex, Karantissis, and Perakis (1953).
(see Fig. 9.3). Thus the anisotropic part of the exchange interaction
(measured by D, E) is very small compared with the isotropic part.
The 0-values of Abe and Shimada (which are almost certainly more
accurate than those of Bleaney and Bowers) for the triplet state agree
very closely with those of isolated copper ions in copper-zinc pairs

--- Page 523 ---

508 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
obtained from zinc-doped copper acetate by Kokoszka, Allen, and
Gordon (1965). This supports a treatment (Bleaney and Bowers 19526)
in which the copper ions are assumed to be subjected to a normal type
of crystal field, together with an exchange interaction /($>i. S) which
;
is isotropic in the true spins. If the same tetragonal crystal field is
assumed for each ion, then an anisotropic exchange interaction between
the effective spins results when the spin-orbit interaction is introduced
into the theory. Its size can be linked to the ^-values:
If we take / = 310 cm-1, gz = 2-344 and gL = 2-073 (the mean of
g , g) we find D = +0-95 cm"1 and, on the assumption of tetragonal
x y ex
symmetry, E = 0.
An additional contribution to D comes from magnetic dipole-dipole
interaction between the two copper ions, which on a point dipole
model gives
With the interionic distance r = 0-264 nm, and the measured values
of g, g this gives D = —0-19 cm."1, so that the net calculated value
z L dip
of D is D +i> = +0-76 cm."1. This is over twice the measured
ex dip
value. The discrepancy is most likely due to use of the value
fl = 310 cm"1 in eqn (9.37). This value, obtained from the singlet-
triplet splitting, represents the exchange interaction between two
cupric ions in the ground orbital states produced by the splitting due
to the tetragonal crystal field. However it is easily shown (see Bleaney
and Bowers 19526) that the splitting of the triplet depends on the
exchange interaction between one cupric ion in the ground state and
the other cupric ion in an excited orbital; there are in fact two such
excited orbitals involved, which have matrix elements to the ground
orbital through the spin-orbit coupling. If we allow for different values
of the exchange interaction when an excited orbital is involved, we
should write
There is no evidence as to the values of /^ / % and a meaningful
comparison with experiment (where the sign of D has not been
determined) is impossible.
A partially resolved hyperfine structure is observed (see Fig. 9.4)
when the external magnetic field is along the 2-axis. The electronic
transition is split into components displaced from the centre by an

--- Page 524 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 509
(a) (b)
FIG. 9.4. Hyperfine structure due to coupled pairs of Cu2+ ions in cupric acetate,
CuAc, 2HO. (a) Oscillogram showing hyperfine structure with magnetic field parallel
2 4 2
to z-axis, (b) Calculated hyperfine structure, assuming Gaussian line shape and half
width at half intensity of 35 G. (Bleaney and Bowers 19526.)
amount ^A(m+m) where A is the hyperfine parameter for an isolated
i j 9
copper ion, and m m the nuclear magnetic quantum numbers for the
i9 j
two copper ions of the pair. Since I Z, = f, the sum m^ m can take
iy i r j
all integral values from +3 to —3, but the intermediate values can
be obtained in more than one way, giving a set of 7 equally spaced
lines with relative intensity 1:2:3:4:3:2:1. The experimental line
shape is compared with its reconstructed shape in Fig. 9.4. The values
of A , A , A given in the first column of Table 9.2 for the triplet
x y z
spectrum refer to the separation of successive lines, and are close to
half the values in column three for the isolated ion. The factor \ occurs
because we are dealing with two identical ions for which the hyperfine
interaction is much smaller than the strong exchange interaction, so
that we must project the spin vector of each ion onto the total spin T.
The factor is only \ if each ion has the same value of S, as can be
immediately understood from a vector coupling model in which S S,-
i9
precess about the total spin T.
9.6. Interaction between a pair of dissimilar ions
The discussion in the last section of the energy levels and spectrum
of a pair of interacting ions with effective spin S =•% was confined to
the case of a pair of similar ions. We now consider the case of a pair
of dissimilar ions, again each with S = |. For the sake of simplicity
we assume that the principal axes of the two (/-tensors are identical
but the principal (/-factors themselves are not. Initially we allow the
spin-spin interaction to be anisotropic, with the same form as in eqn
(9.24). If an external magnetic field H is applied along the z-axis
z
(a principal axis for both the (/-tensor and the interaction tensor), the

--- Page 525 ---

510 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
Hamiltonian is
The energy matrix is similar to (9.25); writing
we obtain
in which the labelling of the states |H—}, etc. is the same as in (9.25).
The important difference between (9.41) and (9.25) is that the diagonal
matrix elements for the states \-\—) and | —h) are no longer identical,
and this is most significant when the difference in Zeeman energy
dgzj3Hz is large compared with the interaction between the two ions,
which appears in the off-diagonal matrix elements between these two
states. For simplicity we consider first the case where this inequality
is so well satisfied that we can use first-order perturbation theory and
neglect the off-diagonal terms. In this approximation the states and
energy levels are as shown in Fig. 9.5; the allowed transitions are just
those in which the ^-component of the spin of one ion is reversed, and
occur at
This spectrum consists of two pairs of lines, one pair centred on the
point at which the transition for ion i would occur in the absence of
any interaction, the other similarly centred for ion j. The separation
of the lines in each pair is just /„ and the important difference
between this and the separation in eqn (9.35) is that whereas the
separation for similar ions depends only on the anisotropic part fl1 of
the exchange interaction, the separation for dissimilar ions (eqn (9.42))
gives the component £ of the entire interaction. Obviously similar
z
measurements with the magnetic field along the x, y axes will yield
the quantities / , / .
x y
We now relax the restriction that the spin-spin interaction be
small compared with the difference in Zeeman energy and consider a
general case. However we reduce the number of parameters involved
by assuming that the interaction is a simple isotropic interaction, so
that /a = / = / = /. This enables us to express the energy
y z

--- Page 526 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 511
i FIG. 9.5. Approximate states and energy levels for a pair of dissimilar ions for which the
difference in Zeeman energy (giz—gjz)j3Hz = 2,dgzf}Hz is large compared with the spin-
spin interaction energy ^(/ +/ }. The allowed transitions (in first approximation)
x y
correspond to the ^-component of one spin being reversed under the combined effect of the
.external field plus the steady component / of the interaction due to the other spin.
z
.levels in terms of a parameter x = %e//(dgzpHz), and the spectrum
can be studied as x is allowed to increase from zero (no interaction) to
ivery large values (strong interaction). The states and energy levels
are given in Table 9.3.
When x = 0 (no interaction), the allowed transitions are a<— »c,
b<-*d, which both occur at hv = gizfiHz\ and a<-»&, c^d, which
both occur at hv = gjz@Hz; this is, of course, just the case of two
TABLE 9.3
States and energy levels for a pair of ions of spin S = %, which are
dissimilar (different g-values), subject to isotropic exchange inter-
action. Here tan 2oc = 2x = A ^l(dq3H)
z z
States Energy levels

--- Page 527 ---

512 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
isolated ions with different values of g. When x is small, these transitions
z
split into two doublets, the components of each doublet being separated
by an amount / in first approximation; this is the case treated earlier
in this section, where it was shown more generally that if the interaction
is anisotropic, the doublet separation is /z (—/ in this case) when
the external field is applied along the z-axis.
FIG. 9.6. Spectrum of a pair of dissimilar ions with isotropic exchange interaction
corresponding to the Hamiltonian (S = S = J),
{ f
The states and energy levels are given in Table 9.3 in terms of the parameter
x = %/l(dgzfiHz}. At x = 0 (no interaction), the transitions occur at hv = gizf$Hz,
g f}H appropriate to the isolated ions. As x increases the outer transitions diverge (and
iz z
become steadily weaker); the inner transitions converge on the mean frequency
hv = gz{$Hz = J(<7,-z+<7jz}f$Hz (and become stronger). The diagram is drawn for
As x increases, the two transitions a <—»c, c <-> d, which are diverging
in frequency (see Fig. 9.6), gradually lose intensity, while the transitions
a <-» 6, b<^>d, which are converging towards the point
become rather stronger. When x is extremely large, only these two
latter have appreciable intensity, and they lie close to a frequency
which is midway between the frequencies appropriate to the isolated
ions. When x approaches infinity, the value of a approaches Tr/4 and
the energy levels can be divided into a triplet a, 6, d whose states are

--- Page 528 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 513
symmetric, and a singlet c whose state is antisymmetric. This is similar
to the position considered in § 9.4, where transitions within the triplet
only are allowed, but here transitions between the triplet and singlet
are also allowed when x is small but become increasingly forbidden as
x -> oo.
The essential difference between the energy matrices (9.25) and
(9.41) is that in the former the diagonal elements for the states | -(—}
and |—h) are the same, whereas in the latter they are different. In
the former case the off-diagonal elements produce a splitting of the
two states in first order, while in the latter the off-diagonal elements
produce a first-order effect only when they are of the same order as
the difference between the diagonal elements. Physically the situation
can be interpreted as follows. When the ions are identical, they precess
at the same rate in the external magnetic field. When spin-spin
interaction is present, each ion experiences also a field set up by the
other ion which has both steady and oscillatory components. (In the
simple case of magnetic dipole interaction this is just the local magnetic
field of the other ion.) For identical ions this oscillatory component
is just at the right frequency to cause a spin 'flip', thus giving an
additional interaction because of the resonance effect whereby ion 'V
moves from the 'up' to the down position while ion (f moves from 'down'
to 'up'. This corresponds to the exchange of a quantum of energy and
does not change the total Zeeman energy of the pair in the external
field.
When the ions are not identical they precess at different velocities
in the external magnetic field and there is no resonance effect if the
interaction between them is small compared with the difference in
velocities of precession. If this inequality is reversed, and the interac-
tion is large, there is a high rate of mutual spin 'flipping' whose
frequency is of order \(/x-\-/^\h, which is rapid compared with the
difference of precession frequencies in the external field. This field
therefore sees only an average of the two ions, and the spectral line
is observed at \(giz+gjZ}fiHz = gz(5Hz instead of at or near the indi-
vidual frequencies g f}H, g fiH.
iz z jz z
Figure 9.6 shows how the line positions vary as the relative sizes of
the spin-spin interaction and dg@H vary from one extreme to the
z z
other. In practice the spin-spin interaction for a given system is fixed
in size but we can achieve a variation in x = \/\(§g $II^ by measuring
z
at different magnetic fields, i.e. at different frequencies. In copper
sulphate, CuS0 ,5H 0, an effect of this kind for the two types of Cu2+
4 2
34

--- Page 529 ---

514 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
ion was reported by Bagguley and Griffiths (1948) and Pryce (1948);
this was the first direct observation of exchange effects in paramagnetic
resonance. At lower frequencies (~10 GHz) only a single resonance
line is observed, but at higher frequencies (40 to 60 GHz) two lines
are resolved (Bagguley and Griffiths 1950, Ono and Ohtsuka 1958).
The ^-tensors of the two Cu2+ ions are similar but the principal axes
are differently oriented, so that the phenomenon can also be studied
as a function of dg by varying the orientation of the magnetic field
with respect to the crystal axes.
Although we have treated above only the case of a pair of ions that
are dissimilar in the principal values of their g-factors, the distinction
between 'similar' and 'dissimilar' ions is more general. A pair of ions
may be identical except that their nuclei are isotopes of the same
element with different hyperfine structures (see, for example, Baker
(1964a)). If the ions have effective spins greater than S = \ they may
have 'fine structures' with differently oriented principal axes, as in a
chromic alum. The essential distinction is: in the energy matrix of a
pair of ions do two states have the same energy in the absence of spin-
spin interaction, or do their energies differ by an amount large compared
with the spin-spin interaction? In the latter case we need include only
the diagonal components of their mutual interaction; in the former the
off-diagonal components will be equally important. For the simple
examples treated in this and the previous section, the interaction
splits each spectrum line into a doublet; for dissimilar ions with a
weak interaction, the doublet splitting (for a magnetic field along the
z-axis) is ^ , whereas for similar ions the corresponding splitting is
z
where we have used the fact that fl' + J?' + ^' = 0 for the components
x y z
of the anisotropic interaction. We shall meet these two quantities
again in the following sections on line broadening.
In conclusion it should be noted that when the interaction tensor
contains off-diagonal terms such as S S , etc. (and these are generally
ix jz
present in magnetic dipole interaction), transitions between the
'triplet' and 'singlet' states are no longer forbidden either for pairs of
similar or dissimilar ions.
9.7. Line broadening by spin-spin interaction
In the previous sections we have considered only isolated pairs of
magnetic ions; but in a paramagnetic salt each ion is surrounded by
a number of other ions at varying distances. The interaction between
each pair is a function of the distance between them and the angle

--- Page 530 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 515
which the line joining their centres makes with the crystal axes; with
indirect exchange it may also depend on the arrangement of diamag-
netic ions in between. The effect of this interaction is to displace the
resonance line from that of a single ion by an amount dependent on
the strength of the interaction, and the intensity at a given displacement
depends on the number of pairs with a given size of interaction. If
we consider in turn pairs of ions in a crystal with increasing separation
we may expect their interaction to diminish in size but the number of
such pairs increases. Hence lines that are displaced by a small amount
will have greater intensity, while lines displaced by a larger amount
will have a smaller intensity. With only a small number of ions, the
absorption curve may show some structure, but with a crystal of
ordinary size the number of interacting ions is so large that a broad
absorption curve with no structure is to be expected. Exceptions to
this occur if the interaction of one ion with two of three of its neighbours
is much greater than its interaction with other neighbours. One such
example, cupric acetate, has already been described in § 9.5, where
given pairs of ions are strongly coupled by exchange interaction; a
less dramatic example is neodymium ethylsulphate (see Fig. 9.9) where
interaction (mainly magnetic dipole in origin) with two nearest neigh-
bours predominates sufficiently to give a structure to the absorption
curve, while more distant neighbours give only an unresolved
broadening.
The complete Hamiltonian for a set of interacting ions consists of
(a) a set of terms 3£ \, the separate spin Hamiltonian for each ion,
summed over all ions; and (b) a set of terms 3£ ' the interaction
ijy
Hamiltonian for each pair of ions, summed over all pairs. Formally
we may write this as
where the summation nomenclature j > i reminds us that each pair
must be counted only once. Exact diagonalization of this Hamiltonian,
which would yield all the eigenvalues and hence the details of the
width and the shape of the absorption curve, is clearly impossible. An
alternative approach, originally due to Waller (1932), is the method of
'moments'. The nth moment of an absorption line is defined by the
relation

--- Page 531 ---

516 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
where f(v) is the value of the 'shape factor' at frequency v, (see § 2.3),
which is normalized so that J f(v) dv = 1 when the integral is taken
over all frequencies, and V is the frequency at which the line would
Q
occur in the absence of any interaction. If the absorption curve (more
strictly, the shape factor) is symmetrical about this frequency V ,
Q
then clearly all the odd moments (including the first, n = 1) will
vanish, so that we need consider only the even moments. In principle
these moments give information about the line shape in an indirect
way, which is progressively more exact the higher the number of
moments computed. Although these moments can be computed
without having to diagonalize exactly the whole matrix corresponding
to eqn (9.44), the labour is excessive for the higher moments. In practice
only the second moment (Av2) is easily found, and the fourth moment
(A*>4) has been calculated only for a few special cases. This does not
represent a serious drawback for comparison with experiment, because
calculation of the higher moments from measured absorption curves
is very inaccurate, the major contribution coming from the extreme
wings of the curve where the absorption is small and difficult to measure
exactly. In any case the theoretical computations can only be carried
through if the way in which the interactions vary is known for all
pairs of ions; this condition is fulfilled for a crystal of known structure
if only magnetic dipole interactions are involved, but seldom holds
if exchange or other interactions are present.
An extensive discussion of dipolar broadening (including the effect
of isotropic exchange) can be found in Van Vleck (1948). In view of
the limitations mentioned above, we give only a sketch of the method
using the nomenclature adopted in this chapter. We begin by restricting
the discussion to a set of identical spins, with no fine structure or
hyperfine structure, subjected to an external magnetic field H whose
direction we take to be the 2-axis of a system of Cartesian coordinates.
Then the general Hamiltonian (9.44) will have the form
where the interaction term embraces all interactions that are linear in the
spin coordinates and expressible in tensor form. That is, each interaction
term has the form (dropping the subscripts i, j on fl for convenience)

--- Page 532 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 517
Here the form of the first term is that of an isotropic exchange interac-
tion while the remainder is that of an 'anisotropic' exchange interaction,
in which
This distinction is similar to that made in § 9.5, though the assumption
was made there that the interaction could be reduced to the simple
form of eqn (9.24). Here the z-axis is chosen to be that of the external
magnetic field, which is not necessarily a principal axis of the interac-
tion tensor, nor is the latter necessarily a symmetrical tensor. Equation
(9.48) is valid whatever system of axes is used; it makes the trace of
the anisotropic tensor zero, while the coefficient / of the term
/(&i . S,,-) is independent of the choice of axes.
Of the terms in (9.47) we now pick out those for which the total
^-component of the spin (S -\-S ) is constant. For any given pair
iz jz
these are
where we have used eqn (9.48). The reason why we select these terms
can readily be seen by considering the energy matrix of a pair of
similar ions. The Hamiltonian, including the Zeeman interaction and
the 'truncated' Hamiltonian (9.49), is
and, if the basis states (cf. § 9.5) are taken as
the energy matrix is diagonal. The allowed transitions are all of the
form AJf = ±1, where M = (Siz+Sjz) is the total z-component of
the spin, and occur near hv = g@H provided that J>' < g@H. The
zz
terms omitted are all off-diagonal terms, whose effect is to admix the
basis states and allow other transitions of the type £±M = 0, ±2,
which occur near hv = 0, 2gflH. Similar considerations hold when we
consider a large number of interacting similar ions, for which the
truncated Hamiltonian is
The z-component M = ^ S is a constant of the motion, and the
iz

--- Page 533 ---

518 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
allowed transitions are all of the type AJf = ±1 and occur near
hv = gf3H. The interaction terms omitted from the truncated Hamil-
tonian (9.51) introduce matrix elements of the type AJkf = ±1, ±2,
and make transitions of the form AJf = 0, ±2, ±3 weakly allowed
(higher values of AJf also occur with rapidly decreasing intensity).
The subsidiary line near hv = 0 corresponds to the non-resonant
spin-spin relaxation phenomenon observed at radio-frequencies of
order /'\h\ the line at hv = 2g/3H has been observed experimentally
(see Fig. 9.7) by Bleaney and Ingram (1951) in a cobaltous salt where
FIG. 9.7. Spectrum of concentrated cobalt ammonium sulphate along the K axis at
2
20°K and v = 0-84 cm"1. The line at half-field is shown on a scale 100 x that of the main
line (its height is 0-6 per cent of that of the main line). The line shape indicates that there
is a considerable amount of exchange narrowing (Bleaney and Ingram 1951).
the effective spin of the Co2+ ion is S = -J, and such a line cannot be a
single ion transition.
We now consider the problem of calculating the second moment of
an absorption line centred on frequency v , and for which the shape
0
factor at frequency v has the value f(v). Since we can write
we have
and

--- Page 534 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 519
If the line shape is symmetrical about r , the second term on the
0
right-hand side vanishes and, since v is a constant and J f(v) dv = 1,
0
we have
The conditions under which the assumption of a line shape symmetrical
about v is valid will be discussed later (§9.11).
Q
Equation (9.52) enables us to find (Ay2) using a quantum-mechanical
formula for (v2). Suppose transitions are induced by an oscillatory
magnetic field polarized along the #-axis. Then, if there is no aniso-
tropy in g, the transition probabilities are found from the matrix
elements of the operator S = ^ $*«• Let (S ) , be the matrix element
x x nn
i
between two eigenstates of (9.51) denoted by n and ri ', for which the
corresponding frequency is v , = (J^ — J^f )lh. Then the mean square
nn n nf
absorption frequency (in which each frequency is weighted with the
square of the appropriate amplitude) is
Both numerator and denominator can be expressed as diagonal sums,
giving
which has the advantage that the spur or trace (Tr) is invariant and
can be computed without having to diagonalize the Hamiltonian
(9.51), and finding the individual eigenvalues. Evaluation of the traces
(cf. Van Vleck 1948) gives
The striking feature of this result is that it contains only the aniso-
tropic part of the interaction, and is independent of the isotropic term
(S- . S,-). This is in line with the result found in § 9.5 for the spectrum
t
of a pair of similar ions, which consists of a single line at hv = g()H
if only an isotropic interaction is present, but otherwise contains several
lines split by an amount dependent on the size of the anisotropic
part of the interaction. For a system of many interacting ions we may
picture the broadened line as consisting of a multiplicity of such split
pair spectra, though this is, of course, an over-simplification since we
have to picture each ion as being paired off with every other ion.

--- Page 535 ---

520 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
In many paramagnetic crystals there may be more than one set of
paramagnetic ions, such as two sets of electronic spins with different
g-values, or one set of electronic spins and one set of nuclear spins.
We must therefore carry out a calculation similar to that above, but
in which we treat the interactions between similar spins all belonging
to the same set 8 separately from the interactions between a spin 8
of one set and a spin S' of the other set. We assume that the two sets
of spins have different g-values g and g', and give two distinct resonance
lines at hv = gf)H and g'jUH respectively whose separation is large
compared with their widths; this implies that the spin-spin interaction
between spins of the different species is small compared with the
difference (g—g')f3H in their Zeeman energies (cf. § 9.6). Suppose we
wish to find the second moment of one of the lines (that of the first
set of spins). For interactions with other spins of the same set we
proceed exactly as above, but for interactions between dissimilar
spins we retain in our truncated interaction Hamiltonian for each
pair only the term
Comparison with (9.49) shows that we have excluded terms of the type
$t+$j-_> 8i-8'j > which would correspond to mutual spin flips between
+
the two sets of ions; these terms are associated with a subsidiary
absorption line at hv = (2g—g')/3H which, under the condition given
above, is distinct from the main line at g/3H. The formula for the
second moment then becomes
where the first summation is over pairs of ion i with all similar ions
of the first set only, while the second is over all pairs of ion i with
dissimilar ions belonging to the second set only. An important difference
between the two summations is that in the second case the quantity
/zz is involved and not just the term /'zz belonging to the anisotropic
part of the interaction. This means that the isotropic interaction
contributes to the second moment for dissimilar ions, but not for
similar ions, corresponding to the differences already found for single
pairs of interacting ions in §§9.5 and 9.6. A further correspondence
appears in the factor (f) in the term (3^^ /2) for similar ions arising
2
from the resonance effect that enhances the interaction between them.
This factor is absent from the term /zz for dissimilar ions.

--- Page 536 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 521
9.8. Line shape due to dipolar spin-spin interaction
As noted in the last section, computations of line width and moments
can be carried out only if the interaction constants are known for all
pairs of spins in a crystal. In general, this restricts the computations
to cases where the interaction is entirely due to magnetic dipole
interaction between the spins, a situation that is rather rare if the
magnetic moments are electronic rather than nuclear in origin. For
this reason the following discussion will in the main be qualitative
rather than quantitative.
If the interaction is dipolar, and the (/-factors of the two spins
involved are each isotropic, the form of the interaction is given by
eqn (9.3). This is a particular form of the more general tensor-type
interaction assumed in eqn (9.46), and since (9.3) has zero trace the
'isotropic' part of the interaction as defined by eqns (9.47), (9.48)
vanishes; that is, / = 0, and the distinction between quantities /
xx
and /' ^ etc., is unnecessary. (This does not hold if the (/-factors are
x
anisotropic, since the sum / + /y + / = 0 for eqn (9.3) but not
xx v zz
for (9.5a) or (9.5b).) If there are two sets of spins, S and $', with
isotropic (/-factors </, g'', the quantities needed for the calculation of
the second moment given by (9.57) are
and
Here r is the distance between the centres of spins i, j and n = cos O
tj tj i}
where O is the angle that the line joining the centres makes with the
tj
external magnetic field H (i.e. with the z-axis). The value of £ is
zz
just the interaction between the z-component of spin S and the
i
z-component of the local field at its centre, that is produced by the
^-component of spin 8(. If mutual spin flips among the spins S' can
be neglected, this component is a constant of the motion, and con-
tributes just a static component to the local field, so that broadening
of the line due to interaction with dissimilar spins is essentially similar
to that which would be produced by inhomogeneities in the external
magnetic field. If no other form of broadening is present the line is
said to be cinhomogeiieously broadened'. In the extreme case the wave
train emitted or absorbed by a spin is infinite in length, but is at a
slightly different frequency from that of other spins subjected to
different local fields (cf. § 2.6).
When the interacting spins are identical there is the additional

--- Page 537 ---

522 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
resonance interaction due to the processing components of the spins,
which in eqn (9.57) makes the relevant quantity (3^/^/2) rather than
/ . Since in the present case there is no distinction between /' and
zz zz
^' , the second moment for similar spins is just a factor (f) greater
zz
than that obtained simply by including only the static components
of the interaction. (Obviously the factor (f) is correct only if the gr-factor
is isotropic, since otherwise /' ^ / .} This resonance interaction
zz zz
between identical spins shortens the lifetime of the individual spin
states through mutual spin flips. In the over-simplified model discussed
in Chapter 2 the average lifetime of a spin state is described by a
parameter r , the spin-spin or transverse relaxation time. The line in
2
such a case is said to be 'homogeneously broadened'; the spins emit or
absorb wave trains of finite length whose mean duration in time is r ,
2
and whose probability distribution is of the form exp(— £/r ). The
2
line shape should be given by the Lorentz factor
where Av = l/(27rr ). For such a line shape, the intensity falls to one-
2
half the maximum value when the frequency deviates by ±Ar from
the central frequency V . If the second moment of such a line is com-
Q
puted by eqn (9.45), it is found to be infinite; since we know from eqn
(9.55) that the second moment is finite, it follows that the line shape
cannot be Lorentzian, and the absorption in the wings must fall more
rapidly than predicted by eqn (9.59). Again, since the second moment
given by (9.59) is infinite, there is no way of relating the line breadth
parameter Ar in (9.59) to the second moment computed from eqns
(9.57) and (9.58).
In practice it is often useful to have a simple analytical form for the
line shape, even if only approximately correct. An alternative assump-
tion for the shape factor is that of a Gaussian error function
which is normalized, and contains no arbitrary parameter, since it
gives a second moment just equal to (Av2). The higher moments can
also be readily calculated, and (9.60) gives for the fourth moment

--- Page 538 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 523
An explicit calculation of (Av4) for a simple cubic lattice of spins by
Van Vleck (1948, 1957) by the rigorous method of moments gives
a check on the validity of the Gaussian assumption. For S = J, and an
external field directed along an (001) axis, he finds the factor to be
1-25 rather than the 1-32 given in (9.61). For a field directed along a
(111) axis, or if S > |, the factor is even nearer to 1-32.
An experimental determination of line shape is shown in Fig. 9.8;
the experimental points agree well with the Gaussian shape whose
second moment has been computed by the diagonal sum method (with
Magnetic field (KG)
FIG. 9.8. The — f <-> — £ transition in caesium chrome alum, CsCr(SO), 12HO, for
42 2
which the single ion spin Hamiltonian is
i with S = f. There are four ions in unit cell, and in the figure H is along the z-axis
(a (111) axis) for one ion only. The continuous line is computed using a Gaussian shape and
• a root mean square width of 118 G, the calculated value for dipolar interaction assuming
that ions whose trigonal axes are differently oriented are to be counted as dissimilar ions.
This gives a good fit to the experimental points (Bleaney 1950).

--- Page 539 ---

524 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
one simplifying assumption—see legend to Fig. 9.8). In this substance
(as in all the alums) the magnetic ions lie on a face-centred cubic
lattice, and each ion is surrounded by twelve equidistant nearest
neighbours. Although this substance is cubic, the line width is not
isotropic because of the angular factors in eqns (9.58a), (9.58b). The
variation in line width is most dramatic in cases where the dipolar
contribution from all the nearest neighbours vanishes at certain
orientations of the external field. If g is isotropic, this requires that
(1—3 cos2^-) = 0, or Q = 54° 44', where 6^ is the angle between
tj
the external field and the lines joining nearest neighbours. This condi-
tion is fulfilled in two cases of cubic symmetry:
(a) If the magnetic ions lie on a simple cubic lattice, so that the
six nearest neighbours lie in pairs along [001], [010], and [100], and H
is directed along a (111) axis;
(b) in a lattice of the CaF type, with nearest neighbour magnetic
2
ions along the (111) axes, when H is along an (001) axis.
These conditions, with isotropic gr-factor and purely dipolar interac-
tion, are more readily achieved with nuclear than with electronic
dipoles. A special case of (b) is CaF with an isolated electronic magnetic
2
ion on a Ca site, when the first-order interaction with the eight nearest
neighbour F~ nuclear moments vanishes for H along an (001) axis
provided the interaction is entirely dipolar in form.
The assumption of a Gaussian line shape is most likely to be a good
approximation when the number of equidistant nearest neighbours
is fairly large. In other cases, when the number of nearest neighbours
is rather small, the Gaussian assumption may be seriously wrong. A
notable example is neodymium ethylsulphate, in which the Nd3+ ion
has two equidistant nearest neighbours at 0-7 nm along the c-axis,
which give a partly resolved structure (see Fig. 9.9) when the external
field is along the c-axis. In a first approximation the line consists of a
triplet with a 1:2:1 intensity distribution, corresponding to the
chances of neighbouring spins being both 'up'; one 'up' and one 'down'
(which can arise in two ways); and both 'down' respectively. The six
next-nearest neighbours are about 0-88 nm away in directions such
that when the external field is along the c-axis they contribute only
a rather small dipolar field. Since all ions have symmetry about the
c-axis, it is readily found from eqn (9.5a) that when H is along this axis
and

--- Page 540 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 525
FIG. 9.9. Oscillogram of the spectrum of neodymium ethylsulphate. Above, triplet
structure observed with magnetic field parallel to the crystal (hexagonal) axis; below,
spectrum with magnetic field normal to crystal axis (Bleaney, Elliott, and Scovil 1951).
Thus the first-order dipolar contribution from neighbouring ions
vanishes in this case if their directions are such that (1—3^-) — 0,
irrespective of whether they are identical or not, and irrespective of
the anisotropy in their (/-tensors provided they have axial symmetry
(g — g = g ). In the ethylsulphates the directions of the next nearest
x y ±
neighbours are near to fulfilling the condition (1—3^.) — 0.
The angular dependence just derived applies to the case of H along
the unique axis and neighbouring ions not along this axis. The converse
case, of a pair of ions along the c-axis (such as the nearest neighbours
in the ethylsulphates) and H at an angle to this axis, does not give
the same angular dependence except when the </-values are isotropic.
For such a pair of ions, if H is at an angle 6 to the 2-axis, which is the
symmetry axis and also the line joining the ions, we have
where, because of the axial symmetry, we can assume that H lies in
the #z-plane. The interaction Hamiltonian would be just (9.5b) if the
interaction were purely dipolar, but we may take the rather more
general form
which includes other possible contributions axially symmetric in
form. If the Zeeman interactions are much larger than the spin-spin

--- Page 541 ---

526 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
interaction, they must be diagonalized first; this can be achieved by
a rotation of axes about the ^/-axis (as in § 3.2) through angles of ^
and <f>j for spins /S and S respectively, where tan </^ = (<7ii/<7i||)tan 6
f s
and tan ^ = (<7^i/S^ u )tan 6. Then the interaction Hamiltonian becomes
where we have retained only terms of the form
If the ions are dissimilar we need for the second moment calculation
just the coefficient
in which we have, as usual,
If the ions are similar, their (/-factors are the same and (f> = <f>j, = </>.
i
Then in (9.67a) we have
in which we have made the usual separation into an interaction with
trace <$'-\- /' ^r <$' = 0, and an cisotropic' part whose coefficient is
x y z
In computing the second moment (cf. eqn (9.57)) we need the quantity
If the interaction is purely dipolar in origin, we have from (9.5b),
from which we see that the tensor interaction (9.67a) is traceless
(/ = 0) only if 9 is isotropic.

--- Page 542 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 521
A perhaps surprising feature of (9.72) is that whatever values the
coefficients $ ^ fl may have, the angular variation of fl' given by
L z
the last bracket in (9.72) is from a maximum of +2 when H is parallel
to the symmetry axis (6 = 0) to — 1 when H is perpendicular (6 = 77/2).
The anisotropy in g affects only the angular variation at intermediate
values of 6; in particular, /' passes through zero at tan20 = (2g^/g2 ).
z L
In the case of neodymium ethylsulphate referred to earlier in this
section, the triplet separation is proportional to /' and is only well
z
resolved (cf. Fig. 9.9) when /' has its maximum value, i.e. when H
z
is along the symmetry axis.
9.9. Effect of exchange interaction on line shape
In the previous section we considered the width and shape of a line
when the spin-spin interaction is wholly dipolar in origin. This is
seldom the case for a system of electronic dipoles, and in many para-
magnetic substances exchange interaction may be more important than
the dipolar interaction.
Initially we consider again the simple case of a set of identical ions
with isotropic gr-factors and no 'fine' or hyperfine splittings, coupled
together by dipolar interaction and isotropic exchange interaction.
As we have seen already from §9.7, eqn (9.55), the second moment
is unaltered by an isotropic exchange term. However Van Vleck (1948)
has shown that the formula for the fourth moment contains the iso-
tropic exchange energy, so that the fourth moment is larger than it
would be in the absence of such exchange interaction. This information
is obviously insufficient to determine the line shape, but it is readily
seen that the behaviour of the two moments implies that the line must
be narrowed in the centre and extended in the wings in order to increase
the fourth moment while keeping the second moment constant. This
is the phenomenon of 'exchange narrowing', first predicted by Gorter
and Van Vleck (1947). Physically it can be regarded as an effect akin
to motional narrowing of a magnetic resonance line in a liquid. In
order that the local field experienced by a given ion shall shift its
precession frequency, and hence broaden the resonance for an assembly
of ions, the local field must persist for a time long compared with the
duration of the 'wave train' absorbed by the ion. If the local field
fluctuates rapidly during this time, its effect tends to be averaged out.
When the exchange energy is large, the orientation of neighbouring
spins is being changed at a rate of order \(/\K]\ through mutual spin
flips, so that the local dipolar field fluctuates at a similar rate and

--- Page 543 ---

528 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
tends to be averaged out. For this to be effective, we require
where (Ar2) is the second moment due to dipolar interaction.
The problem of the shape of an exchange-narrowed line has been
considered in more detail by Anderson and Weiss (1953), using a
mathematical model in which the dipolar interaction is assumed to
produce a Gaussian distribution of internal fields and, in addition,
this field is time-modulated in a random way. If the above inequality
is satisfied, this theory gives a line shape where the wings of the line
fall away exponentially as for a Gaussian shape, but near the centre
the line is Lorentzian in shape, with a half-width
Here (Av2) is the second moment due to dipolar interaction, and
is the exchange energy in frequency units. However, when this fre-
quency exceeds the resonance frequency, the truncated Hamiltonian
(9.55) should not be used in computing (Ai>2), but all the $' terms in
(9.47). For a set of identical spins with isotropic g-f actors, this gives a
value for (Av2) which is larger by a factor V than that obtained from
(9.55) and (9.58a) (see, for instance, Abragam (1961)). The increase in
line width at lower resonance frequencies, and its reduction at higher
frequencies, has been measured for K CuCl ,2H 0 (see, for example,
2 4 2
Henderson and Rogers (1966)), and for Cu(NH ) S0 ,H 0 by Rogers,
3 4 4 2
Carboni, and Richards (1967).
Equation (9.74) is only valid and exchange narrowing will only be
appreciable provided that \/\h\ > ((Ai>2))*. Here / must be the value
of the isotropic exchange interaction expressed in terms of the effective
spins. We have seen (§ 9.3) that when there is considerable magnetic
anisotropy, the exchange interaction expressed in terms of effective
spins may be quite anisotropic, even if we start from an exchange
interaction that is isotropic when expressed in terms of the real spins.
In this case the appropriate value for (Av2) is given by eqn (9.55),
which includes all contributions to the anisotropic part of the spin-spin
interaction; clearly, when /' is of the same order as / , there is no
appreciable narrowing, and if /' is mainly due to exchange its effect
is to broaden rather than to narrow the line. Thus the narrowing of
resonance lines by exchange interaction is most likely to be effective
when the dipole moments are almost wholly due to electron spin, as
in a half-filled shell such as 3cZ5, Mn++, Fe3+ in a weak crystal field.

--- Page 544 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 529
The phenomenon of exchange narrowing depends on the property
that isotropic exchange interaction does not contribute to the second
moment when we have a system of identical ions. This is no longer
true when the ions are not identical, and isotropic exchange then makes
a contribution to the second moment. Apart from the obvious case of
ions of different species, ions of the same species are essentially not
identical under conditions such as the following:
(a) the axes of their (/-tensors are differently oriented, e.g. CuS0 ,
4
5H 0; see §9.6;
2
(b) they possess a hyperfine structure, e.g. neodymium ethyl-
sulphate; see Baker (1964a);
(c) they possess a 'fine structure', e.g. nickel salts; see Ishiguro,
Kambe, and Usui (1951), Stevens (19526).
Basically the essential criterion is that ions are counted as dissimilar
if they give resolved resonance lines; then in calculating the second
moment we take as the centre point the position of the unbroadened
line. When the exchange interaction becomes comparable with the
separations between the lines the situation becomes complicated, and
if the exchange interaction is still larger the lines become merged.
Exchange narrowing then sets in, with half-width given by eqn (9.74),
provided that we include in (Ai>2) the contributions from the line
splittings.
The general question of methods of calculating moments when fine
structure is present is discussed by Pryce and Stevens (1950), Kambe
and Usui (1952), and McMillan and Opechowski (1960, 1961). The last
authors also treat particularly the changes in moments which occur at
low temperatures where departures from random orientation in the
spin system cannot be neglected, a subject that is briefly discussed in
§9.11.
9.10. Magnetic dilution, and the spectra of pairs
In most salts that are paramagnetic down to fairly low temperatures
the distances between the nearest paramagnetic ions lie in the range
0-5-0-8 nm, and the line widths due to magnetic dipolar interaction
between the ions are of order 102-103 G. This is sufficient to obscure
many details of the resonance line, such as hyperfine structure. In
more concentrated salts the lines may be narrowed by exchange
interaction, but at the same time small splittings due to fine or hyper-
fine effects tend to be averaged out. Since spin-spin interaction falls
off rapidly with increasing inter-ionic distance, considerable reductions
35

--- Page 545 ---

530 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
in line width can be achieved by the use of 'magnetically dilute' salts,
in which the majority of the paramagnetic ions are replaced by suitable
diamagnetic ions in an isomorphic crystal. For hydrated salts where
the waters of hydration are the immediate neighbours of the para-
magnetic ion, a residual width of order 10 G is attained at a relative
concentration of paramagnetic ions in the range 0-1 to 1 per cent.
This residual width is due to the nuclear magnetic moments of the
protons, which are typically at a distance of a little over 0-2 nm; an
M(6H 0) complex characteristic of the iron group contains twelve
2
such protons, while a lanthanide ethylsulphate group contains eighteen.
This residual width can be reduced by a factor of about one-third by
deuteration, because of the smaller nuclear moment of the deuteron.
Considerable narrower lines, with widths less than 1 G in favourable
circumstances, can be achieved by the use of oxides such as MgO,
Th0 where the only isotopes with nuclear moments (25Mg, 170) are
2
in low abundance. Clearly such narrow lines can only be attained if
the concentration of paramagnetic ions is made sufficiently small.
Paradoxically, quite 'narrow' lines can also be observed in substances
such as fluorides (ZnF , CaF ) where the 19F ions with their large
2 2
nuclear moments are the immediate neighbours of the paramagnetic
ion; this occurs when electron transfer between the paramagnetic ion
and the nearest F~ ions is sufficient to give a resolved fluorine hyperfine
structure. The width of the individual lines then arises only from interac-
tion with more distant magnetic moments.
If the replacement of paramagnetic by diamagnetic ions is a purely
random process, the chance of a paramagnetic ion occupying a given
site is just equal to the fractional concentration c. In the calculation
of the second moment (Av2), the sums involved in, for example, eqn
(9.57), are each proportional to c since, for any given paramagnetic
ion, the chance of any given neighbouring site being occupied by another
paramagnetic ion is just proportional to c. At first sight this would
suggest that the line width would fall on dilution only as c^, but in
practice the line width falls faster than this. The reason for this is that
dilution does not reduce the magnitude of the interaction between
any given pair of ions, but only the chance that such a pair will occur.
Thus a pair of near-by ions with (presumably) a large spin-spin interac-
tion will give rise to lines well out in the wings of the main line, and
as the line width is reduced these appear as satellites to the main line.
In the sums involved in computing the second (and higher) moments
the furthest out satellites make a more than average contribution;

--- Page 546 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 531
such contributions keep the second moment proportional to the concen-
tration, but the fallacy in using the root mean second moment ((Ai>2))*
as a measure of line width is that this incorrectly assumes that the
line shape remains unaltered. At sufficiently low concentrations the
dominant contribution to all moments (Av2w) comes from sums over
pairs of ions, and is thus proportional to c, showing that the line shape
must change (Kittel and Abrahams 1953). The arguments using the
method of moments set out by these authors agree with the analysis
of Anderson (1951) that at concentrations below about 0-1 the centre
of the line is Lorentzian in shape, with a half-width roughly proportional
to the concentration.
At relative concentrations of order c = lO^-lO"1 the satellite lines
are sufficiently intense and well resolved that their spectrum can be
observed and fitted to a spin Hamiltonian with fair accuracy. The
centre portion of the spectrum is obscured by the main line due to
'isolated' ions, which at low concentrations are relatively more abundant
than 'pairs' of ions, and a rather careful and painstaking analysis is
needed to identify with what type of pair a given set of satellites is
associated. When the effective spin of the ions is S = |, the energy
levels split into singlet and triplet as discussed in §§ 9.5-9.6. When
the ions are identical, the 'isotropic' part of the interaction determines
the singlet-triplet splitting whose size can be found from intensity
measurements as a function of temperature, while the 'anisotropic'
part is found from the splitting of the triplet as measured by the
separation of the satellites as a function of orientation of the external
magnetic field. An example of an extensive analysis of this type is
the work on K (Ir, Pt)Cl and related compounds by Griffiths, Owen,
2 6
Park, and Partridge (1959). Here the Ir4+, 5d5, ions are subject to a
strong ligand field (see Chapter 8) of exact octahedral symmetry, with
effective spin S = J and g = 1-79 (isotropic); the Pt4+, 5cZ6, ions with
a closed de shell act as diluent. The spin-spin interaction is assumed to
have the form
where the anisotropic terms can also be written in the form
with (since

--- Page 547 ---

532 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
The crystal structure is face-centred cubic, so that each Ir4+ ion has
twelve nearest neighbours (nn) and six next nearest neighbours (nnn).
The interaction parameters are given in Table 9.4.
TABLE 9.4
Interaction parameters between Ir4+ ions in two salts. After
Table 1 (see also Table 8) of Harris and Owen (1965)
K(Ir, Pt)Cl (NH)(Ir, Pt)Cl
2 6 42 6
Nearest neighbours / (cm-1) + 8-0±0-8 + 5-2±0-8
/(°K) + 11-6±1 + 7-5±l
D (cm-1) + 0-45±0-01 + 0-42±0-01
e
E (cm-1) -0-18±0-01 -0-22d-0-01
e
Next -nearest neighbours / (cm-1) + O38±0-03 + 0-27±0-03
The interactions are antiferromagnetic (/ positive) in character,
the triplet level lying above the singlet. Comparisons have been made
with the magnetic behaviour (Cooke, Lazenby, et al. 1959) of the un-
diluted salts, which become antiferromagnetic below 3-05 and 2-15°K
respectively. These transition temperatures are smaller than the Curie-
Weiss constants by a factor of about iV ; this is related to the small size
of the isotropic interaction between next nearest neighbours, which has
been measured indirectly from the spectra of triads of three coupled
ions (Harris and Owen 1965). The magnitude of the exchange interac-
tion and its dependence on the inter-ionic distance has been discussed
using a simple model by Griffiths et al. (1959), and in more detail by
Judd (1959c). The problem of magnetic order in the co-operative state
is considered in the papers quoted, and is discussed using spin wave
theory by Lines (1963).
The observation of pair spectra is considerably more difficult for
ions whose effective spins are greater than J because the spectrum of
each single ion may be complicated through the presence of fine and
hyperfine structure. A brief survey of some experiments is given by
Owen (1961). Suppose the spectrum of a single ion i is given by the
Hamiltonian
with an identical Hamiltonian for ion j. The fine structure terms in
D , E are labelled with subscript c, and have their origin in higher-
c c
order effects of the crystal field. Two similar ions are then coupled by

--- Page 548 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 533
an interaction of the type given by eqns (9.75), (9.77). We assume that
the axes (x, y, z) for Z), E are the same as those for D E \ usually
e e C) c
this requires that the z-axis is not only the line joining the ions but also
a principal axis of the ligand interaction (in other cases this assumption
is equivalent to neglect of terms of the form S S , etc. in (9.79) or
ix iz
terms of the form S S -, etc. in (9.75)).
ix 3 z
If g, A are isotropic, and the term in / is much larger than any of
the others, the spins S., S. couple to form states of total spin S whose
t ;
values are (/S^+/S^), (&i+Sj — I), . . . , 0, in terms of which the spin
Hamiltonian may be written
Here (9.81) is the reduced value of the 'fine' structure for the state of
total spin S. The values of D , E are given by
8 s
where
The hyperfine constant in eqn (9.82) is halved because each ion is
identical (see end of § 9.5). The overall width of the hyperfine structure
is unaltered, but the components have maximum intensity in the
middle and minimum at the ends of the hyperfine structure as in Fig.
9.4.
The major term (9.80) represents a set of states of total spin 8
whose energies follow the Lande interval rule. If / is positive (anti-
ferromagnetic), the state 8 = 0 is lowest, with 8 = 1 higher in energy
by /, and 8 = 2 higher than the latter by energy 2^, etc. The Zeeman
interaction splits each state of total spin 8 into 28 + 1 substates, the
separation of consecutive substates being just g@H, independent of 8.
However the spectrum of a state of total spin 8 may be identified
(a) by its fine structure (resulting from (9.81)) of 28 transitions allowed
by the selection rule AS = ±1, which is valid so long as gfiH > D ,
Z s
E' (b) by the variation of intensity with temperature. If $ is positive,
s9
a state of total spin 8 is higher in energy than the ground state 8 = 0

--- Page 549 ---

534 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
by an amount W = %^S(S + l), and the population of each of its
s
substates is proportional to the quantity
which (apart from temperature-independent factors) gives the tempera-
ture variation of the intensity of a transition within a given manifold
8 relative to that for a normal paramagnetic ion with no excited states.
The form of the function I is shown in Fig. 9.10 for the case
s
and a simple isotropic exchange interaction for which W — ^^S(S-\-l).
s
As mentioned in § 9.3, extra terms may occur in the exchange
interaction for values of S Sj greater than |. If we include a simple
i9
biquadratic term, making the exchange Hamiltonian
the separation between successive manifolds of total spin S, S — l
becomes
showing that the Lande interval rule is no longer obeyed. If the energy
FIG. 9.10. The relative intensity, as measured by the function I (eqn (9.85)), of transi-
s
tions for a pair of spins S = S = f, coupled by an exchange interaction </($*. S,).
t s
The numbered curves give the intensity for the different manifolds of total spin S = 1,2,
3, 4, and 5, whose energy is W — %/S(S + l] above the ground state S = 0, plotted
s
against the reduced temperature (kTI/). (After Owen 1961.)

--- Page 550 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 535
of more than one excited state can be found experimentally, the values
of both / and /(<® are determined. Work on Mn2+ pairs in MgO
suggests that ^(2) is about a few per cent of /, though the biquadratic
term may be partly due to exchange-induced distortion of the lattice
(Harris and Owen 1963; Rodbell, Jacobs, Owen, and Harris 1963).
9.11. Temperature-dependent effects
Apart from the excited states in pair spectra, the possibility of
temperature-dependent effects in spin-spin interaction has not so far
been considered. The Hamiltonian for spin-spin interaction does not
in itself contain any explicit temperature-dependence, and the width
and shape of lines resulting from spin-spin interaction might therefore
be expected to be constant. This is true over a wide temperature range
in most substances, but in this section we discuss two effects that modify
this result, one at high temperatures, the other at low temperatures.
As pointed out in § 9.9, the full effects of spin-spin interaction in
line broadening appear only if the local field due to neighbouring ions
persists for a time long compared with a characteristic time r whose
2
reciprocal is immediately related to the line width due to spin-spin
interaction only when the resonance line is 'homogeneously broadened'.
If the line width is predominantly due to 'inhomogeneous broadening',
it is better to regard r as representing the average duration of the
2
wave train emitted or absorbed by the spin system. If the local field
is due to another species of ions whose spin-lattice relaxation time is
r the local field will persist only for a time of order r and over
ly l5
longer periods the local field will be 'averaged out'. This is a form of
motional narrowing which can be observed in a compound that contains
two paramagnetic species, one with an abnormally short value of T
I?
the other with a long value of r (and hence also of TJ), such as neo-
2
dymium ethylsulphate containing a small fraction of gadolinium ions
(Bleaney, Elliott, and Scovil 1951). At a temperature of 90°K, no
resonance due to the Nd3+ ions was observed because of broadening
due to the very small value of r (< 10"11 s), while the Gd3+ resonance
x
was observed with a line width substantially the same as in a dia-
magnetic host lattice such as lanthanum ethylsulphate. At 20°K,
where the value of T for the Nd3+ ions is at least 10~8 s, the full effect
X
of their magnetic dipolar field is observed in the Gd3+ spectrum. The
contrast in resolution is shown in Fig. 9.11. The effective spin-lattice
relaxation time for the Gd3+ ions was found to be much shorter than
in a diamagnetic host owing to coupling with the rapidly fluctuating

--- Page 551 ---

536 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
FIG. 9.11. The spectrum of Gd3+, 4/7, 8£j present in low concentration in a single crystal
of neodymium ethylsulphate. Above, spectrum at 90°K, showing absence of broadening,
owing to rapid relaxation of the Nd3+ ions. Centre, spectrum at 20°K, broadened by
dipolar field of Nd3+ ions. Below, triplet structure on each Gd3+ line, calculated assuming
dipolar interaction with nearest pair of Nd3+ ions (cf. Fig. 9.9). The external magnetic
field is parallel to the c-axis of the crystal, and the two nearest Nd3+ ions lie along this
axis. (After Bleaney, Elliott, and Scovil 1951.)
fields produced by the Nd3+ ions, which provides a path by which
energy can be rapidly transferred to the lattice. As in the case of nuclear
magnetic resonance in a liquid, the narrowing effect for the Gd3+
ions is most pronounced the shorter the spin-lattice relaxation time
of the neodymium ions, while the reduction of r for the Gd3+ ions
x
should be most pronounced when r"1 for the Nd3+ ions is of the same
order as the resonant frequency of the Gd3+ ions (i.e. when the Fourier
components at the Gd3+ resonance frequency of the fluctuating local
field due to the Nd3+ ions have their maximum amplitude).
True motional narrowing requires much shorter correlation times
for electron than for nuclear magnetic resonance, and (apart from
conduction electron spin resonance) is correspondingly less important.
In liquids it is associated with some unusual effects on the hyperfine
structure (see, for example, McConnell (1956); McGarvey (1956)); in
ionic solids it occurs only at temperatures where rapid ionic diffusion
becomes possible.
The second (low temperature) effect that we now discuss does not
depend on the intervention of another phenomenon such as spin-
lattice relaxation, but is a consequence simply of the changing Boltz-
mann population of the different magnetic levels. In considering
broadening due to spin-spin interaction we have so far assumed that
all orientations of neighbouring dipoles are equally probable. This is
of course an approximation that is not seriously in error at high

--- Page 552 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 537
temperatures such that k T > gfiH, but as the temperature falls and
we approach the region where kT is of the same order as gf)H the
population of the spin-orientation states of higher energy becomes
substantially less than that of the low-energy spin orientations. If
(as we are assuming) the energy difference is mainly due to the Zeeman
energy in an external field, the population shift is from the orientations
where the magnetic dipoles are antiparallel to the field (if the gyro-
magnetic ratio is negative, as for free electrons, this means the spin
orientations parallel to the field) into the dipole parallel (spin anti-
parallel) positions. For convenience we refer to this as a shift from the
cup5 positions to the 'down' positions. When kT <^ g(3H, the spins are
almost entirely in the 'down' position and the static magnetization of
the sample approaches its saturation value.
We now consider the local field at a given ion. If the neighbouring
spins are predominantly in the cup' position, the local field that they
set up at the given ion will be (say) positive, while if they are pre-
dominantly 'down' the local field will be negative. The line broadening
arises from the random statistical variation in the chances of any given
neighbour being 'up' or 'down', but if on average these chances are
equal the centre of gravity of the line will not be shifted from the
resonance position for a single ion. If the chances are unequal, one
wing of the broadened line will have higher intensity and the other
lower intensity (see Fig. 9.12), so that the centre of gravity will be
shifted. The effect becomes progressively greater in proportion to the
amount by which the mean expectation value of 'down' spin pre-
dominates over 'up' spin. The size of the shift is determined by the
mean value of the local field, which is proportional to the mean
magnetization of the spin system(s) responsible for the local field.
As the temperature is reduced so that kT becomes much smaller
than gfiH, the spins fall more and more into the 'down' state and the
local field approaches its maximum value corresponding to the satura-
tion magnetization of the paramagnetic system. At the same time the
shift in the centre of gravity of the resonance line approaches its
maximum value. This is accompanied by a decrease in the randomness
of spin orientation (decrease in entropy) so that the resonance line
becomes less broad and, ideally, when all spins are completely aligned,
the width should approach zero. However this assumes that the local
field (and hence the line shift) is the same in all parts of the sample,
and, because of demagnetizing fields, this is true only for certain sample
shapes such as a sphere or ellipsoid.

--- Page 553 ---

538 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
FIG. 9.12. Resonance absorption at 30 GHz in neodymium ethylsulphate at very low
temperatures (magnetic field parallel to hexagonal axis). As the temperature is lowered
the absorption strength increases and shifts progressively to one side. The spin-spin inter-
action is mainly due to the dipolar field of nearest neighbours along the hexagonal axis;
when these dipoles are aligned in the external field their local field adds to the external
field, so that at very low temperatures the intensity is concentrated in the line on the low
field side when observed at constant frequency. (After Svare and Seidel 1964.)
For a system of spins S = | the nature of the temperature dependence
proves to be rather simple. If the Zeeman Hamiltonian for a magnetic
field parallel to the 2-axis is
the mean expectation value of S is
z
The shift in the centre of gravity of the resonance line with temperature
is measured by the first moment

--- Page 554 ---

SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION 539
where V is the centre frequency of the unshifted line. At any given
Q
temperature we should expect the shift (Ai>) to be proportional to
the value of (S). From the method of moments the actual relations
z
are found to be
if all the spins are identical, and
for interaction with a system of non-identical spins Sf = | denoted by
j', whose ^-factor for a field along the z-axis is g'.
In calculating the second moment we are interested in its value
relative to the centre of gravity (v + (Av» of the shifted line, i.e. in the
0
quantity
rather than the second moment {Av2} measured relative to the frequency
v of the unshifted line. In the high temperature limit assumed in
0
§§ 9.7-9.10 the value of (Av) goes to zero, and the distinction between
(Av2} and (Av2) is unnecessary. This is no longer true at low tem-
0
peratures. It turns out that for a set of identical spins 8 = \ the formula
for the second moment measured from the centre of the shifted line is
while for a spin i surrounded by a set of non-identical spins jr, also
with 8' = |, we have
The temperature-dependent factors in curly brackets in (9.93), (9.94)
reduce to unity in the high temperature limit (in agreement with eqn
(9.57), specialized to S = S' = %) and vanish as T — >* 0.
Experimental determinations of line shift and shape at very low
temperatures have been made by Svare and Seidel (1964), who also
discuss the eifects of demagnetizing fields and non-uniform precession
within the sample (magnetostatic modes). The classification into
'identical' and 'non-identical' spins is not straightforward when the

--- Page 555 ---

540 SPIN-SPIN INTERACTION
resonance frequencies are shifted by appreciably different amounts
through interaction with neighbouring spins, as in Fig. 9.12. When
.8 > ^, there may be the additional complication of crystal field
splittings. The theory is discussed in some detail by McMillan and
Opechowski (1960, 1961), and compared with experiment by Svare
and Seidel (1964).

--- Page 556 ---

10
SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
IN this chapter we shall be primarily concerned with the mechanisms
by which energy is exchanged between the paramagnetic ions (or spin
system) and thermal reservoirs such as electromagnetic radiation, the
lattice vibrations (or phonon radiation) within the paramagnetic
crystal, and the surroundings of the paramagnetic crystal, such as a
bath of liquid helium. These mechanisms are fairly well established;
they give a good qualitative, and sometimes a reasonably quantitative
explanation of the way in which the spin-lattice relaxation time
varies, particularly with temperature. Some related effects, such as
the phonon bottle-neck and phonon avalanche that result from the
comparatively small heat capacity at low temperatures of the phonons
resonant with the spins, are outlined in the last section.
The spin-phonon interaction also affects the parameters in the static
spin Hamiltonian, giving rise to shifts in the g-value, the fine structure
splitting, and the hyperfine interaction. The phonons may also induce
a fspin-spin' interaction between ions, as mentioned in § 9.4. Such
effects arise at 0°K from the zero-point vibrations of the lattice, and
though they increase at finite temperatures, they are often rather small
and we shall not discuss them further. In addition we shall be mainly
concerned with fairly dilute paramagnetic substances, thus avoiding
the complexities that arise in more concentrated compounds from the
interplay of spin-spin interaction and spin-lattice relaxation. The
excellent review by Stevens (1967) covers similar ground; its different
approach strongly recommends it as companion reading.
10.1. The attainment of thermal equilibrium
If we have a system whose temperature is not the same as that of
its surroundings, it cannot be in thermal equilibrium with these sur-
roundings, and provided there is thermal contact between the two,
their temperatures will approach a common value at a rate determined
by the heat capacities of the system and the surroundings together
with the rate at which energy can be transferred from one to the other.
If the surroundings have a heat capacity that is immensely greater
than the heat capacity of the system, the temperature of the latter
will approach the temperature of the surroundings at a rate determined
only by the heat capacity of the system and the rate of heat transfer.

--- Page 557 ---

542 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
We start by assuming that the surroundings are essentially infinite
in their heat capacity, and that they are in thermal equilibrium with a
bath of electromagnetic radiation whose density p is that appropriate
em
to a temperature T , which is thereby defined as the temperature of
0
the surroundings.
For an atomic system, energy transfer occurs through transitions
between the atomic energy levels, such transitions being accompanied
by the emission and absorption of quanta of electromagnetic radiation.
For simplicity we consider first a system of just two energy levels a, b
in which a is the lower level and b the upper level, for which the
difference in energy is
A simple example would be a spin system S = \ which is subjected
to an external field that separates the two levels by an energy Hco.
Let the populations of the lower and upper levels respectively be n
a
and n at any instant. Then owing to interaction with the radiation
b
bath, transitions will be taking place between the two levels in either
direction, the number leaving the lower state being proportional to
n and the number leaving the upper state being proportional to n .
a b
Thus the populations of the two levels obey the differential equation
where w^ w^ are the rates at which ions make transitions from the
lower to the upper state, and vice versa. If the spin system is in thermal
equilibrium with a radiation bath at temperature T , the time differen-
0
tials are zero and the populations of the two states will have their
equilibrium values N , N . Thus
a b
and hence
The transition rates are given by the Einstein coefficients of absorption
and emission
where p is the radiation density, B the coefficient of stimulated
em
emission or absorption, and A the coefficient of spontaneous emission.
Hence we have

--- Page 558 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 543
showing that the transition rates must differ just by the factor required
to maintain the ratio of the populations in accordance with Boltzmann's
law.
We return now to the case where the spin system is not in equilibrium
with the radiation bath. By a simple algebraic manipulation we have
from (10.2)
where we have used the fact that the total number of spins N is con-
stant; i.e.,
and the relation
from (10.4). The solution of (10.8) is
where (n — n) is the population difference at t = 0, and the time
a b Q
constant r is given by the relation
x
On substituting from (10.5), (10.6) this becomes
If now we insert the electromagnetic (photon) radiation density
we have, using the well known relation between the coefficients A, B
Equation (10.11) gives a quite general relation for the relaxation
time for a two-level system. If Ha> < JcT so that the difference between
0)
t0j and Wj can be neglected, we have simply I/TJ = 2w. Further, since
the coefficient B is not temperature-dependent, we find from (10.14)

--- Page 559 ---

544 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
that in this region r~l varies as T , corresponding to the classical limit
Q
where stimulated emission and absorption predominate, and the rate
at which transitions occur at a given frequency is just proportional
to the radiation energy density at this frequency, which varies as kT .
0
In the opposite extreme where Hco > kT , r^ becomes independent of
0
temperature, being determined entirely by A, the rate of spontaneous
emission from the upper state, since in this limit coth(ftco/2fcT) tends
0
to 1, and A > Bp in eqn (10.12).
em
In ordinary laboratory optical spectroscopy we have generally
Ha> ;> kT , though this may be far from true in high temperature
0
plasmas. In the radio-frequency region, we have generally Ha) < kT .
Q
In centimetre/millimetre wave-spectroscopy at liquid-helium tempera-
tures, we are just in the transition region, since (Hco/kTo) = 1 at
T = 1-438°K for a frequency (co/27i) = 30 GHz corresponding to a
0
wavelength of 1 cm. Hence in electron paramagnetic resonance we shall
frequently need the more general expression for the dependence on
temperature of the relaxation time.
We now identify our two-level system with an assembly of magnetic
ions for each of which S = £, subjected to a field H that splits the
levels by an amount Hco = g($H. Then the magnetization is given by
where M is the thermal equilibrium value corresponding to temperature
0
T . Substituting in (10.8) and using (10.11) we obtain
Q
which is identical with eqn (2.31) if H is along the 2-axis. On this
basis we recognize r as the 'spin-lattice relaxation time' introduced
x
into the classical equations of motion to describe the way in which
the magnetization returns from a non-equilibrium value to the thermal
equilibrium value. Our treatment indicates that it is a special case of
a general process involving the flow of energy between an assembly
of atoms and ions with discrete energy levels and a thermal reservoir
(the radiation field). In magnetic terms the flow of energy arises as
follows. If the magnetization M in a constant field H changes by an
amount dJf, the magnetic energy of the system changes by — H AM;
this magnetic energy is associated with the spin system, which we
regard as possessing internal energy that may change through a
transfer to or from another thermal reservoir.

--- Page 560 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 545
The concept of thermal equilibrium involves that of temperature.
For our system of ions with two levels separated in energy by Hco,
we can define a temperature for the spin system known for brevity as
the 'spin temperature' T by means of the relation
s
which is analogous to eqn (10.7). Since the magnetization of such an
assembly of N magnetic ions of spin S = | is
we can write eqn (10.16) in the form
Using eqn (10.14) this becomes
In the high-temperature region where (HcD/kT) < 1, Curie's law holds,
so that M , M vary as T~l, T~! respectively. Using the nomenclature
0
|8 = (l/kT), /3 = (1/kTo), we can write (10.18a) in the approximate
g s 0
form
In the classical thermodynamical approach to spin-lattice relaxation,
a specific heat C is associated with the spin system at constant field,
H
and it is assumed that the rate of energy transfer between spin system
and lattice is proportional to the difference in their temperatures. Then
— C (dT ldt) = (x.(T—To), where a is a 'coefficient of thermal contact',
H a 8
or
We can relate this to the magnetization using Curie's law and then,
using eqn (10.16), we obtain
Comparison of the two equations for (dTJdt) shows that we can write
(cf. Gorter 1947, Cooke 1950)
36

--- Page 561 ---

546 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
only if I^Q— T | <T 5 this is a more stringent condition than the
g 0
approximation that leads to eqn (10.19), and reflects the fact that both
C and a are temperature-dependent.
H
For a system of more than two levels, a spin temperature can be
defined provided that the ratio of the populations of any two levels
is given by (10.17), and the condition for this is that the spin system
must be in internal equilibrium. Such internal equilibrium is reached
through the spin-spin interaction in a time r , and if r <C T (as is
2 2 X
frequently the case for a magnetically concentrated system) the concept
of a spin temperature is valid in dealing with the relatively slow process
of spin-lattice relaxation. In a magnetically dilute system, on the other
hand, there will be (2/S + l) rate equations describing the way in which
the populations of the (2$ + l) levels change with time, whose solutions
are not necessarily describable in terms of a single spin-lattice relaxation
time.
We now return to the simple two -level system to obtain an estimate
of the relaxation time r associated with transitions induced by the
x
electromagnetic radiation field. In eqn (10.14) we need the value of J5,
to obtain which we make use of the standard formula for the induced
transition probability rate
where (i\ 3F' \j) is the matrix element of the perturbing Hamiltonian
Q
j4?' = 3^' exp(±icot), and/(co) is the line shape function introduced
Q
in § 2.9. For a linearly polarized electromagnetic field of amplitude H
19
we have from eqns (2.56), (2.57), for the transition M <-» M — 1,
and since the mean values of I*, m2 for random polarization are each
( J), and (H*I87T) = Pem dco, while for a transition between the two
states of a doublet (M—l\ jd_ \M) = yh, we find
If we assume that the line width is so small that we can neglect the
variation in the energy density p over the width of the line, then
em
by integrating over the line shape and using the relation J/(co) do> — 1
we have

--- Page 562 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 547
and hence
for interaction with the electromagnetic radiation field. For single
electron spins (J = J, g = 2) the value of B is (2772/3)(e/mc)2, and at a
frequency of 3 x 1010 Hz and a temperature of 1°K the value of r
x
given by eqn (10.23) is about 1010 s. In a solid paramagnetic substance,
however, equilibrium is established not through interaction with the
thermal electromagnetic radiation field but through interaction with
the lattice vibrations. These may be regarded as giving a 'phonon
radiation field' in the solid whose energy density, apart from the
complication arising from the presence of longitudinal and transverse
phonons, is higher at a given frequency than that given by eqn (10.13)
by a factor of order (c/v)* ~ 1015, where v is the velocity of sound.
Thus unless the coefficient B for stimulated emission and absorption
of phonons by the magnetic ions is less than 10~15 of that for photons,
the former process will dominate the latter.
The very long value of r obtained above is due to the small radiation
t
density at the resonant frequency. The latter means also that the
electromagnetic radiation field has a very small heat capacity compared
with the spin system, so that we ought to take into account the rate
at which heat flows from the surroundings of high heat capacity into
the electromagnetic radiation bath. There is no point in pursuing this
here, but in the next section we shall see that even for the phonon
radiation bath, with its enormously higher energy density, its heat
capacity may still be small compared with that of the spin system.
The consequences of this are discussed in § 10.6.
10.2. The phonon radiation bath
The energy density in the phonon radiation bath can be written
down quite simply by analogy with that in the photon radiation bath,
remembering that as well as two transverse polarizations we have in
addition a longitudinal wave motion. If the transverse and longitudinal
wave velocities are v, v we have
t l
Since we shall only be making order of magnitude calculations we shall
ignore the difference between v and v (as well as any dispersion in
t l

--- Page 563 ---

548 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
the wave velocity), obtaining
for the phonon energy density in the frequency range co to co+dco.
It is readily seen that this is the product of the quantity
which is the number of phonon modes per unit volume in the frequency
range just quoted, and p, the phonon 'occupation number' given by
multiplied by the energy quantum (Ha)), since the quantity p (Hat) is
just the average energy per mode. In these equations we have introduced
a 'phonon temperature' T (see § 10.6), which for a given phonon
ph
frequency is essentially defined by eqn (10.27).
The processes by which transitions can be induced in the spin
system require the presence of oscillatory electromagnetic fields at
the resonance frequency of the spins. The phonons can give rise to
such oscillatory electromagnetic fields through the motion with respect
to the paramagnetic ion of other ions carrying either electric charges
(or electric dipole moments) or magnetic dipole moments. This relative
motion is caused by the lattice vibrations, and is determined by the
lattice strain e, which we must therefore relate to the phonon energy
density. For a vibrational mode with wave-vector q = w/v, the matrix
elements for phonon absorption and emission can be related to a
strain e, where for a crystal of unit volume and density p,
a
for absorption of a lattice quantum that reduces the vibrational
quantum number from p to (#> — !), and
for emission of a quantum raising the vibrational quantum number
from p to p + l. On averaging over all values of p, and summing over

--- Page 564 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 549
all vibrational modes in unit volume in the appropriate frequency
range, we have, since q = co/v,
for phonon absorption, while the corresponding value for phonon
emission is greater by a factor (see eqn (10.27))
which is just the ratio of emission to absorption rates given in eqn (10.7).
Hence from (10.28)
where p is the crystal density.
The phonon radiation bath differs from the electromagnetic radiation
bath in that it is limited by the crystal boundaries, and for an isolated
crystal in vacuo phonon radiation energy cannot readily flow into or
out of the crystal, unlike electromagnetic radiation. This makes it
easy to compare the heat capacities of the two systems, the assembly
of spins and the phonon radiation. Retaining for simplicity a simple
two-level system, such as a spin S = |, whose two levels have energy
difference (Hco), we find that the specific heat per spin is, at constant
field H (since Hco = gfiH), and at temperature T,
while the specific heat per vibrational mode at the same frequency is
The two functions are plotted in Fig. 10.1 as a function of the reduced
parameter (I/a?), where x = (Hco/kT). For high values of (I/a;), or high
temperatures, C^ /k approaches unity while C /k falls as T~2. For
h H
low values of (I/a;), or low temperatures, the two specific heats become
identical since we can neglect the population of all but the lowest two
vibrational levels, and both vanish exponentially as T — >• 0. Hence,
except when (Hco/kT) < 1, there is no great difference between the
specific heat per spin and per vibrational mode.
The situation is very different when we include the relative numbers
of spins and of vibrational modes. For an undiluted tutton salt, whose
molar volume is about 200 cm3, the number of paramagnetic ions per

--- Page 565 ---

550 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
FIG. 10.1. Specific heats of a spin S = J with splitting Ha> and of a harmonic oscillator
of the same frequency.
cm3 is about 3 X 1021 per cm3. For the number of vibrational modes given
by eqn (10.26) which are in resonance with the spins, we need to know
the value of dco, which is roughly equal to the width of the resonance
line. If we take a line width Ai> = 0-1 cm"1, corresponding to a spread
in field ^1 kG in the resonance line, we have dco = 27r(3Xl09), and
for a resonance frequency of 1 cm"1 we find 2 = 4 X 1015 per cm3. Even
if we take a well-diluted salt such as a tutton salt in which only 1 in
104 of the dipositive ions are paramagnetic, we still have 3X 1017 spins
per cm3, while with a line width of say 10 G (due to the nuclear moments
of the protons), we have some 4 X 1013 vibrational modes per cm3. Hence
at temperatures in the region of a few °K the heat capacity of the spin
system will far outweigh that of the vibrational modes in resonance
with the spins, a point we shall return to in § 10.6. In the immediately

--- Page 566 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 551
following sections we shall ignore this point, and calculate the spin-
lattice relaxation time on the assumption of a constant phonon
temperature T . Clearly this assumption is only realistic if the resonant
Q
phonons are in close thermal contact with a third system of high thermal
capacity at the temperature T which we shall refer to as the 'bath
0
temperature'.
In the estimate of 2 given above we have used the convenient value
of 3 x 103 ms"1 for the phonon velocity v. Few measurements of v exist
for crystals of the type normally used in paramagnetic resonance
experiments: for LaCl an estimate of 2 x 103 ms"1 has been obtained
3
by Mikkelson and Stapleton (1963), while Shiren (1962) has measured
a velocity of 9-25 x 103 ms"1 for longitudinal waves of frequency 10 GHz
along the (100) axis of MgO. (The velocity for transverse waves is
only 6-5 x 103 ms"1.) For simplicity we shall continue to use the value
3 X 103 ms"1 for later calculations in this chapter. For acoustic waves of
frequency 30 GHz (which corresponds to an electromagnetic wave-
length of 1 cm), the phonon wavelength is A ^ 10~5 cm = 102nm,
which is large compared with inter-ionic distances in a crystal. This
justifies the approximation that e is proportional to (2?r/A) = q = (co/v)
q
which appears as the first factor in equations for the strain such as
(10.28). At liquid-helium temperatures phonons of wavelengths near
the inter-ionic distance (i.e. phonons near the upper frequency limit
corresponding to the Debye temperature) are no longer excited, and
this simplifies a number of integrals over all phonon modes and
frequencies that we shall encounter later. These are commonly of the
form
For example the exact value of / = 47r4/15 = 26-0 while I\ = 4! = 24.
4
The fractional error is smaller for larger values of n.
10.3. Spin-lattice relaxation by phonons—Waller processes
The relaxation process involves the emission or absorption of a
quantum by the spin system, and we consider now how this quantum
can be absorbed or emitted by the lattice vibrations (the phonon field).
A transition between two levels of the spin system can only be induced
by an oscillatory electromagnetic field of the right frequency, and it
follows that some mechanism is required whereby the mechanical
vibrations of the lattice can produce such an oscillatory electromagnetic

--- Page 567 ---

552 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
field. In the earliest theory, that of Waller (1932), the mechanism
involved was modulation of the spin-spin interaction by the lattice
waves; that is, the local magnetic field, which exists at one ion because
of the magnetic dipole on a neighbouring ion, fluctuates because the
distance between the two ions fluctuates under the action of the
lattice vibrations.
It might be thought that modulation of the exchange interaction,
which is strongly dependent on distance, would provide a mechanism
for spin-lattice relaxation. This is not so for isotropic exchange, since
a change in its size merely alters the singlet-triplet splitting in Fig. 9.2
and does not introduce any new matrix elements (in quantum-
mechanical language, the isotropic exchange operator and the Zeeman
operators commute). Anisotropic exchange, whose operator is formally
similar to that for magnetic dipole interaction, does provide such a
mechanism (for a discussion, see Harris and Yngvesson (1968)).
The magnetic field of one dipole // at a neighbouring ion, distance r,
is of order ^/r3. As a result of a lattice strain fluctuating at angular
frequency co, we have r = r (l +e cos cot) and
0
An oscillating magnetic field of frequency o> is thus set up whose mean
square value is
where H* is the mean square value of the static local field, given by
where a is a constant somewhat greater than unity and n is the number
of magnetic ions of moment // per unit volume. Using eqn (10.30) we
have
whereas the equivalent value for electromagnetic radiation would be
H* = 87r/o dco. The Waller mechanism is therefore faster by a factor
em

--- Page 568 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 553
so that instead of eqn (10.23) we have
To obtain an order of magnitude estimate we take the numerical
factor (9a/1677) as unity, p = 2 g-cm~3 and n = 3x 1021 cm~3 (which is
typical of an undiluted double sulphate of the iron group). Then with
// = 1 Bohr magneton, the value of r due to this mechanism at a
l
frequency of 30 GHz and a temperature of 1°K would be about 103 s.
This value, though much less than that found in § 10.1, is still too high;
it would take about 20 min for the heat of magnetization to be trans-
ferred to the lattice in a field of 10 kG at 1°K. In highly dilute salts the
value of T! would be much longer because of the smaller values of H*,
which decrease linearly with the concentration for random dilution;
in practice no concentration dependence of r of this order is found.
±
The processes considered so far are all 'direct' processes, in which a
single quantum is exchanged between the spin system and the radiation
field. They result in long relaxation times because the energy density
in the radiation field at the resonance frequency is very small. In the
electromagnetic case the scattering of a non-resonant photon, combined
with a transition in the spin system, is a higher-order process that can
be neglected. It was pointed out by Waller that the analogous process
for phonons, in which we consider one phonon to be absorbed and
another emitted, can be very important. This mechanism can be
discussed in very simple terms by considering the modulation of the
internal field. Suppose that two strains are present of different fre-
quencies, which we write as € cos a)^ and e cos a>t. Then in the
x 2 2
expansion of r~3 we have
from which it is apparent that in second order there will be fluctuations
at the frequencies (coj — co) and (a)-\-a} ). This means that a fluctuating
2 l 2
magnetic field at the frequency co which is required to cause transitions
within the spin system will be set up by the combined effect of the

--- Page 569 ---

554 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
strains at frequencies o^ and co provided that o> = co bco. In practice
2 1= 2
(see below) we shall be concerned with the difference frequency, and
we can regard the process as consisting of the absorption of a phonon
of energy Ha) by the spin system combined with the emission of a
I
phonon of energy Ha), the difference in energy Ha> being supplied by
2
the spin system, so that in the final state energy is conserved (see
Fig. 10.2). This process is analogous to the Raman effect in optical
FIG. 10.2. Schematic representation of a 'Raman process', in which a 'spin-flip' occurs
through the scattering of a phonon with a change in the phonon frequency. It may be
regarded as the virtual absorption of a phonon of energy Ha> and the emission of a
1
phonon of energy Ha>, energy being conserved provided that Ha)—Ha> — Tko, where
2 2 1
ha> is the change in the energy of the spin. Obviously, if the latter is positive, Ha) < Hco
2 lf
and vice versa.
spectroscopy, and is often referred to as a 'Raman process'. Its
importance as a mechanism for spin-lattice relaxation can be seen from
a plot of the energy density in the phonon system, Fig. 10.3. In the
direct process only phonons of frequency a> can take part, and these
are very few in number. In the Raman process any two phonons can
take part provided that their frequency difference is equal to the
resonance frequency of the spin system, so that the much more
abundant phonons near the peak of the energy distribution are also
available. At high temperatures this more than compensates for the
fact that a second-order process involves a much weaker coupling
mechanism than a first-order process.
It is obvious from Fig. 10.3 that the number of phonons for which
cOi + coa = co is negligible compared with those for which o^ — co = co,
2
and this is the reason why we disregard contributions from the former.
From the expansion of r~3 we find that the mean square magnetic
field fluctuating at the frequency co = co — co is
1 2

--- Page 570 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 555
FIG. 10.3. Plot off(x) = x3l(ex — l) showing the energy density of phonons as a function
of x = Ha)/kT. The arrows indicate the energy density of phonons available for direct
0
processes (co), at (Ho)/kT) = 0*1, compared with the densities at (co, ct)) available for
0 1 2
Raman processes, which may be anywhere in the spectrum.
and from eqn (10.21) the rate at which transitions occur in the spin
system is
In relating e^, e^ to the energy density in the phonon field we must
remember that e refers to a quantum being emitted by the spin
2
system into the phonon field, and e to a quantum absorbed by the
x
spin system from the phonon field so that (cf. eqn (10.30))
so that
In evaluating the double integral we must remember that the two
integrations are not independent because Icoj — co| = co; and since in
2

--- Page 571 ---

556 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
general o> <^ co o), we can replace the double integral above by
l5 2
where <D denotes a phonon frequency and we have used the fact that
I
J/(co) dco = 1. The integral over the lattice frequencies is carried from
0 to the Debye frequency but at low temperatures where such fre-
quencies are not excited there is no significant error in replacing the
upper limit by infinity. Then the integral 7 is approximately (see eqn
6
(10.32))
and we have
Using the same parameters as before this gives
which is insignificant at 1°K but is more important than the Waller
direct process above 50°K.
The integral 7 can also be evaluated in the high temperature limit
6
where kT is large compared with the maximum phonon energy (ftco ),
0 m
though this is a situation usually of less practical interest. Then since
and hence
where co is the maximum phonon frequency. Taking the Debye
m
temperature to be about 100°K, which is typical of many paramagnetic

--- Page 572 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 557
salts, co is about 1013, and using the same parameters as before we
m
find
so that TJ_ would still be about 10 s at 300°K. This is in violent contrast
with experimental results, which show that r varies from 10~6 s to
t
less than 10~12 s at room temperature.
10.4. Spin-lattice relaxation by modulation of the ligand
field
The relaxation processes considered in the previous section, involving
modulation of the internal dipolar field, are clearly insufficiently rapid
to explain the experimental results, at any rate in magnetically dilute
salts. A more potent mechanism was suggested by Heitler and Teller
(1936); the theory was elaborated by Kronig (1939) and Van Vleck
(1940), who in a long and detailed paper obtained relaxation times of
the right order of magnitude. This mechanism consists of modulation
of the crystal electric field or ligand field through motion of the elec-
trically charged ions under the action of the lattice vibrations. Obviously
this produces a fluctuating electric field that is essentially a dynamic
orbit-lattice interaction, with no direct interaction with the electron
spin. However, just as a static ligand field splits the orbital states of a
magnetic ion and indirectly influences the spin levels through the
spin-orbit coupling, so a fluctuating ligand field can cause transitions
between these levels. In considering such processes we must of course
take account of restrictions on the way in which electric fields can
interact with magnetic ions, the most important of these being that
the matrix elements of an electric perturbation vanish between a
pair of Kramers conjugate states.
A numerical calculation of the effects of lattice vibrations in distorting
the crystalline electric field is faced with the same computational
difficulties (or more) that arise in calculating the static crystal field
(or ligand field). This problem has been side-stepped by Orbach (1961a)
by expanding the crystalline electric potential F in powers of the
strain :
where the first term on the right is just the static term. The second
and third terms represent the additional electric potential generated
by the strain in first- and second-order respectively. To find their

--- Page 573 ---

558 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
effect on the magnetic ion, we must include also the spin-orbit coupling,
and use the weak, intermediate, or strong crystal field representation
appropriate to the static interaction. On this basis we may regard
(10.46) as the 'magnetic ion-lattice interaction'.
If e is a fluctuating strain caused by the lattice vibrations, the second
and later terms give the dynamic part of the magnetic ion-lattice
interaction. A reasonable assumption (which is considered in more
detail by Scott and Jeffries (1962)) is that each of the terms F(n) is
of the same order as F(0), though they will of course contain terms of
lower symmetry than F(0) because the strain reduces the local symmetry.
This assumption makes it possible to obtain some order of magnitude
estimates of the spin-lattice relaxation time, and once more we consider
first the so-called 'direct process', in which one phonon is emitted or
absorbed in a given relaxation transition.
The direct process
From eqns (10.20), (10.46) we obtain
and on using (10.30) to relate e2 to the energy density of phonons, and
integrating over the line shape, we find
for the Einstein coefficient of induced emission or absorption of phonons.
Hence, using (10.25) for the phonon energy density, we obtain
In the case of a non-Kramers ion the ground states generated by the
static crystal potential may have different orbital states between which
the matrix elements of F(1) are finite and independent of frequency,
in which case (10.49) has the same frequency and temperature depend-
ence as for photons (10.23). If the levels are degenerate in zero magnetic
field we have Hco = g($H, so that
In the case of a Kramers doublet, because of time reversal, the matrix
elements of an electric potential such as F(1) vanish in zero magnetic

--- Page 574 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 559
field. However the presence of an external magnetic field produces
admixtures of excited states of order (g@H/A) or (ftco/A), where A is a
crystal field splitting. To this order the two states of the doublet are
no longer exactly time-reversed states, and we must replace F(1) by
roughly
Hence
For the field and temperature dependence this gives
In the rare-earth group |F(1)|2 for non-Kramers ions is of order 10
to 100 (cm-1)2; thus taking 37 = A = 30 cm"1 makes about 10~3 s
TI
if the levels are split by 1 cm."1 at 1°K, while for Kramers doublets
(/fcco/A)2 produces an extra factor • — '10~3 in r"1 and T! ~ 1 s. In the
iron group the matrix elements are rather greater and the relaxation
times correspondingly shorter.
The need to break the time-reversal symmetry of a Kramers doublet
in order to produce relaxation by the process discussed above was
pointed out by Van Vleck (1940). The factor that it introduces is closely
related to the temperature-independent (or Van Vleck) term in the
magnetic susceptibility, and like it can be quite anisotropic. It follows
that for a given crystal orientation we get an co5 or H5 dependence,
but if measurements are made at constant frequency, and H is varied
as the crystal is rotated, we cannot expect a variation in (1/rJ that
follows a simple H2co* dependence.
A magnetic hyperfine field will also be effective in breaking the
time-reversal symmetry of a Kramers doublet, producing admixtures
of excited electronic states that are of two kinds. First, the diagonal
part of the magnetic hyperfine interaction can be combined with the
Zeeman term to give Hco = g^(H+Hn), where H^ is proportional to
the nuclear magnetic quantum number m (cf. eqn (1.30) or § 1.6); thus
if measurements are made at constant frequency eqn (10.52) still
holds, though at low fields (H < H^) the effect of H will be more
n
important than that of H. Second, the off -diagonal terms in the magnetic
hyperfine interaction involving I produce admixtures of excited
±
states of order (A'/A') which are independent of co, so that we get a
frequency dependence of r~l that is similar to (10.49) rather than

--- Page 575 ---

560 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
(10.52), but that is numerically smaller than (10.49) by a factor
~ (A'l&Y. Here A' is the matrix element of the magnetic hyperfine
interaction between the ground doublet and an excited state at A'
(which may not be the same as A). This provides a relaxation path
through the forbidden transitions Am = ± 1, whose rate in strong fields
is slower by a factor ~ (A'/Hco)2, if we neglect the difference between
A and A7, than that for the allowed transitions Am = 0 given by
eqn (10.52). The importance of these extra relaxation paths has
been demonstrated, for example, by Baker and Ford (1964), and
more extensively by Larson and Jeffries (19666).
The two-phonon Orbach process
In 1961 an important two-phonon process suggested by Orbach was
verified experimentally by Finn, Orbach, and Wolf (1961) (see also
Manenkov and Prokhorov (1962)). Suppose the magnetic ion has a set
of energy levels such as that shown in Fig. 10.4(i), where there are two
FIG. 10.4. Level schemes for spin-lattice relaxation theory, (i) Orbach process, (ii)
Raman process (non-Kramers), (iii) Raman process (Kramers ion), (iv) Orbach-Blume
process (ground multiplet).
low-lying states (such as a Kramers doublet) and an excited state |c)
whose energy is less than the maximum phonon energy. It is then
possible for an ion in, say, state |6) to absorb a phonon of the appro-
priate frequency by a direct process, and be excited to the state |c).
In this state it emits a second phonon by spontaneous or induced
emission and falls down to state |a). This gives an indirect transfer
of ions from state |6) to state |a), and constitutes a relaxation process
that may be faster than the direct transfer from state |6) to |a) because

--- Page 576 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 561
of the much higher density of phonons of energy A. If the direct process
between states |a) and |6) is negligible, the rate equations become
dnjd* = — w n +w n ,
ac a ca c
dnjdt = -w n +w n ,
bc b cb c
where the transition rates now refer to transfers from the lower states
to the excited state |c). In general, we are concerned with effects that
primarily disturb the population of the states |a), |6), such as saturation
of the transition |a)<->16), but which do not in first order change n .
c
Hence if we neglect the difference between w and w , writing them
ac bc
simply as w, we have
t
from which
where F(1) is a product of matrix elements between the states |a), |6)
and the state |c). This gives a relaxation process that is extremely
temperature-dependent since, in the limit where A > kT ,
0
independent of an applied magnetic field except in so far as this may
alter the value of A.
Using the same parameters as before for the rare-earth group, one
finds
if A is measured in °K ; the experimental results lie roughly in the range
(103 to 105) A3 exp( — A/!r ).
o
In any such two -stage process we may expect to find more than one
relaxation rate, but if the rates are materially different the controlling
factor is the slower rate. In the discussion above, if A > kT , the slower
0
rate is that for induced phonon absorption raising the ion to state |c),
the return to the ground state being primarily due to spontaneous
phonon emission that is faster under this condition. Thus the controlling
rate is w*, and this is the rate that appears in (10.55).
If w , w are not equal we may not get a simple one-exponential
ca cb
relaxation rate. A more general discussion (including the case when the
states | a), |6) lie higher in energy than |c)) is given by Harris and
Yngvesson (1968).
37

--- Page 577 ---

562 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
The two -phonon Raman process
We consider now processes involving two phonons which are Raman-
type processes similar to those introduced by Waller, but in which
the interaction mechanism is provided by the ligand field rather than
the magnetic spin-spin interaction. As before, the magnetic ion makes
a transition from state |6) to state |a), or vice versa, accompanied by
the virtual absorption of a phonon of angular frequency o) and the
l
emission of a phonon of frequency co. The condition for conservation
2
of energy in the final state is again o) — a) = ±co. Physically this
2 1
requires that lattice distortions oscillating at frequencies co co can
1? 2
combine to generate a crystal potential fluctuating at frequency
co = |o> — coil. Like the magnetic spin-spin interaction mechanism
2
discussed in § 10.3, the crystal potential depends on inverse powers of
the ligand distance, so that non-linear terms in e2 (and higher powers)
are to be expected, as indicated in eqn (10.46).
We distinguish between two types of Raman process, which we call
'first order5 and 'second order' according to the nature of the perturba-
tion involved :
(i) a first-order Raman process arises when the crystal potential F(2)
in (10.46) has matrix elements between the two states |a), |6) of the
magnetic ion. The corresponding transition probability is then
(ii) a second-order Raman process in which one phonon causes a
virtual transition from one of the ground states to an excited state |c>,
followed by another virtual transition induced by the second phonon
in which the magnetic ion returns from |c) to the other ground state.
In this case the transition probability is
where F{1}, F 1} are matrix elements of F(1) between the states |a),
2
|6) and the excited state |c). The reason why only Virtual' transitions
are involved (unlike the Orbach process) is that the state |c) has an
energy A that lies outside the continuum of allowed phonon frequencies,
as indicated in Fig. 10.4(ii).
As before, each of these mechanisms gives transition rates that
depend on the product e^e2,, where the squares of the strains can be
related to the energy densities at the phonon frequencies coj, co by
2
eqns (10.28)-(10.30). The calculation proceeds as in § 10.3 and, on

--- Page 578 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 563
integrating over all phonon frequencies a> we obtain
lt
At low temperatures the integral can, as before, be carried to infinity
and approximated by I' = 6!, giving
Q
In an approximation where F(1) ~ F(2) <—' A, the two contributions
from the first- and second-order processes are clearly comparable, and
it is difficult to separate them experimentally. A rough estimate suggests
that the Raman processes will be more rapid than the direct process
(eqn (10.49)) by a factor of order (10~7 to lO"6)^, so that it may
become the more important process above about 10°K. Equations
(10.58), (10.59) are valid, however, only for non-Kramers ions, and we
must consider the case of ions with Kramers degeneracy separately.
We have seen that in the direct process the matrix elements of F(1)
vanish between two time-conjugate states of a Kramers ion, and the
same is true for F(2). However the application of a magnetic field
destroys the time-conjugate nature of the doublet to order (g/3Hl&')
or (Soo/A'); the first-order Raman process is therefore allowed at a
reduced rate which, by a straightforward modification of (10.59), is
Here we have written A' rather than A because the Zeeman interaction
has a matrix element with an excited state (of energy A') that is not
necessarily the same state as that to which the crystal field F(1) has a
matrix element from the ground state.
In the second-order Raman process for a Kramers ion a similar
difficulty arises, but in a less direct way. The energy levels of such an
ion generated by the static crystal field are always degenerate in pairs,
so that the excited state \c) is accompanied by its time-con jugate
state |d), as in Fig. 10.4(iii). The matrix elements that occur in eqn

--- Page 579 ---

564 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
(10.57b) must be summed over both states |c) and \d), and are of the
form
The products of the matrix elements in the two numerators are equal
but of opposite sign, a result often referred to as the 'Van Vleck (1940)'
cancellation, and which can be shown to follow generally from time-
reversal symmetry (see § 15.4). It follows that the sum of the two
terms in (10.61) vanishes except for the difference in the denominators,
which arises from the presence of the phonon energy Ha) with opposite
l
signs, corresponding respectively to absorption and emission. The net
result is a residuum of order
where co is a lattice frequency, if A > (HcOj).
z
Using this matrix element for the transition probability in the
second-order Raman process we find
where
At low temperatures this integral can be approximated by I' = 8!,
8
giving
With the same parameters as before, a rough estimate gives
so that this process would predominate over the direct process for a
Kramers doublet already above about 5°K. At still higher temperatures
the approximations inherent in our treatment of the phonon spectrum

--- Page 580 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 565
mean that we cannot necessarily expect a simple TjJ law to hold (see
Kiel and Minis (1967)).
The process just considered allows relaxation to take place within a
Kramers doublet at a rate independent of the applied magnetic field,
in contrast with the process described by (10.60) which depends on
the application of a magnetic field to destroy the time-con jugate
nature of the doublet states. If we set F(1) = F(2) = A = A', a very
rough estimate shows that (10.60) is slower than (10.63) by a factor
r^lQ~2(Ha)lkTo)2, making it usually unimportant except at extremely
low temperatures where, unlike other Raman processes, it gives an H2
dependence of l/r for a doublet whose splitting is Ha) = g(3H. At such
x
temperatures the direct process will probably predominate.
Multiplet ground state
Another important case, considered by Blume and Orbach (1962),
is that of a multiplet ground state; that is, the case (see Fig. 10.4(iv))
where the states |c), \d) have virtually the same energy as the states
|a), \b). Then, in eqn (10.61), A is very small and can be neglected in
comparison with the phonon energy HcD^Hco^. Since the two numerators
are of opposite sign, the two terms now reinforce each other instead of
cancelling, giving a matrix element of order (V2/Ho}i). Instead of eqn
(10.58) we have
At low temperatures the integral can be taken to infinity, when
/ ^/^ = 4!, and
4
For non-Kramers doublets Walker (1968) has described a mechanism
that also gives a T* dependence and can operate between states of a
multiplet that are not time-con jugate.
10.5. Summary and comparison with experiment
We now present a summary of the formulae for the spin-lattice
relaxation time derived in the previous section, together with a

--- Page 581 ---

566 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
comparison with some experimental results. We confine ourselves to
situations in which the results do not appear to be affected by any
phonon bottle-neck, reserving discussion of the latter to § 10.6. We
consider first non-Kramers ions, then Kramers ions, followed by ions
with S > |, all in the low-temperature region; finally the high-
temperature region will be briefly discussed.
The principal experimental techniques for the measurement of r
x
may be classified into two main types: steady-state methods and
transient methods. The former includes (a) the classical low-frequency
method (Gorter 1947, Cooke 1950) and (b) a resonance method in
which the degree of saturation is observed as a function of oscillatory
power level, but this requires knowledge of the transition probability,
the line width and the oscillatory signal strength (cf. §§ 2.8, 2.9).
Transient methods include (c) observation of the recovery of the para-
magnetic resonance signal at low incident power level following the
application of a saturating pulse, a method that has the advantages
that each resolved resonance line can be studied separately, and that
the presence of more than one relaxation time can be detected;
(d) spin-echo methods, which have the further advantage over (c) of
better sensitivity because observation of the transient recovery is not
restricted to low power level; and (e) observation of the recovery of
the steady-state magnetization following a saturating pulse, either by
direct measurement or observation of some quantity (e.g. Faraday
rotation) that is proportional to the magnetization. Methods (a) and
(e) measure an average over all magnetic sub-states, while (b) is
determined by the combined action of all relaxation paths. In general,
(c) or (d) is the most accurate method, and can readily be used over a
wide range of relaxation times, (d) is particularly sensitive and (like
(b)) can be applied to very dilute samples.
Non-Kramers ions
For a resonance frequency (co/2?7) our formulae for the relaxation
time can be summarized as
where R^ jR , E, are parameters in an obvious notation, and A is the
or

--- Page 582 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 567
energy of an excited electronic state lying within the phonon energy
band.
An experimental determination of the direct and Raman terms is
shown in Fig. 10.5 for Tb3+ in yttrium ethylsulphate. This non-Kramers
ion (see § 5.6) has a doublet ground state, slightly split by a crystal-
field effect; the measurements shown are in zero external field, when
there are two allowed electronic transitions for the hyperfine states
\m\ = f and \ respectively. In these measurements Hco < kT0, so that
the first term in (10.66) can be approximated by Bd(Hco)2(2kT0)9 giving
the term linear in T . When the initial splitting of a non-Kramers
0
FIG. 10.5. Spin lattice relaxation rate ljr as a function of temperature T for 1 per cent
l 0
Tb3+ in yttrium ethylsulphate at zero magnetic field. (After Larson and Jeffries 1966a.)

--- Page 583 ---

568 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
doublet is small compared with the Zeeman splitting the direct process
gives (1/rJ varying as H2T .
0
As a very rough order of magnitude, in the rare-earth group when
Hco = gfiH = 1 cm"1, we may expect
I/TJ = 103T + (103 to 105) A3exp(-A/T )+(10-2to 102)TJ, (10.67)
0 0
where r^ is in seconds and A in °K, assuming that (T0jk) < 1.
Kramers doublets
The formulae we have obtained can be summarized as follows.
In the region where g{3H — Hoo <; kT << A, this approximates to
0
In the direct process it must be remembered that one factor (Ha))2 or
H2 arises from the need to break the time-conjugate nature of the
states, and that R , R'^ are dependent on the orientation of the magnetic
d
field. Similar considerations would apply to E' (see Kiel and Minis
T
(1967)). As a very rough order of magnitude in the rare-earth group,
we have, when g(5H = Hco = 1 cm"1,
where r is in seconds and A is in °K.
x
Experimental results confirming the terms in T and T^ have already
0
been presented in Fig. 1.24 for Nd3+ in yttrium ethylsulphate. Measure-
ments on the same ion in lanthanum magnesium nitrate are shown in
Fig. 10.6; in this case the predominant term is an Orbach term together
with a direct process coth(Sa>/2&T ) measured into the region where
0
(Hco/2JcT0) is roughly 0-6. No differences are observed for samples
containing 1 and 5 per cent Nd3+, confirming that the relaxation times
are independent of concentration in this range.

--- Page 584 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 569
FIG. 10.6. Experimental results for the spin-lattice relaxation rate I/TJ for Nd3+ in
LaMg(NO3) , 24HO with H perpendicular to the c-axis in the temperature range from
2 3 12 2
0-3°K to 4-3°K. The data show no concentration dependence, and are fitted accurately
by the formula
. showing that at higher temperatures relaxation is dominated by an Orbach process and
at lower temperatures by the direct process. At the lowest temperatures the relaxation
rate is chiefly due to the spontaneous emission of phonons. (After Ruby, Benoit, and
Jeffries 1962.)

--- Page 585 ---

570 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
FIG. 10.7. Variation of (l/rj at 9-41 GHz with the angle 0 made by the external
magnetic field H with the symmetry axis for 0-1 % Nd3+ in yttrium ethylsulphate at a
temperature T = 1-52°K where the direct process predominates. The full line rep-
0
resents the variation predicted by an approximate theoretical calculation. (Larson and
Jeffries 19666.)
The Nd3+ ion in these two substances also illustrates a number of
other features of the relaxation process. Figure 10.7 shows how (l/r^
varies with the angle 0 which the external field H makes with the
crystallographic axis of symmetry at a temperature of 1-52°K where
the direct process is dominant, while at 4-21°K where the Raman
process is much the more important, the contribution to (l/r^ from the
Raman process is independent of angle (Fig. 10.8). Measurements on
a sample of 0*5 per cent Nd3+ in lanthanum magnesium nitrate,
enriched to 91-3 per cent in the isotope 143Nd (/ = f), shown in Fig.
10.9, demonstrate the importance of extra paths involving the magnetic
hyperfine interaction. These give an additional direct process

--- Page 586 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 571
FIG. 10.8. Measurements on the same sample as in Fig. 10.7 but at a higher temperature
T = 4-21°K. The contribution to (1/rj) from the Raman process is found to be isotropic.
This agrees with eqn (10.63); the Raman rate is found to vary as Tj (see Fig. 1.24).
(Larson and Jeffries 19666.)
FIG. 10.9. The effect of extra paths involving the hyperfine interaction in 0-5 % Nd3+ in
lanthanum magnesium nitrate. The full line represents the empirical relation
(nT,,)-1 = 0-12{/(/+l) — wa}+1 xlO-7#2 for the direct process, where the first term
arises from the effect of the hyperfine interaction and the second from the external field in
breaking the time-con jugate nature of the doublet states. (Larson and Jeffries 19666.)

--- Page 587 ---

572 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
where in this case the coefficient
where m is the nuclear magnetic quantum number.
Multiplets (S > ^)
In a system with more than two electronic levels the situation is
complicated because of the possibility of a number of transitions within
a given ion, not all at the same frequency. The coth formula is not
appropriate, but when (Ha)l2kT0) < 1 the direct process should give
(l/Ti) varying as T . We have then
0
and there may also be an Orbach process if other low-lying levels are
present. Equation (10.65) gives a value of order 10~3 s"1 °K~5 for R ,
T
and Chao-Yuan Huang (1965) finds for the + J<^-» — \ transitions of
Eu2+(4/7, 8£) in CaF
2
The fit to the experimental results is shown in Fig. 10.10. A T^ term
with a coefficient of the same order of magnitude has been found for
the iso-electronic ion Gd3+ in CaF by Bierig, Weber, and Warshaw
2
(1964). A considerably faster T* process has been observed for Mn2+
in BaF and SrF by Horak and Nolle (1967).
2 2
Raman processes in the high-temperature limit
In the high temperature limit where (JcT0) > Ha)m, in which ficom = &0D
and 0 is the Debye temperature, all the Raman processes approximate
D
in their temperature dependence to
since xm = (Ha)m/kT0) = (O^/To) < 1. Such a dependence on temperature
just reflects the fact that two phonons are involved, each with average
energy (kT ) in the classical limit. In some exceptional cases where the
0
vibrations of a defect are involved rather than a second phonon, a

--- Page 588 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 573
Temperature (OK)
FIG. 10.10. Experimental results for (l/r^ as a function of temperature for Eu2+ in
CaF at 0-0047% concentration. The measurements are on the M = +i *•* — i transi-
2
tion of the 8$| ground state, which has a small initial splitting, at a field of 3'27 kG along
a <100> axis and a frequency of about 10 GHz. The data for this concentration, and also
for concentrations of 0-0074% and 0-18%, are well fitted by eqn (10.74).
(After Chao-Yuan Huang 1965.)
different temperature-dependence is observed (see, for example,
Murphy (1966), Feldman, Castle, and Wagner (1966)).
For a few ions (such as $-state ions) where the orbital momentum is
rather fully 'quenched', values of T of order 10~6 s at room temperature
X
have been measured by paramagnetic relaxation experiments (Gorter

--- Page 589 ---

574 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
1947). For other ions T is very much shorter, and spin-lattice relaxation
X
frequently becomes the dominant process in broadening an electron
resonance line at temperatures above 100°K (or even less). Values of
T! can then be estimated from the line width, the shape being Lorentzian
(eqn (2.65)) with Aco = l/r^ Sroubek and Zdansky (1966) report that
a TQ variation of r"1 for Cu2+ in CdW0 has been verified in this way
4
between 95 and 300°K.
10.6. The phonon 'bottle-neck' and phonon 'avalanche'
So far we have assumed that the spins relax to the phonons, and
that the latter correspond to a radiation field whose temperature T
Q
remains constant and equal to that of the 'bath' (for example, the
bath of liquid helium in which the paramagnetic sample is immersed).
This implies either that the heat capacity of the phonons is very much
larger than that of the spins, so that the energy transferred from the
spins to the phonons is insufficient to raise the temperature of the
phonons appreciably, or that the phonons are in such intimate thermal
contact with the bath that heat received from the spins is transferred
instantaneously (or at any rate in a time very much less than r ) to
x
the bath. We shall consider this last point first, remembering that in
any steady-state experiment the temperature of the spin system will
ultimately depend on the rate at which heat is transferred from it to
the bath.
In a reasonably perfect crystal at liquid helium temperatures it is
known from thermal conductivity data that the mean free path of
the phonons is mainly determined by the crystallite size, showing that
scattering of the phonons occurs principally through collisions with
the boundaries. The latter gives a mean lifetime T for the phonons
pjl
of order L/2v where L is the linear dimension of the crystallites. For
9
L = 6 mm, this gives a value r of order 10~6 seconds from boundary
ph
wall scattering. However there is usually a large acoustic impedance
mis-match at the boundary, so that we cannot assume that every wall
collision is efficient in transferring energy to the bath and restoring
thermal equilibrium in the phonon system, and the time of 10~6 s
must be regarded very much as a lower limit.
In a 'direct' process, energy is transferred from the spins only to
those modes which (within the resonance line width) have the same
frequency as the resonance frequency of the spins. We have seen in
§ 10.2 that the number of such lattice modes is very much smaller
than the number of spins. For an undiluted tutton salt with some

--- Page 590 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 575
3xl021 spins per cm3, the number of resonant lattice modes (even
for a splitting ~1 cm"1) is smaller by a factor of roughly 106. If we regard
the spin-phonon relaxation (with characteristic time r ) as due to
x
'collisions' between spins and phonons, then for every collision
experienced by a spin there must be some 106 collisions experienced
by a phonon, so that the mean life time for a phonon between spin
collisions is only lO"6^. This will lie in the range 10~6-10~9 s at helium
temperatures, corresponding to mean free paths for the phonons which
may be much smaller than the crystallite size. This phenomenon is
similar to the optical 'imprisonment of resonance radiation', and the
phonons can only 'diffuse' to the walls, greatly increasing the effective
phonon-bath relaxation time. If the rate at which phonons collide
with spins is greater than Aco = l/r , the line width assumed for the
2
spin resonance, the phonon line width would appear to be greater than
l/r , and it is not obvious which value we should take in estimating
2
S, the number of phonons on 'speaking terms' with the spins. In fact
under these circumstances the spins and phonons constitute strongly
coupled systems, and we cannot correctly speak of either 'spins' or
'phonons' nor discuss their properties separately. The properties of
the coupled spin-phonon system have been considered by Jacobsen
and Stevens (1963), and the implications for paramagnetic relaxation
discussed by Giordmaine and Nash (1965).
We now consider the transfer of energy from the spin system to the
bath via the phonons as a simple classical problem in heat transfer.
We represent the situation schematically in Fig. 10.11, where C is
H
the heat capacity of the spin system given for 8 = \ by eqn (10.3la)
multiplied by the number of spins N, and <7 is the heat capacity of
ph
the resonant phonons given by (10.31b) multiplied by S, the number
of phonons on speaking terms with the spins. The rates of heat transfer
are characterized by time constants r for transfer from spins to
±
FlG. 10.11. Schematic representation of the flow of energy from the spin system through
the resonant phonons to the bath.

--- Page 591 ---

576 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
phonons, and r from phonons to bath. We assume that we can speak
ph
of a spin temperature T and a phonon temperature T^. Then writing
s
T' = (2i -To), T = (T^-T ), where T is the bath temperature, we
B ph 0 Q
have the differential equations
These two equations give differential equations for T' , T which are
B ph
each of the form
The solutions of this equation are of the form
and in the approximation where C > (7 we have
H ph
The first of these time constants is very short, r^ & T^C^/C^), and
corresponds to an initial rapid transfer of energy from the spins to
the phonons, heating the latter quickly to the same temperature as
the former because of their relatively small heat capacity. The second
time constant r corresponds to the much slower rate at which the
b
combined systems (spins+phonons) relax to the bath, a time constant
that is greater than r in the ratio (C +Cph)/Cph> which is the ratio
ph H
of the combined heat capacities to that of the phonons alone. For a
spin system with S = J, we have, using eqns (10.31a, b),
where we have written T on the assumption that the spin and phonon
Q
temperatures do not differ greatly from the bath temperature. This
assumption is clearly essential for the validity of (10. 76), (10.77).
A similar result is obtained from a microscopic approach on the same

--- Page 592 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 577
lines as that used in § 10.1 for the spin system alone. The temperature
T of the phonon system is related to the phonon occupation number
ph
p by (10.27); for the bath temperature T
0
and for a two-level spin system as in § 10.1 we have in thermal equi-
librium at temperature T
0
The microscopic differential equations are
where the ratio (p + l)/p represents the ratio of the probability of
emission of a phonon to that of absorption by the spin system. The
constant E' is related to (l/r ) by
x
as can be verified by comparison with eqns (10.2) and (10.11). In terms
of the parameters
the differential equations can be written
where, with
from eqn (10.82). The solutions of these equations are discussed by
Faughnan and Strandberg (1961), who plot curves for various ranges
38

--- Page 593 ---

578 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
of 6 and r . When recovery is nearly complete (x -> 1, y -> 0) a simple
ph
exponential is obtained with time constant
in agreement with eqn (10.81).
When 6r is the largest term in this equation for r we expect quite
ph b
a different temperature and frequency dependence from the ordinary
direct process. We have then to a good approximation
An experimental result of this type is shown in Fig. 10.12. The results
fit very well to a coth2(Ha}/2kTQ) dependence, corresponding to a
temperature-independent value of r which would be expected if a
ph
relation such as r = L/2v is valid. Figure 10.12 shows also a con-
ph
centration dependence, but R^ is not simply proportional to N-1,
presumably because dco (and perhaps also r ) in eqn (10.91) are con-
ph
centration (or sample) dependent.
At temperatures where (Sco/2fc77 )< 1, coth2(^co/2fcjr ) is approxi-
0 0
mately (2kT/Ha))2, and l/r is found to vary as TJ. This corresponds to
0 b
a region where C varies as T~2, while C is independent of temperature,
H ph
so that (1/6) varies as T72. Thus instead of a spin relaxation rate (1/Tj)
varying as T in the direct process, we have a variation of (l/r ) as T2,
0 b
indicating that the temperature dependence is determined just by the
heat capacity of the spin system.
The difficulty in transferring energy from the spins to the bath which
arises from the presence of relatively few phonons on speaking terms
with the spins is known as the 'phonon bottle-neck' and was first
recognized by Van Vleck (1941a,b). If instead of just heating the spin
system by a saturating pulse, we go further and invert the populations
of the spin levels by means of adiabatic rapid passage or a 180° high-
power pulse (cf. §§ 2.5-2.7), we have an interesting situation because
the phonons, unlike the spins, cannot attain a 'negative' temperature
because their energy levels are not finite in number and continue to
infinity. This is reflected in the different way in which the parameter y
is defined in eqns (10.88); its value is zero in thermal equilibrium, and
can rise to large positive values, bounded by + °o ; (negative values of
y correspond to the phonons being colder than the bath). On the other
hand, for a two-level spin system, x = +1 at thermal equilibrium,
falls to zero when the populations of the two levels are equal (corre-
sponding to T = oo ), and becomes negative when the level populations
8

--- Page 594 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 579
FIG. 10.12. Experimental data for the spin-bath relaxation rate l/r for Ce3+ in
b
LaMg(NO) , 24HO. The data are fitted accurately by the formula
2 3 312 2
where the value of # is concentration dependent, being 2-4 for 0-2 percent Ce and 0-8 for
b
2 per cent Ce. Thus the relaxation rate to the bath is dominated by an Orbach process at
the higher temperatures and by the phonon bottleneck (see eqn (10.91)) at lower
temperatures. (After Ruby, Benoit, and Jeffries 1962.)

--- Page 595 ---

580 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
are inverted. If we write u = —x, then exact population inversion
corresponds to u changing from — 1 to +1, which will be followed first
by a fall in u back to 0 (equal populations), and then by a return
through negative values to — 1. In this second region the spin tempera-
ture is high but positive, so that the position is similar to that analyzed
above, and we discuss now just the region where u is positive.
In terms of the parameter u = —x, eqns (10.89) become
These rate equations are non-linear and have been solved by Brya and
Wagner (1967) for particular conditions using numerical techniques,
representative curves being reproduced in Fig. 10.13. Initially u
changes rather slowly, because we start with y = 0, and from the
first equation in (10.92) the initial rate of change of u is just charac-
terized by the normal spin-phonon relaxation time r . For large
1
values of 6, which from eqn (10.90) and the earlier discussion may
easily be in the region of 104, the second equation in (10.92) shows that
y will rise very much faster than u falls, because of the relatively small
heat capacity of the phonons. In turn, the rapid increase in the phonon
energy density stimulates the emission of further phonons by the
spin system, the deluge rapidly becoming catastrophic and resulting
in a 'phonon avalanche'. This region is represented by the rapid fall
in u and large rise in y shown in Fig. 10.13, the effective relaxation
time in this region becoming r where approximately
f
u being the initial value of u. Equation (10.92) shows also that at
{
u = 0, (du/dt) = — (l+'fcO/r-L, so that at this point again u changes at
a rate given by T since there is no net stimulated emission (or absorp-
I?
tion) of phonons from the spin system when the populations of the
two spin levels are just equal. Thus the value of u changes rather
slowly both initially and as u approaches 0, with a very rapid change
in the 'avalanche' region. Similarly y rises slowly from zero initially,
then very fast to a high value in the avalanche region, followed by a
rather swift drop at a rate primarily determined by l/r to compara-
ph
tively small values. It can be seen from Fig. 10.13 that the maximum

--- Page 596 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 581
FIG. 10.13. Numerically computed solutions to eqns (10.92) for various initial values of
the inverted spin population parameter u, assuming the numerical values 6=2-5xl04,
= 1Q~6 s, r = 10~2s, where b is the ratio of the specific heat of the spin system to
Tph l
that of the resonant phonons at temperature T (the bath temperature). u is the value
0 t
of u at t = 0; note that the scale for y is larger than that for u by a factor of 104. (After
Brya and Wagner 1967.)
value of y attained depends rather sharply on the value of u the initial
i9
degree of inversion, and it is clear that much higher values of phonon
temperature are generated in the avalanche than can be produced by
saturation of the spin system, for which u is negative, and at most
i
zero. The experiments of Brya and Wagner using dilute cerium
magnesium nitrate give general confirmation of the theory. Similar

--- Page 597 ---

582 SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION
results have been obtained for Ni2+ and Fe2+ in MgO by Shiren (1967),
who has succeeded in detecting the phonons generated in an avalanche
at one end of an MgO rod doped with Fe2+ by their effect on the spin
resonance of Fe2+ ions (with uninverted level populations) at the other
end. In this case the characteristic time constant for the avalanche was
4 x 10~8 s, in contrast with the normal spin-phonon relaxation time r
x
of 4xlO~4s. The phonons generated were predominantly transverse,
because the transition probability varies as v~5 and in MgO (§ 10.2)
In this section so far we have obviously been concerned just with
the 'direct process', and the phenomena of the phonon bottle-neck and
avalanche depend on the very high ratio of the heat capacity of the
spin system to that of the resonant phonon modes. It is possible that
analogous effects might occur by means of an Orbach process, which
also involves a narrow band of phonons, in this case of energy A,
though the number of such modes will be higher by a factor (A//£co)2.
In the Raman process all lattice modes are involved so that the specific
heat ratio will be much lower than for the direct process; however it
should be noticed that a spin system S = J in an undiluted tutton
salt, with a splitting equal to 1 cm"1, will have a magnetic specific
FIG. 10.14. Schematic representation of the various paths for spin-phonon relaxation,
phonon-phonon coupling and phonon-bath relaxation. The arrows indicate the direction
of energy flow assuming that the spin system is 'hot' and the bath 'cold'.

--- Page 598 ---

SPIN-PHONON INTERACTION 583
'heat that is larger than the Debye specific heat (i.e. the specific heat of
all lattice modes) even up to 4°K, if we assume the Debye 6 to be
D
about 100°K.
In considering the direct process we have neglected coupling between
lattice modes, though this seems a reasonable approximation in a good
crystal at helium temperatures if the mean free path of the phonons
(in the absence of spins) is limited by crystallite size rather than by
scattering through collisions with other phonons. A block diagram that
includes all the above relaxation paths, and phonon-phonon coupling,
is given in Fig. 10.14. An analysis of a less general system, involving
just three 'thermal reservoirs', has been given by Petersen (1965, 1967);
this uses rate equations for the quantity /^ = (kT^-1, (cf. eqn (10.19))
which are valid provided that each reservoir i is in internal thermal
equilibrium so that it can be characterized by a temperature T This
it
is basically similar to the analysis of Fig. 10.11 given at the beginning
of this section; however it is valid over a wide temperature range
because population differences (e.g., na— nb) are proportional to (I/T)
and not to T, and it thus avoids the approximation of small temperature
changes which is frequently inherent in the use of classical thermal
analysis (cf. eqns (10.76), (10.77)).

--- Page 599 ---

PART III
THEORETICAL SURVEY
11
THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
11.1. The interaction between electrons and a magnetic field
ELECTRONIC magnetic resonance occurs when an oscillating mag-
netic field induces transitions between two separated, discrete atomic
levels. The most common case is one in which the levels are split
through the application of a steady external magnetic field, but it
sometimes happens that the two levels may be separated even in
the absence of such a field. Nevertheless, it may still be convenient
to apply to the system a magnetic field that will control within certain
limits the spacing between the two levels.
An important problem, then, is to determine the position and the
nature of the levels of an electronic system in the presence of an applied
magnetic field H . If ^ is the Hamiltonian of the system in the
0 0
absence of the field, it is known from electromagnetic theory that
the effect of a uniform field H is described by replacing in &\ the
0
momentum p^ of each electron i of charge — e by the quantity
where A(r) = J(H A rj is the value at the electron position r^ of the
t 0
vector potential from which the field H is derived.
0
If the kinetic energy of the electrons has the correct relativistic
form given by Dirac, the coupling of H with both the orbital magnetic
0
moment and the spin magnetic moment of the electrons is obtained
directly. On the other hand, if the non-relativistic form of the kinetic
energy
is being used, the spin magnetism does not appear and the orbital
magnetism is obtained as follows: the substitution
yields

--- Page 600 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 585
The extra terms containing the magnetic field can be written:
If we now introduce the quantity
where L is the orbital momentum of the system with respect to the
origin of coordinates (the origin of the vectors r,), and the Bohr
magneton /? = eH/2mc eqn (11.2) becomes
9
The first term in (11.4) represents the orbital magnetism. It shows that
an electronic system with an orbital momentum KL possesses a magnetic
moment \L = — /?L. The second term is the so-called diamagnetic term.
L
In the expression for the vector potential we did not specify the
origin of the vectors r. It is clear that the separation of (11.4) into
t
a paramagnetic and a diamagnetic part depends on the choice of this
origin. On the other hand, the principle of gauge invariance in electro-
magnetism tells us that this choice should not affect the result of the
calculation of any physical quantity that can be observed experimen-
tally. In this chapter, where we assume that the electrons responsible
for the magnetic properties of the system are localized on a single
atom, we shall choose as origin for the vector potential A and the
orbital momentum L, the nucleus of this atom. It is then easily shown
that for the values of the field H that are currently used in laboratories
0
the diamagnetic term is much smaller than the paramagnetic one.
The diamagnetic term can be written
where d is the angle between the vector r and the applied field. In
i i
order of magnitude, if we assume that we can take L to be of order
unity, this term is smaller than the paramagnetic term by a factor
of ~ i TST ((r2)le)H where (r2) is the mean square radius of the
Q
atom. For H ~ 104 e.m.u., and atomic dimensions of the order
Q
of 0-1 nm, the ratio of the diamagnetic to the paramagnetic term is of
order 10~6. This is comparable with the ratio between the diamagnetic
and the paramagnetic susceptibility measured at very low temperatures

--- Page 601 ---

586 THE ELECTRONIC ZEE MAN INTERACTION
when the electron magnetic moments are almost completely aligned
in the applied field and (L) can indeed be of order unity.
Another reason why we shall often be able to disregard the dia-
magnetic term is that it has the same expectation value for both levels
|a) and |6) between which the resonance is observed and thus does not
affect the resonance frequency.
In the foregoing non-relativistic treatment the spin magnetism must
be introduced phenomenologically by assigning to the electron an
intrinsic spin magnetic moment {JL = —g fis, which has the same posi-
S 8
tion as the electron charge. It is well known (and will be proved (in
§ 17.3)) that reduction of the Dirac equation to the non-relativistic
form due to Pauli leads to a value of 2 for g. However, both accurate
s
experiments and a more refined theory that takes into account the
interaction of the electron with the fluctuations of the radiation field
lead to a slightly different value of 2-0023 for g. We are thus led to
s
describe the magnetic coupling of an atom (or an ion) with an applied
field by means of a Hamiltonian
where S is the total spin of the atom. In some experiments of very
high accuracy a few small corrections, most of them of a relativistic
nature, have to be applied to (11.6), but we shall disregard them with
one or two possible exceptions. Frequently we shall even neglect the
difference g—2.
s
11.2. The Zeetnan effect in a free atom (or ion)
Whatever the interactions between the electrons of a free atom or
ion, in the absence of external fields the magnitude J of its total
angular momentum J is a good quantum number and each energy
level corresponding to a given value of J will have a degeneracy of
2J + 1.
The behaviour of the energy levels of the atom, when a steady
magnetic field is applied to it, will depend on whether the Zeeman
coupling (11.6) is large or small compared to the spacings of the atomic
energy levels between which it possesses non-vanishing matrix elements.
For magnetic fields currently used in laboratories, Z will in general be
much smaller than these spacings. If we neglect the effects of the
Zeeman coupling between different J levels, we may calculate the
splitting of any given J level by first-order perturbation theory, using
only the matrix elements of Z inside the manifold of degeneracy
(2J + 1).

--- Page 602 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 587
A fundamental theorem of group theory, the Wigner-Eckart
theorem, of which we shall have more to say in § 13.5, tells us that
inside the manifold J all vector operators have the same matrix
elements within a constant factor. Within the approximation of the
first-order perturbation theory we shall then write
where gj is a constant, called the Lande factor. The manifold J is
split by a magnetic field into 2J + 1 equidistant levels each corre-
sponding to a different value of J where z is the direction of the
z)
applied field. As magnetic resonance transitions are allowed only
between successive levels for which J differs by one unit there is a
z
single resonance frequency,
Whereas the proof of (11.7) is very general, the actual calculation of
QJ requires more detailed hypotheses.
11.3. LS-coupling and the Lande formula
In a non-relativistic theory the interactions inside an atom can be
divided into two parts: one, a spin-dependent part and two, a spin-inde-
pendent part.
Quite generally (with the possible exception of the heaviest atoms)
spin-dependent forces are much weaker than purely orbital forces and
can be neglected in a first approximation. The description of atomic
states in the framework of this approximation is known as the Russell-
Saunders or £$-method of coupling. In this description it is well
known that the magnitude L of the total orbital momentum is a good
quantum number (this is a result of rotational invariance in the free
atom and will be discussed in Chapter 13 from the viewpoint of group
theory).
A second good quantum number is the total spin 8. It is worth
pointing out that, in contradistinction to L, the fact that S is a good
quantum number has nothing to do with rotational invariance and
stems simply from the fact that spin-dependent forces have been
neglected. As Dirac (1930) has shown in his chapter on identical
particles, the quantum number S is related to the type of symmetry
of the electronic wave-function with respect to a permutation of the
orbital coordinates of the various atomic electrons. Indeed one could
(and did in the early days of quantum mechanics) classify atomic

--- Page 603 ---

588 THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
energy levels, without mentioning the spin at all, by using the language
of the theory of the permutation group. It is just the fact that the
electronic wave-function is antisymmetric with respect to the permuta-
tion of both the orbital and the spin coordinates of two electrons that
enables one to replace, at least partially, this complicated description
by the introduction of the total spin 8 as a good quantum number.
In atomic spectroscopy an energy level specified by the values of L
and 8 is called a term. In practice, L and 8 alone will often not be
sufficient to specify a term and extra parameters have to be introduced.
A given term (L, S) has a degeneracy (2L + 1) X (2/9 + 1). We consider
now the effect on such a term of spin-dependent forces that will
partially lift this degeneracy. Since the magnitude J of the total angular
momentum J = L + S is a good quantum number, the term (L, S) will
be split into a number of submultiplets (J, L, S), where each multiplet
has still a degeneracy of order (2J + 1) and where J ranges from L+S
to \L—S\. The representation of each multiplet by (JL8) implies
9 9
that, according to our assumptions, the spin-dependent forces that
split the (L, S) term are small compared to the distance between two
neighbouring terms (L, S) and (Lf, S'), and in a multiplet (J, L, S) the
admixture of wave-functions originating in another term (Lf, S') is small.
We have made no assumptions so far about the nature of the spin-
dependent forces and thus can tell nothing of the spacings between the
various multiplets (J, L, S). If these spacings are large compared to
the Zeeman coupling Z we can compute the Lande factor gj of formula
(11.7) as follows. On multiplying each side of (11.7) by J we have
and from squaring the relations S = J— L and L = J — S we find
whence
In particular, if we make the approximation g = 2, eqn (11.12a)
s
becomes
The formulae (11.12a) or (11.12b) become particularly simple if J
has the maximum possible value J = L+S, for then the substate

--- Page 604 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 589
J = J is also the state L = L, S = S and the z component of the
z z z
vector equation (11.7) can be written as the scalar relation
whence
which could of course be obtained directly from (11.12a) by writing
J = (L+S).
It is worth emphasizing once more the extreme generality of the
assumptions made so far. Equation (11.7) has simply implied that
the Zeeman coupling Z is small compared to the spacings between the
various levels of the free atom. The more detailed relations (11.12a)
and (11.12b) are based on the further assumption that spin-dependent
'forces are small compared to orbital forces. The great simplicity of
the Zeeman splitting in the free atom is related to the fact that the
applied field H is uniform and that its effects are not sensitive to the
0
detailed structure of the wave-functions. To a lesser extent this holds
for a paramagnetic ion embedded in a crystal potential and the main
features of the Zeeman splitting in such an ion could be derived without
introducing any further details about the electronic structure of the
free atom. However this is unadvisable for the following reasons.
(a) While the foregoing simple assumptions of rotational symmetry
of the atom and of relative weakness of the spin-dependent forces
have demonstrated the existence of (L, S) levels, they have provided
no indication of their number or of their relative positions. Far more
detailed predictions for these levels can be obtained.
(b) Furthermore, in addition to the effects of a uniform magnetic
field we shall have to consider those of the very inhomogeneous fields
produced by the nuclear magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole
moments that give rise to the hyperfine structure of the resonance
lines ; these are very sensitive to the details of the atomic wave-function.
11.4. Self-consistent field configurations
The spin-independent part of the Hamiltonian of an atom can be
written
(in which we have neglected small orbital magnetic interactions between
electrons).

--- Page 605 ---

590 THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
For any atom beyond hydrogen, the problem of finding the eigen-
states and eigenvalues of (11.14) cannot be solved exactly. The best,
and in fact the only, approximation used to solve this problem is that
of the self-consistent field suggested by Hartree and improved by Fock.
In Hartree's method it is assumed that each electron moves inde-
pendently of the others in a central potential F(r), which represents
the combined effects of the attraction by the nuclear charge and a
suitably averaged repulsion by the other electrons. In such a field,
electrons have individual energy states and individual wave-functions,
specified by the usual four quantum numbers n, /, m m , where,
lt s
because of rotational symmetry, the energy of each level is independent
of the last two numbers. Thus at this stage of the approximation
each atomic energy level is specified by a set of values for the quantum
numbers n and I of each electron, where the restrictions introduced by
the Pauli principle have been taken into account. Such a set is called
a configuration.
Hartree's method has the following drawback. Consider two indi-
vidual wave-functions 9^- and 99.,. The average potential V(r) 'seen' by
an electron with wave-function cp is that produced by all the electrons
i
except itself. It will therefore be different from the potential 'seen' by
the electron <p The wave-functions <p and q> being eigenfunctions of
jt t i9
two slightly different one-electron Hamiltonians, will not be exactly
orthogonal, which is a nuisance. Moreover, the fact that the electrons
are indistinguishable is not taken properly into account in this method.
The answer to these difficulties is to be found in Fock's variational
method. In this method one seeks the 'best' wave-function
which is a product of individual wave-functions 9^1(^1)9^2(^2) • • • <Pn(r)
n
or, more exactly, the antisymmetrized product
which is called a Slater determinant. The individual or trial functions
(p obey the orthogonality conditions (99,- . (p) = d and are determined
t k ik
by the requirement that (tf) = J T*3#*¥ dr ... dr be an extremum.
± n

--- Page 606 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 591
In practice, for free atoms, the trial functions are taken of the form
where only the radial parts are unknown. The condition 6(^f) — 0
leads to a set of integro-differential equations for the P (r), which are
ni
then solved numerically. The energy level that corresponds to a con-
figuration is still highly degenerate since the quantum numbers m and
l
m remain unspecified and can take all the values compatible with the
s
exclusion principle.
Consider then two Slater determinants X¥ , and *¥ » belonging to a
A A
configuration A of energy W , and two other determinants *¥ , and
A B
^¥ » belonging to a different configuration B of energy W . If these
B B
Slater determinants were exact eigenfunctions of Jtf* the following
would hold:
In fact these equalities will be only approximate: the diagonal
matrix elements (*F ,\ tf \T ,) and (T^| 3tf \*¥ ») will be slightly
A A A
different and will partially lift the degeneracy of configuration A.
Off-diagonal matrix elements (M^/l Jti? I^Fg,) will admix into each
configuration wave-functions originating in another configuration, an
effect known to the spectroscopists as configuration interaction. The
usefulness of the self-consistent field approximation resides in the fact
that off-diagonal matrix elements of Jf9 linking two different con-
figurations A and B, are small compared to the energy difference
W —W between these configurations. Configuration interaction can
A B
then be neglected and the 'correct' eigenfunctions O^, of Jtif are given
by first-order perturbation theory as linear combinations of Slater
determinants from a single configuration. The choice of the 'correct'
linear combinations O^ is greatly simplified through L and S being
good quantum numbers. As is well known in spectroscopy, and as will
appear in more detail later on in connection with a group-theoretical
discussion, the determination of the 'correct' linear combination will
involve solving a secular equation only if more than one term (L, S)
can be constructed from a given configuration. For instance, two distinct
2D terms can be constructed from the configuration d3; a quadratic
secular equation must be solved in order to determine the structure
of the wave-functions and the energies of the two 2D terms.

--- Page 607 ---

592 THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
Thanks to a rule originally due to Hund, the ground state of an atom
(which is with few exceptions, the one of widest interest in paramagnetic
resonance) has a structure much simpler than that of the excited states.
Hund's rule states that the ground state has the maximum possible
total spin 8 and, among states of maximum 8, the greatest orbital
momentum L. For instance, in a configuration d* the ground state
will have 8 = 2, L = 2; in a configuration /3 the ground state is
8 = f, L = 6, etc. For such a state, the magnetic substate L = L,
z
S — 8 is a single Slater determinant where all the electrons have the
z
maximum values m and m compatible with the exclusion principle.
s l
The low energy of a state with maximum 8 corresponds to the fact
that, being completely symmetrical with respect to spin variables, the
wave-function is completely antisymmetrical with respect to space
variables. This keeps the electrons apart and reduces the positive
contribution to the energy arising from their electrostatic repulsion.
Unfortunately no such simple interpretation can be given for the rule
for maximum L.
11.5. Spin-orbit coupling
Among spin-dependent interactions the most important by far is
the spin-orbit coupling; for each electron this can be written as
£(r)l. s. A simple physical (and somewhat incorrect) model of this
interaction obtains as follows: the electron moves with a velocity
v = p/m in an electrostatic field E, which is the gradient of an electro-
static central potential — V/e. The electron 'sees' a magnetic field
where E is related to the potential energy V by
The magnetic coupling 2/te . H between the field (11.17) and the spin
magnetic moment — 2 (is of the electron can be written
A correct calculation from Dirac's equation yields a result smaller
by a factor 2 leading to

--- Page 608 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 593
where £(r) and V(r) have both the dimensions of an energy and (ft/me)2,
the square of the Compton wavelength, the dimensions of an area.
The assumption of £$-coupling is that spin-orbit coupling is small
compared to the energy difference between two neighbouring terms, and
this makes it possible to neglect off-diagonal matrix elements of
2 £(r*)li • si between two such terms. Inside each term the Wigner-
i
Eckart theorem permits the replacement of ^ £*!»• • s* by a single
i
scalar product XL . S. From this approximation it follows immediately
that the energies of the various (J, L, S) multiplets originating from a
given term (L, S) vary as (A/2){J(J + 1)}, a result known as the Lande
interval rule.
If, as happens in heavy atoms, the off-diagonal matrix elements of
spin-orbit coupling between two different terms are not negligibly
small, L and 8 are no longer good quantum numbers and both the
Lande formula for the ^-factor and the interval rule become more or
less incorrect. This situation is called intermediate coupling. The
extreme case ofj-j coupling, where the spin-orbit coupling is so strong
that it is a better approximation to couple first I and s to a resultant j
for each electron and then to couple the various j to a resultant J, is
never realized in practice.
Besides the spin-orbit coupling, by far the most important spin-
dependent interaction, there are others much smaller, namely the
spin-spin coupling between two electrons and the coupling of the spin
of one electron with the orbit of another. These are discussed in some
detail, together with the relation between A and £ by Blume and
f
Watson (1962, 1963) and Watson and Blume (1965).
11.6. Matrix elements between Slater determinants
We summarize here without proof (Condon and Shortley 1935) a few
simple rules relating to the calculation of matrix elements. We assume
that the wave-function is a single determinant of the form (11.15),
which we shall write for brevity:
The extension to a linear combination of such determinants is straight-
forward.
In transition elements we shall specify a Slater determinant by the
values of m and m for electrons outside closed shells. For instance, in
l s
the configuration d3, T = (2+, 1~, 0+) is a state where the quantum
numbers of the threes-electrons are m = 2,m = ^; ra^ = 1, m — — ^;
l 5 s
39

--- Page 609 ---

594 THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
m = 0, m = + J. From well known properties of the determinants it
l s
follows that the interchange of two one-electron states leads to a
change of sign of T:
The diagonal matrix element (*¥\ A \*F)
The operators A that we shall deal with are either one-electron
operators
such as the electrostatic coupling ol an electron with the nucleus or
with an external crystalline or magnetic field, etc., or two-electron
operators (electrostatic repulsion, spin-spin interaction, etc....) of
the form
For a one-electron operator the following rule holds:
For a two-electron operator the rule is
The second term of (11.25) is the so-called exchange term. In particular,
if the operator a(l, 2) is spin-independent the exchange term vanishes
unless (p and <p correspond to the same spin orientation.
p q
Off-diagonal matrix elements
Consider two different Slater determinants
The matrix elements (T| A |Y') are then given by the following rules.
(a) One-electron operators
If T andT' differ by more than one one-electron state, (T| A \*¥') = 0.
If they differ by a single individual state, which is cp in *F and 9?' in *F',
The sign in (11.26) is that of the permutation that has to be performed
among the states of *F' in order to bring 9?' into the place corresponding

--- Page 610 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 595
to that which 99 has in *F, all other identical individual states appearing
in the same order in both T and T'.
For instance,
(b) Two-electron operators
If T and T' differ by more than two individual states, (T| A |Y') = 0.
If T and Y' differ by two individual states, 99 and # for Y and 99',
x'forT'
The choice of sign is determined by the permutation on the states of
T' that will bring 99' in front of 99 and %' in front of #.
If T and T" differ by a single state, namely 99 and 99',
The choice of sign is determined as before.
The simplicity of the formulae (11.24)-(11.28) rests entirely on
the assumption that the one-electron wave-functions 99 ^ are orthogonal
to each other. This is always the case if one-electron Hartree-Fock
wave-functions of a single atom are used. On the other hand, if we
allow the magnetic electrons to be spread over several atoms, as will
be the case when we shall consider the effects of covalent bonding,
one-electron orbitals belonging to different atoms are no longer mutually
orthogonal and the calculation of matrix elements of the energy
becomes far more complicated.
11.7. Introduction of the crystal field
In the years from 1929 onwards it was suggested by a number of
authors that the paramagnetic properties of an ion should be greatly
affected by its electrostatic interactions with its surroundings. These
interactions, at least in a first approximation, could be described by
introducing an electrostatic potential in the region occupied by the
electrons of the paramagnetic ion, produced by the neighbouring atoms
or ions. Van Vleck (1932) and Bethe (1929) put this description on a
quantitative basis, developing what is known as the crystal field theory,
of paramount importance for our understanding of magnetism in

--- Page 611 ---

596 THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
general and more specifically of the results of paramagnetic resonance
experiments. The first success of crystal field theory was the explana-
tion of the 'quenching' of the orbital momentum in the iron group.
It had been found that experimental values of the susceptibilities of a
good many salts of the iron group could be made to agree with the
theoretical formulae if in the latter the orbital contribution to the
magnetic moment were equated to zero; that is, if T is the wave-
function of the ion, one had to assume that
Van Vleck has shown that the absence of orbital degeneracy is a
sufficient condition for this quenching of the orbital momentum, his
proof being as follows. Let T be an eigenstate of the system, assumed
non-degenerate. If spin-dependent forces can be neglected, the Hamil-
tonian e^, the sum of the kinetic and potential energy of the electrons,
is a real operator. We can then assume that \F is real; for, if it were com-
plex, of the form 1F +iT , 3? being real, l¥ and T would be separately
1 2 1 2
eigenfunctions of 3? with the same energy and the level would be
degenerate, in contradiction with the initial assumption. However the
angular momentum operator equivalent to (11.3) is
which is purely imaginary, so that the expectation value of any of its
components taken over a real wave-function is imaginary. On the other
hand, since L is Hermitian, this expectation value must be real. It
must therefore vanish.
We shall present in § 15.4 a more general proof of the foregoing
statement. Here we note that the quenching of the orbital momentum
is a prime instance of the influence of the surroundings on the magnetic
properties of an ion and more specifically of the close connection
between magnetism and degeneracy. The rotational symmetry enjoyed
by a free ion corresponds to a degeneracy that, in surroundings of the
low^er symmetry encountered in a crystal, may be lifted partially or
even totally, leading to a change of the magnetic properties of the ion.
In order to estimate the effects of the crystal potential, the most
important question is its magnitude relative to the energy spacings
encountered in the free ion. These spacings can be classified according
to their order of magnitude into three different categories:

--- Page 612 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 597
(a) the energy separation C between two neighbouring configura-
tions, of the order of the excitation energy of an individual
electron;
(b) the separation T between two terms originating in the same
configuration; as stated above the usefulness of the central
field approximation resides in the condition T <^ C;
(c) spin-orbit coupling energies A, which are smaller than T in LS-
coupling, comparable to it in intermediate coupling and larger
in J-J coupling.
In the following we shall always assume X < T and often A < T.
We now compare the magnitude F of the crystal potential with the
energy spacings of the free ion. Three extreme situations can be used
as starting points for a quantitative description of the properties of an
ion embedded in a crystal field, all of which are actually encountered in
transition elements.
(1) Weak field case
The crystal field energy is smaller than the distance between two spin-
orbit multiplets (J, L, S) and (J', L, S). It lifts partially or wholly the
degeneracy 2J + 1 of each multiplet, which at least in a first approxi-
mation can be studied by neglecting the admixture from neighbouring
multiplets so that J is approximately a good quantum number.
The weak field case is a good approximation for the rare-earth group
where the spin-orbit coupling is larger and the crystal fields as a rule
are smaller than in the iron group.
It is sometimes stated that the crystal fields are small because
the 4/ electrons of the rare-earth ions are shielded by the 5s and 5p
electrons of external closed shells, but there is some doubt as to the
reality of this shielding effect. Rather the result is due to the ligand
ions being pushed further away by the extended 5s, 5p orbitals.
(2) Intermediate case
Here the multiplet structure disappears completely and J ceases to
be a good quantum number, even approximately.
Since perturbation theory requires that the various terms of the
Hamiltonian should be introduced in order of decreasing magnitude,
one must consider first the effect of the crystal potential on an (L, S)
term and only afterwards examine how spin-orbit coupling affects the
wave-functions and the energy levels modified by the crystal potential.
In first approximation the admixtures from neighbouring terms (L'', S')

--- Page 613 ---

598 THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION
may be neglected in the study of the splitting of a given term (L, S)
so that L, and to a better approximation S, remain good quantum
numbers; in more refined calculations these admixtures have to be
considered.
This is the situation for many salts of the iron group. It often happens
that the crystal potential V can be split into terms of decreasing sym-
metry FL, V , etc. of which only the first is much larger than A, which
2
is a complication. One may have to calculate first the effect of V then
ly
apply to the resulting structure simultaneously F and the spin-orbit
2
coupling as a perturbation, etc.
(3) Strong field case
The crystal field energy is stronger than the electronic repulsion
energy responsible for the LS- coupling.
The term structure is washed out and L itself ceases to be even an
approximately good quantum number. The correct treatment is then
to go back to the configuration to see how each one-electron orbit is
modified by the crystal potential and how the degeneracy of individual
electron levels is lifted. The various electrons are then placed in the
new orbits and a new configuration of minimum energy is built up.
We shall call it a 'crystal field configuration'. One can then switch on
as a perturbation the electron-electron interaction; this will partially
lift the degeneracy of the crystal field configuration, introducing new
levels that we may call by analogy 'crystal field terms' with new
good quantum numbers that replace the total orbital momentum L.
The correct interpretation of these new quantum numbers will appear
in the group-theoretical discussion to follow. This situation is
encountered mainly in the £d and 5d group (palladium and platinum
groups) and also for certain complexes in the iron group. Actually we
shall see that the so-called strong field case is generally associated with
covalent bonding where the description of the magnetic behaviour of
an ion in terms of wave-functions strictly localized on this ion becomes
inadequate. Nevertheless, the main features of the magnetic properties
of the ion can still be understood in the framework of the crystal field
theory. This is due to the fact that many of these properties are already
determined by the symmetry of the surroundings without any detailed
assumptions about their interactions with the paramagnetic ion.
In order to obtain a detailed quantitative description of the magnetic
properties of a paramagnetic ion, in principle the following information
should be available:

--- Page 614 ---

THE ELECTRONIC ZEEMAN INTERACTION 599
(i) The wave-functions and the energy levels of the free ion must be
known. Fortunately, very often the knowledge of the ground term
(L, S) is sufficient and, as mentioned earlier, this term being of maximum
S and L has a simpler structure than that of excited states. If the
crystal field is sufficiently weak, as in the case of the rare earths, it may
be enough to know the ground spin-orbit multiplet (J, L, S).
(ii) One must be able to calculate the crystal field acting on the ion.
Even if the positions of all neighbouring nuclei are known accurately
from X-ray analysis, this is a very difficult problem fraught with
considerable uncertainty. We shall discuss it in some detail in Chapter
16.
(iii) The matrix elements of the crystal field between the various
states of the free ion must be computed. This involves in particular the
knowledge of the radial parts of the one-electron Hartree-Fock wave-
function of the free ion. These are matrix elements of one particle
operators, and the only ones that appear for weak and intermediate
crystal fields. For strong fields one has also to compute matrix elements
of the electron-electron repulsion, a two-particle operator.
(iv) With the matrix elements thus calculated, secular equations
must be set up and solved. It is particularly important to extract any
multiple roots that correspond to degenerate energy levels. Wave-
' functions for the paramagnetic ion, which are linear combinations of
the wave-functions for the free ion, are also obtained.
(v) With these functions, expectation values and, if necessary,
off-diagonal matrix elements are computed for the physical quantities
of interest in paramagnetic resonance: components of the magnetic
moment, electron spin-spin interaction, magnetic dipole and electric
quadrupole hyperfine interaction, etc. The hyperfine structure is very
sensitive to the details of the wave-functions and configuration interac-
tion must often be taken into account in its evaluation.
This is a rather formidable programme and it is neither possible
nor fortunately always necessary to determine quantitatively all the
elements listed above.

--- Page 615 ---

12
GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
IT is difficult to exaggerate the role played in paramagnetic resonance
by symmetry considerations, from which alone a tremendous amount of
theoretical information can be obtained. Fortunately there exists a
mathematical tool made to measure, as it were, for the task of extract-
ing this information and translating it into quantitative results; this
tool is the theory of group representations. Considered not so long ago
as a somewhat sophisticated branch of mathematics, this theory has
become accessible to physicists in a number of books written for them
rather than for mathematicians. This poses the problem of on what level
group theory should be treated in a book on paramagnetic resonance,
in which perhaps the only certainty is that it cannot be ignored
altogether.
Group-theoretical considerations enter the subject in both rather
simple and rather complicated ways, as well as lying behind a number
of statements contained in elementary books on atomic theory. For
example, when it is said that the orbital angular momentum is a good
quantum number, or that L and S are coupled together to give a
resultant J, use is being made (consciously or unconsciously) of the
theory of the representations of the rotation group, which we shall
consider in the next chapter. On a simpler level, group theory is hardly
needed to predict that in a field of cubic symmetry the three wave-
functions xy, yz, zx will correspond to states of the same energy; or,
that if the field has a distortion along the z-axis, the function xy will
have an energy different from the other two. On the other hand, without
any knowledge of group theory it would hardly be possible to predict
that a level with J = V would split in a cubic field into two doublets
and three quartets.
Given that group theory cannot be excluded, one may either assume
that the reader already has a working knowledge of the subject, or
attempt to give sufficient information to enable those unfamiliar with
group theory to follow its applications in the field of paramagnetic
resonance. Not without some hesitation, we have decided on the latter
course. Apart from our desire to make this book reasonably self-
contained, we felt (perhaps mistakenly) that, being ourselves more
interested in paramagnetic resonance than in group theory per se, our
account of the latter might be useful to readers sharing the same

--- Page 616 ---

GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE 601
interest. In this chapter we shall therefore attempt to outline the main
results of group theory relevant to our subject, and in subsequent
chapters to apply them first to the free atom or ion and later more
specifically to the conditions of lower symmetry experienced by
paramagnetic ions in solids.
12.1. Invariance and degeneracy
The definition of a group is well known and will not be reproduced
here. Consider a system defined by a set of dynamical variables
x . .. ,x , and assume that its Hamiltonian <2$? is unchanged by all the
l9 n
transformations ^ of a group & which take a point of the set of variables
x = (x ... , x ) into a point x' = ^x = (x' ... , x' ). Let Y(x) be a
l9 n v n
function of (x . . . , x ) and define *F'(x) as the function
l9 n
that is, the function that takes a value equal to Y(x) at the point x' into
which & transforms x. We have written symbolically T' = 1P¥, the
meaning of this symbol being given by (12.1). The transformation R
is a linear operator acting on the function *F and it is easy to see that the
operators R form a group 0 that is isomorphous with *&. The relation-
ship between G and & is a little more complicated when the electron
spin is introduced, as will appear later on. Since $P is invariant under
G, .KpfT) = 3?(R*¥) for all T and hence ^ commutes with all
operators of G. This invariance entails the following fundamental
property: unless all the operators R of the group commute with each
other (abelian group) the system necessarily has degenerate levels: the
proof of this is as follows.
Let R and S be two non-commuting operators of G, and let *F be an
eigenfunction of J^f with eigenvalue W'. Then
from which it is clear that JK*¥ and S*F are eigenstates of J^ with the
same eigenvalue W. If the system has no degenerate levels the three
functions \F, JB*F and S*F will represent the same state and differ by
constant phase factors only. It follows that [H /S]Y = 0 for all eigen-
9
functions of the system. Since these functions form a complete set,
[.R, S] = 0, in contradiction with the initial assumption.

--- Page 617 ---

602 GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
12.2. Linear representations, equivalence, and irreducibility
Let YX, Ya,... , Yp be a set of orthogonal, normalized eigenstates
spanning the manifold of a ^-fold degenerate energy level.
As we have seen, any state O^ = ^T is also an eigenstate of Jf7 with
t
the same energy TF, and it must therefore be a linear combination of
the T which we write as
fc
The linear operators &f(R) represented by the matrices D (E) form
ki
what is known as a linear representation of the group G. We shall
review briefly the properties of the linear representations that are of
importance for the understanding of properties of paramagnetic ions in
crystals. The groups of interest to us are certain finite groups, that is
groups with a finite number of elements and also one infinite group, the
group of spatial rotations.
A linear, p-dimensional representation of a group 0 establishes a
correspondence between every element R of the group and a matrix
D(R), with a non-vanishing determinant, that transforms any vector X
of a ^-dimensional vector space $ into a vector Y = Z)( JB)X of the same
space through the formula
with the isomorphism condition
If in the space $ we make a change of coordinate axes X = $X' and
Y = SY', the relationship Y = D(R)X becomes
The two representations 3f' and Of related by the similarity trans-
formation (12.5) are said to be equivalent. For all finite groups and for
the rotation group it can be shown (and we assume it without proof)
that every linear representation has an equivalent representation that
is unitary, i.e. formed of unitary matrices. From now on we shall
consider unitary representations only.
A unitary representation 2 of dimension p is said to be reducible if
through a similarity transformation all its matrices D can be trans-
formed to the quasi-diagonal form

--- Page 618 ---

GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE 603
where the submatrices D and D have dimensions p and p , with
l 2 ± 2
Pi +Pz = P- Geometrically, the reductibility of the representation Sf
corresponds to the fact that in the representation space $ there are two
invariant orthogonal sub spaces $± and <^ with dimensions p and p ,
2 1 2
such that every vector of (S> is transformed by Qt into another vector of
1
<f and similarly for <?. A representation that cannot be reduced to the
1? 2
form (12.6) by a similarity transformation is said to be irreducible. If
the matrices D^ and/or D are reducible the process can be carried
2
further until all the matrices D are of the form:
where all the submatrices are irreducible.
12.3. Orthogonality relations, characters, and classes
We shall make use of the following theorems, most of which are
stated without proof.
(a) If a matrix M commutes with all the matrices of an irreducible
representation it is a multiple of the unit matrix.
(b) For two irreducible non-equivalent representations ^ and &
l 2
of a finite group G the following orthogonality relation holds whatever
the values of the indices i, j, k, I,
where the summation is over all the elements 8 of the group.
Each group possesses as one irreducible representation the unit
representation where to each operation of the group corresponds the
multiplication by the number 1. Hence if in (12.7) we take 2 ^° be the
2
unit representation we get
(c) For every irreducible representation 2 of order p the following
holds:

--- Page 619 ---

604 GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
where ra is the number of elements of the group, also called the order of
the group. For the rotation group, an infinite group, the orthogo-
nality relations (12.7) and (12.9) are still valid provided the summation
over the group elements is replaced by a suitable integration. It can be
shown that if we define a rotation R by the three Euler angles a, /?, y the
relations (12.7) and (12.9) adapted for the rotation group can be
rewritten as
(d) The traces of the matrices of a linear representation are called its
characters and are denoted by #. Since the trace of a matrix is invariant
under a similarity transformation such as (12.5), two equivalent
representations have the same set of characters. From (12.7) and (12.9)
we obtain immediately the relations
The concept of character is intimately connected with that of class :
two elements A and B of a group are said to belong to the same class if
the group contains a third element C such that
For instance, two rotations A and B through the same angle but
around two different axes X and Y, belong to the same class provided
that the element G in (12.12) is the rotation that converts X into Y.
From the definition (12.12) it follows that the unit element of the group
is in a class by itself. It also follows from that definition that all the
matrices of a linear representation that belong to the same class have
the same character.
If the group contains r different classes C(k) with g elements per class
k
the relations (12.11) can be rewritten as
(e) A problem in the theory of linear representations of a finite group
of paramount importance, for quantum mechanics in general and for

--- Page 620 ---

GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE 605
paramagnetic resonance in particular, is the discovery of all the
irreducible representations of a group G. Let & & ,.. ., 2 be all the
19 2 l
non-equivalent irreducible representations of a finite group G containing
r classes. The number I is finite, as will appear presently. In a space S
with r dimensions consider I vectors X X ,.. ., X , the r components of
l5 2 z
the vector X^ being the r numbers, with k = 1, 2, . . . , r:
It follows from (12.13) that these vectors are orthogonal and therefore
linearly independent. Their number I cannot exceed the number r of
dimensions of the space ff, and we must have I < r. It can also be
shown (and we assume it without proof) that I > r and thus I = r,
which means that the number of non-equivalent irreducible represen-
tations of a finite group is equal to the number of its classes.
Let I 1 , . . . , l be the dimensions of the r irreducible representations
l9 2 r
Consider one such representation Qt^ and the m matrix elements
D (8) that correspond to the m elements 8 of the group. We can
piii
regard these numbers as the m components of a vector X^^ in a space
S with m dimensions. The formula (12.7) shows that these vectors are
all orthogonal and therefore their number /J+^j+. . . +l2 cannot be
larger than the number of dimensions m of the space <?, which is the
order of the finite group G.
Here again it can be shown that the following equality holds:
which once more we assume to hold without proof.
12.4. Reduction of a representation and calculation of the
characters
Let us assume that we know the characters of all the irreducible
representations of a group G and let 2 be a reducible representation.
We want to know the numbers of times a a ,...,a that each irreduc-
lt z r
ible representation 2 is contained in 2. Let #(/S) be the character of
i
the transformation 8 in the representation 2 and #i(/S),. . . , %(/S) be
r
the characters of S in the irreducible representations ^. From the
very definition of reducibility and of the characters it is clear that

--- Page 621 ---

606 GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
Multiplying each side of (12.15) by %* ($), where q is one of the indices
1, 2, . . . , r, and summing over all the group elements 8, we obtain from
(12.11)
where a is necessarily an integer.
g
The prediction of the breakdown of a given representation into its
irreducible components is therefore straightforward if the characters
of all the irreducible representations are known. A straightforward
answer to the question of how to find the characters of irreducible
representations is to look them up in a table. Nevertheless we will
indicate briefly the principle of their calculation.
If we consider the elements of the group as linear operators as
explained in § 12.1 it follows from the definition (12.12) that the
operator ^(9) = E + B +. . . +R , the sum of all elements of a given
1 2 g
class (g) of the group, commutes with all the elements of the group and
conversely that every operator that commutes with all the elements of
the group is a sum of operators ^(flr). It is clear, therefore, that the
product ^(p)(^(q) is also a sum of operators ^ which can be written as
The coefficients as are obtained in a straightforward manner if the
pq
multiplication table of the group is known. Consider now an irreducible
representation 2 of order l. The matrices representing the operators
i t
^(p) commute with all the matrices of this representation and must
therefore be multiples of the unit matrix. The operator ^(p) is represen-
ted by the matrix
where / is the unit matrix and ff^ a number.
Taking the trace of each side of (12.18) we get
where ^!1) = L is the character of the class corresponding to the unit
operator. Inserting this result into (12.17) we find

--- Page 622 ---

GROUP THEORY— AN OUTLINE 607
where we have dropped the index i of the particular representation &..
With the notation y(s) = %(S)I%(1) where y(1) = 1, (12.20) becomes
which can be solved for the values of y as follows. Consider a linear
function
where we choose arbitrarily the coefficients oc. According to (12.21) the
s
successive powers J52,. . . , Br will also be linear functions of the y(s) of
the form
where the @ ,. . . , p are deduced from the oc by means of (12.21).
8 s s
From the r + l linear equations (12.22), (12.23) and y(I) = 1 we can
eliminate the y(s\ obtaining a secular equation of order r for B:
where the coefficients C . . . , C are known.
l9 r
For each of the r roots of (12.24) we get from the sets of linear
equations (12.22), (12.23) a set of values for the y(s) and thus also a set
of characters if we know the %*1); that is, the dimensions l of the
i
irreducible representation. The latter are often determined uniquely
from the relation (12.14): ZJ+. . .+ZJ = m.
We are now in a position to enumerate the irreducible representations
of a group, to calculate their characters, and to break down every
reducible representation into its irreducible components. These
methods enable us to make predictions about the splitting of an energy
level by a perturbation of known symmetry.
12.5. Splitting of a degenerate level by a perturbation
of lower symmetry
Consider a Hamiltonian ^ which is invariant under all the trans-
0
formations of a group 6?, and a level W of that Hamiltonian with
0 0
p-fold degeneracy. For instance, for a given level J of a free ion, the
group GQ will be the rotation group and the degeneracy is p = 2J + 1.
Under the operations of the group G , ihep eigenfunctions T that span
0 i

--- Page 623 ---

608 GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
the manifold £ of the wave-functions with eigenvalue W are trans-
0 0
formed into each other as explained in § 12.2, and provide a linear
representation £} of order p of the group 6r, a representation that we
Q 0
shall initially assume to be irreducible. We introduce a perturbing
Hamiltonian F of lower symmetry than J^ . What is meant by lower
0
symmetry is that only a fraction of the transformations belonging to
6r , namely a subgroup G of 6r, will leave F invariant. The linear
0 0
transformation of the functions *F under the more restricted set of
t
operations belonging to G, provides for this latter group a represen-
tation 2 that may not be irreducible. For, reducing the representation
^ of G consisted of bringing by a similarity transformation all the
0 Q
matrices of ^ to the quasi-diagonal form (12.6), and our assumption
0
of the irreducibility of ^ meant that this could not be done. On the
0
other hand, since the representation 2 of G contains only a fraction of
all the matrices of 6?, we have to 'quasi-diagonalize' fewer matrices by a
0
similarity transformation and this may not be impossible.
We can also say that no sub-manifold ff' of the manifold <? was left
0
invariant by all the transformations of the group G but that it is not
0
inconceivable that a fraction G of these transformations might leave
such a sub-manifold invariant.
Let us assume then that 2, a linear representation of 6?, is reducible.
We can reduce it by means of the formulae (12.15) and (12.16), which
tell us how many times a given irreducible representation, say 3# of
iy
G is contained in 2. Assume for the sake of argument that 2 contains
two irreducible representations 2^ and ^ of dimensions p± and p
2 2
with PI+PZ = p. We can show that the level W will be split into two
sublevels W± and W with respective degeneracies of order p and p .
2 l 2
Let q>(i = 1,2,..., p±) "bepi functions of the manifold £ that transform
t
by & and Xj (j = 1> 2,. . . , p ) those that transform by ^ , and
19 2 2
calculate the following matrix elements:
(Here of course #, has nothing to do with the quantity # used to denote
the character of a representation in § 12.3.)
The matrix element A can be written
u

--- Page 624 ---

GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE 609
Let E be an operation of group G that leaves F invariant, i.e.
(this involves just a change of variable in the integration). Making use
of the definition (12.1) we find that
where m is the number of elements in the group.
From the formulae (12.2) and the orthogonality relations (12.7) we
have
In particular, if in (12.25) we replace V by unity we find
>Thus two such functions belonging to two non-equivalent irreducible
representations are orthogonal.
In the same way, with the help of (12.9), we find
i Equations (12.28) and (12.30) express precisely the fact that the
(functions <p and are the 'correct' zero-order wave-functions for the
t Xi
perturbation F, and that the level W is split into two levels W± and
W of respective multiplicity p and p .
2 l 2
This may be generalized immediately to the case where 3) is reduced
into q irreducible representations £& . . . , £$ of dimensions^, . . . ,p
l9 q qt
all different. The level W is split into q sublevels W . . . , W of mul-
i9 q
tiplicity PI, . . . , Pq, and the correct zero-order wave-functions of the
level W form a basis for the representation <3 and are determined
q q
from symmetry considerations alone. However, if a given irreducible
representation occurs more than once in ^, the situation is rather more
complicated.
Assume for the sake of argument that an irreducible representation
QI occurs twice in Q), spanned respectively by a set of functions
40

--- Page 625 ---

610 GROUP THEORY— AN OUTLINE
(fit . • . , q>n an(i Xi> • • • > #n- We assume further that the cpi and %; trans-
form exactly by the same matrices Z^ and not only within a similarity
transformation. We can establish as before that B , and C^ vanish
H
for i ^ V and j -=£ j* but we can no longer state that (^| V \fa) = 0
and indeed this cross-element will not, in general, be zero. (p and fa are
t
not 'correct' zero-order wave-functions any more and the correct
linear combinations as well as the energy splittings caused by the
perturbation F are obtained from the secular equation
It follows from (12.30) that
The same argument shows that
We wrould therefore have obtained the same secular equation by
choosing two other functions <^ and fa instead of y^ and fa. The
'correct' zero-order wave-functions will be first a set of linear combina-
tions
spanning a first manifold of order p, with an energy W that will be
one of the roots of (12.31), and a second set orthogonal to it,
with an energy TF" that will be the second root of (12.31). The 'correct'
zero-order wave-functions can no longer be obtained from symmetry
considerations alone but involve the perturbing potential F explicitly.
More generally, if a representation 2 of dimension p occurs a
q q q
times in ^, the original level W will be split into a sublevels W . . . , W
q l9 q
each of degeneracy p (and also into other sublevels). The energies
q
W . . . , W and the 'correct' zero-order wave-functions are obtained by
ly q
solving a secular equation of order a .
q
In the foregoing discussion use has been made of first-order pertur-
bation theory and one might ask whether a higher-order calculation
might not lead to a further removal of degeneracy. The answer is no.
Let us consider a total Hamiltonian 2tf (e) = J^o + eV, where W is a
Q

--- Page 626 ---

GROUP THEORY— AN OUTLINE 611
p-fold degenerate level of J^(0) = 3tf0 spanned by p eigenfunctions
*¥ which provide an irreducible representation Q) of the group G that
i9
leaves ^ invariant. We assume that G also leaves F invariant. We
Q
saw that first-order perturbation theory predicts then no splitting for
the level TF, and we shall show that this statement is correct to all
orders. We assume that W is split into two levels W and W spanned
0 ± 2
respectively by p- eigenfunctions 9^ and p eigenfunctions %. The p
L 2 k l
functions <p,• provide a representation £)' of G, irreducible or not, but
which can neither contain S> nor coincide with it since p < p, nor be
1
contained in it since 2 is irreducible. From the orthogonality relations
it follows that the x¥ are orthogonal to all the <p and also to all the %.
i t k
The manifold of the functions (<p # ) being orthogonal to the manifold
jy fc
^¥ cannot be made to coincide with it in a continuous manner when
i
e -* 0, and the two levels W± and W , if they do exist, do not originate
2
from a splitting of W .
0
This takes us back to the assumption made at the beginning of this
section (§ 12.5) that the representation $> of the group 6r , which left
Q 0
J^ invariant and which can be represented by the eigenfunctions of a
0
level Wo, was irreducible. Had it been reducible into, say, two represen-
tations ^ and ^Q, a perturbation of the same symmetry as J^ could
0
have split W into two levels W' and W" . A degeneracy of this type is
Q Q Q
called accidental and will be disregarded from now on.
12.6. The direct product of two representations
We consider now two dynamic systems 8-^ and S , and to start with
2
we assume them to have no mutual interaction, so that their Hamil-
tonians J^ and ^ commute with each other and are each invariant
2
under operations of the same group G. Examples of this type are two
electrons moving in the central potential of the same type of atom, or
two nuclear spins in an applied magnetic field.
Let WL be a level of «^ spanned by p functions <p and W a level of
1 t i 2
3? spanned by p functions /,.. The 99 and the % provide two represen-
2 2
tations ^! and :^ > each of which, barring accidental degeneracy, we
2
assume to be irreducible. It is clear that the products 99^ also provide a
representation of (?, which we shall denote as 2± X ^2 and shall call the
direct product of the two representations 2± an(i ^2- A matrix element
of this representation is defined by the relations

--- Page 627 ---

612 GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
The degeneracy of the level W = TFJ.+T^ of the combined system
Si+S is at most of order p p . (It may be less because of the limitations
2 ± 2
due to the Pauli principle.) If we introduce an interaction ^f? , between
12
the two systems, invariant by the same group G, the degeneracy of the
level W may be partially lifted, for ^ x &Will not in general be an
2
irreducible representation of the group G. We shall be able to bring it
to a reduced form by means of the relations (12.15) and (12.16), since
the character of a matrix
is clearly
The problem of reduction of direct products of representations is
closely connected with the calculation of matrix elements of various
physical operators. A special case is the establishment of selection rules
that correspond to the vanishing of certain matrix elements.
Consider first a function ^(r), which belongs to an irreducible
representation 0 of a group G that is not the unit representation. It
can be seen that J*F (r) dr — 0. Indeed, following the argument that
a
led to the relation (12.28), we have, because of the relation (12.8),
Consider now a matrix element of the form
where *F, Vp, and O transform according to irreducible representati ns
a y
2, &}' , 3)" of a certain group. The product Y*P^O transforms according
y
to the representation ^* x 2' X 2" which is, in general, a reducible
representation of G, and the matrix element (12.37) will be different
from zero only if the representation ^* x 2' X £$" contains the unit
representation at least once.
Practically all the group representations that we shall encounter have
real characters and are therefore equivalent to their complex con-
jugates ; if this is the case for @ the direct product 2* x 2' X 3)" can be
9
replaced by 2 x 2' x 2" . We can show that, if all three representations
2, @', 2" have real characters, the condition that 2 X £$' X 2"
contains the unit representation can be replaced by the requirement
that Of X 2' contains 3t" . The proof is as follows. The number of times,
n that the unit representation is contained in the direct product
l9

--- Page 628 ---

GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE 613
@ X 2^ of two irreducible representations 2 and @ is unity if 2
a a b a
and ^ are equivalent and zero if they are not, for n^ is given by the
&
following relation derived from (12.16) and (12.35):
Thus (&x&')x&" contains the unit representation if and only if
(Of X 2') contains 2".
Let us assume now that T and O of (12.37) belong to the same
a y
representation 2 = 2". It is easily shown that the trace
vanishes unless F^ belongs to the unit representation. We can write
Since the matrices D are unitary, ]T D* (B)D^J(E) = <5,, and (12.39)
fgL aa
can be rewritten: a
which vanishes because of (12.8) unless F^ belongs to the unit represen-
tation. Let dW^,. . . , dW^ be the energy changes produced in the
degenerate level spanned by a set of functions T belonging to the
a
representation 2, by the perturbation F^. Because of the in variance
of the trace we have
which means that the mean position of the energy levels is unchanged
by the perturbation that lifts the degeneracy.
If in the direct product (12.34) the two representations 2± an(l ^2 °f
order p are the same 2 = ^ = ^> ^ne se^ of functions <pxi that span
l 2 k
the reducible representation (^)2 = 2 X 2 can be broken up into a
symmetrical subset \{^^i + ^PiXk} that contains %p(p + l) terms, and into
an antisymmetrical subset %{(pXi~<Pi%k} that contains %p(p — l) terms.
k
It is clear that in the reduction of (^)2 = 2 x 2 the two subsets do not
mix and that in the decomposition

--- Page 629 ---

614 GROUP THEORY—AN OUTLINE
where the £$ are irreducible representations, each of them belongs
l
either to the symmetrical or to the antisymmetrical part of (&)2.
The following relations for the characters of the symmetrical and
antisymmetrical parts of (&)2 are easily established:
In (12.42), (12.43), R is any transformation of the group G and the
suffixes S and A stand for the symmetrical and antisymmetrical parts
of ^2.

--- Page 630 ---

13
GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
FEW subjects in modern physics have been more extensively studied
and have a wider field of applications than the theory of representations
of the group of spatial rotations, and the reader is likely to be already
familiar with the subject. Two truly great books, Group theory
(Wigner 1959) and Irreducible tensorial sets (Fano and Racah 1958),
contain all the information on this subject that we might require.
Excellent books such as Quantum mechanics (Messiah 1961) and more
specifically Group theory (Tinkham 1964) and Angular momentum in
quantum mechanics (Edmonds 1957), to name but three, also give a clear
and comprehensive review of the subject. The importance of the group
of spatial rotations for the study of paramagnetic resonance stems from
the fact that although a paramagnetic ion embedded in bulk matter does
not enjoy full rotational symmetry, the starting point for its study is the
free ion. The wave-functions of the free ion do transform according to
representations of the rotation group and the calculation of matrix ele-
ments between two such functions is greatly simplified by this fact. The
sole aim of the developments to be given below is to remind the reader of
those properties that are of direct interest for the calculation of wave-
functions of low-lying energy levels of paramagnetic ions in the
surroundings in which they are usually found in nature. Far more
sophisticated developments based chiefly on the work of Racah and his
school are utilized in atomic spectroscopy (see, for example, Judd
(1963b)) but are not of immediate concern to us.
13.1. Angular momentum
Consider an electronic system with a Hamiltonian ^f = ^(pi, r sj
i?
which may contain forces dependent on the spins s of the individual
i
electrons. It is well known that the total angular momentum of the
system, J, is a Hermitian vector operator defined by
If the system is in a state described by a wave-function Y(r-, orj
t
where the a are the spin variables, the definition (13.1) enables one to
L
calculate the wave-function resulting from the operation on *F of any

--- Page 631 ---

616 GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
of the components J, J, J of J. It is also well known that the com-
x y z
ponents of J obey the commutation rules [JX9 Jy] = iJz, etc.
From these commutation rules it can be deduced that the operator
J2 = J2 + J* + J* commutes with the three components of J and that
it has eigenvalues of the form j(j + l) where j is an integer or half
integer. For brevity we shall call (somewhat incorrectly) j an eigen-
value of the operator J. For each value of j there are (2j+l) states
such that J2 =j(j+l).
Since J commutes with J2, these states can be specified by the
z
eigenvalues of J = m and it can be shown that m can take the values
z
m = j, j — 1, . . . , —j. If we take as basis functions Y^ = \j, m), which
are eigenfunctions of J2 and J, it is possible to choose their phases in
z
such a way that
where and also
The commutation relations are a consequence of the fact that under
infinitesimal rotation by an angle s around an axis, say Oz, the wave-
function \F is changed into a function
Indeed, although the definition (13.1) for J is the more usual one, it
would be more logical to derive it as a consequence of (13.3). It follows
from (13.3) that a finite rotation by an angle 99 around an axis of unit
vector n, transforms *F into a function
Since J2 commutes with the three components of J it also commutes
with all rotational operators R = exp {— i 99(11 . J)}. It follows that if a
function ^ is an eigenstate of J2 so is JJY,- and, since there are
m m
(2j + l) linearly independent functions Y^ ,
m
The 2j + l functions T^ , wrhere m takes the values J j — l,..., —j,
m 9
provide a representation of the rotation group of order 2j +1 which is
denoted as 3)j. It can be shown that these representations are irreduc-
ible and that the rotation group has no other representations. It is often

--- Page 632 ---

GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP 617
convenient to specify a rotation by the well-known Euler angles,
already mentioned in § 12.3.
It can be shown by a straightforward geometrical reasoning (see for
instance Edmonds (1957)) that to a rotation specified by these three
angles there corresponds an operator
13.2. The irreducible representations
Consider more particularly the casej = | when (13.6) can be written
where c?, a ct are the well-known Pauli matrices. Inside the manifold
x y) z
*¥$ where j = J, m = ± J it is easy to show that the matrix represent-
m
ing (13.7) is
This follows immediately from (13.7) through the relation
An inspection of the matrix (13.8) shows that it is unitary (as
indeed it must be since it represents a unitary operator) and that its
determinant is equal to unity. Conversely it can be shown that any
unitary matrix u with determinant equal to unity can be cast in the
form (13.8). It is also often written in the form
which exhibits its properties; (13.10) can be rewritten as
with oc'2 + |8'2+/2 + <$'2 = 1, or in the operator form
Unitary matrices u with a determinant equal to unity clearly form a

--- Page 633 ---

618 GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
group U that is called the unitary unimodular group. We can thus say
that U and Sfr are the same group. The correspondence between this
group and the group of spatial rotations is established as follows: every
two-dimensional Hermitian matrix h with zero trace can be written
where the coefficients x, y, z are real and its determinant is
— (#2+?/2+z2). Consider the matrix
where u is unitary and unimodular. Jir is clearly Hermitian and also has
trace zero. It can therefore be written as
where x', y'', z' are real; as is apparent from (13.14) they are linear
functions of x, y, z with coefficients that are necessarily real and depend
on the elements of the matrix u in a manner we need not specify. The
determinant of A', -(x'*+y'2+z'2) is equal to that -(x*+y*+z*) of h.
It is therefore clear that the relation resulting from (13.14), between x',
y'', z' and x, y, z or r' = R r, is a real orthogonal matrix. It will be a
u
spatial rotation if its determinant is +1, which is easy to check by a
direct calculation.
From the relations
we have
or
and it follows that if to the matrix u there corresponds the rotation R
u
and to the matrix v the rotation R , to the product uv there corresponds
v
the rotation R R . On the other hand, the correspondence between the
U V
matrix u and the rotation R is not one-to-one for it appears from the
u
relation (13.14), which actually specifies J? that a change of u into
UJ
—u does not change h' and therefore leaves R unchanged. Hence to
u
each rotation R there correspond two matrices u and —u. In particular,
u
to the element unity of the rotation group there correspond the two

--- Page 634 ---

GROUP THEORY — THE ROTATION GROUP 619
matrices and It follows that 2% is not strictly
speaking a representation of the group of spatial rotations: it is what is
called a two-valued representation. This appears very clearly in
formula (13.8) since an increase of, say, a by an angle 277, which brings
the system (or the coordinate axes) back into the original position,
changes Z>* into — D%. The fact that a rotation by an angle 2?r leads
to a change in the sign of the wave-function is not a paradox. The value
*F of the wave-function is not a physically observable quantity as
contrasted for instance with |T|2, which is observable and indeed
remains unchanged under a rotation through 277. The same two-
valuedness applies to all representations Dj when j is half an odd
integer (we shall say for brevity half-integer). This is seen most easily
by considering rotations around the 2-axis when the rotation operator
can be written e~z(pJz. This operator acting upon a wave-function \j, m}
multiplies it by e~^w, which is —1 for cp = 2 77 if j is half integer.
It is thus more correct to say that the representations Dj are represen-
tations of the group U, which is the group of the matrices u = D*. To
each matrix u there corresponds a single spatial rotation B and a
u
single matrix Dj(Ru) for each j. On the other hand, corresponding to two
opposite matrices u and — u we have the same rotation R , the single
u
matrix D(Ru) for j integer, and two opposite matrices ±Dj(R^ if j is
j
half-integer.
It is useful to know the matrix elements D3 ,(R) which, according
mm
to (13.5), determine the transformation of the wave-functions
^Y = (J m), which for a free ion are eigenstates of the energy and
j m ?
thus form a convenient basis for the study of the bound ion. For j = J
they are given by (13.8). For higher values of j they have no simple
analytical form and the usual advice of looking them up in tables still
holds. At a pinch they can be calculated using the following remarks.
The relation
shows that only the simpler quantity $ ,(f$) = .D^ ,(0, /?, 0) need be
mm w
computed. Its evaluation is greatly facilitated by the following property
that we quote without proof. Let f and r\ be the two components of a
two-dimensional vector that transform through the D* matrices. It can

--- Page 635 ---

620 GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
be shown that the 2j +1 quantities
with m = j, j — 1, . . . , — j transform according to the matrices -D^'.
This provides a method of calculating the latter, knowing D%.
The characters of the representation Dj are easiest to calculate by
considering the rotations through an angle 99 around the z-axis. Rota-
tions through the same angle cp around another axis belong to the same
class and have the same characters. The operator R takes the form
e-*w* and
whence
13.3. The coupling of angular momenta
Clebsch-Gordan and Wigner coefficients
The coupling of angular momenta is one of the best known laws of
physics. Given two angular momenta j\ and j with eigenvalues j j
2 1? 2
the vector j = J!+j has eigenvalues j = J!+J , Ji+j — 1, • • • > Iji— jz\-
2 2 2
In particular, the value j = 0 appears only if j = j .
l 2
From the viewpoint of group representation it has the following
meaning. Consider two sets of wave -functions Y = | ji^i) and
y TO
Y, = |J2m2)> which are respectively bases for the representations &l
m
and ^2. The set of all the products VF ^j ig a basis for the represen-
J m m
tation &1 X &2. This representation is reducible and contains the
following irreducible representations:
An important point is that every representation 2j with
is contained only once in the decomposition (13.17).
The equation (13.17) has a symbolical character. Its matrix trans-
cription is
where S is a unitary matrix that relates the basic states \Ji^i)\J2m2) °f
D*1 X D32 to the basic states \jijzjm) with respect to which the matrices

--- Page 636 ---

GROUP THEORY— THE ROTATION GROUP 621
of the representation Stf* x 2** take the reduced quasi-diagonal form
The elements of the matrix S are represented by the self-evident
symbols (jim j m 1 jij , jm), which are known in the literature as
l5 2 2 2
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. Their properties have been studied
extensively and tables of their numerical values have been prepared ;
we shall therefore be very brief on this subject. According to the vector
coupling law they vanish unless \ji— J2\ < j < ji+jz an(i also if
m 7^ m +m . The latter follows from the fact that a rotation by an
1 2
angle 99 around the z-axis multiplies \Jim-L)\jzm2) by G-Umi+mJ<p and
| j, m) by e~im<p.
The phases of the various basis vectors can be chosen so that the
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are real, a point that is by no means trivial.
From the unitary character of the S matrix, obvious orthogonality
relations for the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients can be deduced such as, for
instance,
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients possess somewhat complicated symmetry
properties that are best exhibited by introducing related coefficients
called Wigner coefficients or 3j-symbols denoted by
with m +m +m = 0 and defined by the relation
1 2 3
Wigner coefficients have very simple symmetry properties that are
easy to memorize. An interchange of two columns multiplies a Wigner
coefficient by ( — 1)^+^+^ an(j so (joes ^e change of ml9 m2, m3 into
—m —m , — m . The more complicated symmetry properties of
l9 2 3

--- Page 637 ---

622 GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients can be obtained from these, using (13.21).
It is worth noting that
The following relations can be established between and
13.4. Multiple vector coupling and Racah symbols
Given three vectors J J , J there is more than one way of coupling
1? 2 3
them to a value j. Consider first the case when j = 0. According to the
laws of vector coupling this can only be achieved by coupling j and J
l 2
to a value J equal to J , or j\ and j to j , or J and j to j . The important
12 3 3 2 2 3 x
point is that all these coupling schemes, within a phase factor ±1, lead
to the same non-degenerate state, invariant under spatial rotation.
The symbol \jij jz, 00} represents the state of zero angular momen-
2
tum where j\ and j are coupled to a value J = J and J is then
2 12 3 12
coupled to J to give j = 0. It can be show^n that the following relation
3
holds:
The symmetry of |JiJ J , 00) with respect to an interchange of two
2 3
indices follows immediately from that of the Wigner coefficients: an
interchange of two indices multiplies the result by ( — l^i+^+'X
We consider now the general case when the sum J of the three
vectors j J , J is different from zero. We wish to calculate the scalar
1? 2 3
product of the two states
where |a) is obtained by coupling j and J to a value j and the resulting
1 2 12
vector j to J to give J and \b) by first coupling j and J to j . Since
12 3 2 3 23
| a) and |6) are two basis states that both belong to the same irreducible

--- Page 638 ---

GROUP THEORY— THE ROTATION GROUP 623
representation Z)*7, their scalar product vanishes if M ^ M' and is
independent of M if M = M'. This is a special case of eqn (12.33)
where F is taken equal to unity. We can then drop the index M and
write the product (a \ b) as
Racah introduces a function of six variables
called the six-j symbol which is essentially just this scalar product
apart from a numerical factor. By definition of the six-j symbol, we have
We shall not attempt to give an analytical expression for the six-J
symbol, which is rather complicated. Numerical values have been
tabulated by Rotenberg, Bivins, Metropolis, and Wooten (1959). The
six-j symbol
has some remarkable symmetry properties that are easily memorized
by means of the so-called tetrahedron diagram. Construct a
tetrahedron and call the three edges of any one plane a, 6, c and
the three opposite edges respectively d, e, f. The symbol
has the symmetry of this figure. For instance, selecting another plane,
say aef, we obtain the symbol
which is equal to the former.
From the definition (13.28) of the six-j symbol it appears that they
can be expressed in a straightforward manner as a sum of products of
four Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. We shall not write down these
expressions explicitly.

--- Page 639 ---

624 GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
13.5. Irreducible tensor operators, the Wigner-Eckart theorem,
and equivalent operators
Consider an operator T that acts on a wave-function T, the result
being another function O as symbolized by the equation
Let R be a transformation belonging to a group G that transforms *t
intoT and O into O according toT = R*¥, O = R®. From (13.29) we
obtain for the relationship between O and *F,
The operator T = RTR~l is said to be the transform of T under the
transformation R.
A very important class of operators are the irreducible tensors. By
definition, a tensor operator T of order k is a set of 2& + 1 operators
k
T*, where q = k, & — !,..., — k, which under the group of spatial
rotations transform according to the representation 3)^\ i.e.,
The simplest tensor operator is a scalar, invariant under spatial
rotations, with a single component. Next come vectors with three
components, etc.
If we take for R the infinitesimal rotations R = l—ieJ and
z
R = 1— ieJ , we obtain from (13.31),
±
Expansion of these relations, neglecting terms of order £2, gives, using
equations (13.2),
The importance of irreducible tensors stems from the following
theorem known in the literature as the Wigner-Eckart theorem. Given
a tensor operator T* consider the set of all the matrix elements
9
(aym\ T^ |oc'j'm') where a and a' stand for any extra parameters that
may be necessary to specify the states \jm) and \j'm'}. For fixed values
of a, j, k, a', j', k' there are altogether (2j + l)(2fc + l)(2j' + l) such
matrix elements. The Wigner-Eckart theorem states that all these

--- Page 640 ---

GROUP THEORY— THE ROTATION GROUP 625
matrix elements are uniquely determined within a single multiplying
factor. The proof is as follows. Let us for brevity represent the matrix
element (oy'm| T^ |a'j'm') as/, the index i standing for the indices m, g,
f
m'. Under a rotation of the coordinate axes, f transforms according to
t
the triple direct product Dj* x Dk x D3 . We can reduce this product by
a similarity transformation to a sum of irreducible representations DJ
by introducing a set of symbols g^ which transform according to DJ
and are linear combinations of the f
i9
The index /? takes into account the fact that in the reduction of the
product Dj* x Dk x Dj to ^,DJ, a given value J may appear more than
once. The value J = 0, however, can appear only once since there is
only one way of coupling three angular momenta to zero and the first
formula (13.35) can be rewritten:
The coefficients (i \ (MM) depend solely on the properties of the
rotation group and are independent of the tensor T% and of the para-
meters a, a' needed to specify the states |oym) and \afjfm'). In particular,
the coefficient (i \ 00) is, according to eqn (13.25) for the invariant
triple product, proportional to the Wigner coefficient
times a phase factor ( — l)j~m. Here the change of m into — m in the
Wigner coefficient, and the phase factor, are due to the fact that in the
matrix element (jm\ T^ \j'm') it is the complex conjugate function T™*
that appears.
Using the symmetry properties of the Wigner coefficients and the
definition (13.21), we find
41

--- Page 641 ---

626 GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP
On the other hand, a matrix element such as f does not depend on
t
the orientation of the coordinate axes since it is an integral over space
(and possibly spin) variables and a rotation of the axes is simply a
change of integration variables. This is only possible if in (13.35) and
(13.36) all the g% with J ^ 0 vanish, whence f = (i \ 00)grJ which
i
establishes the theorem, since a single constant gr{[ distinguishes the set
of matrix elements of T^ from those of another tensor operator of the
same order k.
The gist of the proof is that in the reduction of the triple product
Dj* xDk xDj' the unit representation D° appears only once. We shall
see later that for groups of lower symmetry this is not always true and
that matrix elements of the form (YJ V |Y ), where Y , TJ, Y belong
ft y a y
to three representations of, say, the cubic group, may require more
than one constant.
The Wigner-Eckart theorem is usually expressed in the following
form, consistent with (13.37),
where (aj|| T \\vfj') is independent of the magnetic quantum numbers
k
m', q, m. The factor l/y"(2J + l) could equally well be included in its
definition; we conform to the usual practice in leaving it out. Once a
single matrix element (oyra | T^° la'j'm^) has been calculated for one
0
set of magnetic quantum numbers m , q m' (this is the hard part), all
0 Q) Q
the other matrix elements can be computed from (13.38) if a numerical
table of the relevant Clebsch-Gordan coefficients is available.
A slightly different way of applying the Wigner-Eckart theorem,
sometimes more convenient than the direct use of formula (13.38),
especially for the calculation of diagonal matrix elements j = j',
a — a', is the so-called method of operator equivalents. Consider a
component S% of a tensor operator whose matrix elements are for some
reason particularly easy to compute such as, for instance,
for which
If we are interested in, say, the operator T® = ^ (3z* —r£) where the
p
summation is over all the electrons of the ion, the Wigner-Eckart
theorem enables us to write that inside the manifold |oc, j).

--- Page 642 ---

GROUP THEORY—THE ROTATION GROUP 627
Here the constant /? may be obtained by calculating the expectation
value of T® over a selected substate |oc, j, m ) and writing
0
The method of operator equivalents is also convenient when a non-
standard set of components such as, for instance, Cartesian tensor
components are used for the tensor operators. As an example, consider a
vector with three Cartesian components V , V , V . The three linear
x y z
combinations of these components which transform under rotation in a
standard way by means of the matrices D^* are
Inside the manifold J we can write
which we can express in the condensed form V = j3J and use any set of
components we please to express this relation in a coordinate form.
(Anticipating the Wigner-Eckart theorem we already made use of this
result in the calculation of the Lande factor in § 11.2.)
Similarly from the components of the vector J we can build up an
irreducible tensor S with components S* given by
2
and write that inside the manifold J all second-order irreducible
tensors T\ have matrix elements proportional to those of S\.
Here too it may be more convenient to introduce S as a symmetrical
2
traceless Cartesian tensor with components
and state that inside the manifold J any other symmetrical traceless
tensor T will be of the form T = pS . For instance the tensor T,
ik ik ik
for which

--- Page 643 ---

628 GROUP THEORY— THE ROTATION GROUP
where the x* are the coordinates of the electrons of an atom, is called
the electric quadrupole tensor of that atom and within a manifold J is
proportional to the tensor (13.44).
The most cogent reason for preferring the equivalent operator
formulation of the Wigner-Eckart theorem to the direct use of formula
(13.38) is that most of the pioneer work in the field of magnetic
resonance (including extensive and very useful numerical tables) is
couched in that language. Despite some unfortunate inconsistencies of
notation, such as the use of unnormalized spherical harmonics, we shall
often use equivalent operators, pointing out occasionally the relation-
ship with the more consistent notation of (13.38). A detailed study of
the applications of this method to paramagnetic resonance is deferred
until Chapter 16.
It may be useful to the reader to point out that Buckmaster (1962)
has defined 'Racah operators' denoted by 0£ which correspond directly
to the reduced spherical harmonics
and thus possess the consistency lacking in the operators defined
by Stevens (1952a). Smith, and Thornley (1966) give a complete list of
such operators up to k = q = 6, and their matrix elements are listed in
Fortran notation by Birgeneau (1967b).

--- Page 644 ---

14
THE CUBIC GROUP
AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
14.1. The cubic group
WE shall study this group in much greater detail than any other
finite group, not only because cubic symmetry occurs quite often but
even more so because it is the only type of symmetry for which the
theory of group representations is really indispensable in paramagnetic
resonance. This theory can often be dispensed with for environments of
lower symmetry. Many of the results derived can be extended in a
straightforward manner to other groups.
A level of a free ion with a given value J of its angular momentum
and therefore a degeneracy of order (2J + 1) is spanned by a represen-
tation DJ of the rotation group with characters given by (13.16):
In order to discover how this level is split in an environment of cubic
symmetry we must obtain the irreducible representations of the cubic
group 0. We consider first the case when J is an integer. As we saw
earlier, there is then a one-to-one correspondence between a rotation E
and a matrix DJ(R).
The cubic group 0 is the group of rotations that leaves invariant a
cube or a regular octahedron. It contains the following classes:
E, the identity^ operation (1 element),
(7 , rotations through an angle TT around the three axes perpendicular
2
to the faces of the cube (3 elements),
(7 , rotations through the angles ±77/2 around the same axes
4
(6 elements),
C', rotations through 77 around the 6 axes passing through the centre
2
points of opposite edges; these axes are parallel to the face-
diagonals (6 elements),
<7, rotations through angles ±(277/3) around the 4 body- diagonals
3
(8 elements).
We have altogether 24 elements and 5 classes. In contrast to the
situation in the full rotation group, two rotations through the same
angle but around two different axes X and Y do not belong to the same

--- Page 645 ---

630 THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
class if the rotation C that brings X to Y is not an element of the group.
This is why the two rotations through an angle TT, (7 , and C", belong
2
to two different classes.
Since a regular octahedron is a figure obtained by joining the centres
of the six faces of a cube it is clear that it is left invariant by the same
group. Note also that each operation of 0 amounts to a permutation
of the four body-diagonals. Hence the cubic group is isomorphic to the
group of permutations $ .
4
Since there are 5 classes and 24 elements, the cubic group has 5
irreducible representations with dimensions I . . . , 1 which obey the
l9 5
relation
It is easy to check that the only solution of (14.1) is the set of 5
integers 1, 1, 2, 3, 3. The corresponding representations are denoted in
the literature by the symbols I\, F , F , F , F or A A , E, T T .
2 3 4 5 l9 2 l9 2
The characters can be obtained by the method described in paragraph
12.4 and their values are listed in Table 1.
We shall see shortly that it is possible to choose the basis functions
of the irreducible representations of 0 to be real. Then the unitary
matrices of these representations become real orthogonal matrices (that
the characters are all real in Table 1 is only a necessary condition). The
calculation of matrix elements of the form (YJ V 1^,), where Y and
a
Y , belong to representations F and F' of 0, is facilitated by the
a
knowledge of the reducibility of the direct products F* x F' or, since
all the F can be made real, of F x F'. The results are given in Table 2.
For diagonal direct products F x F we have indicated by a superscript
S or A whether an irreducible representation r belongs to the
t
symmetric or antisymmetric part of F x F. This can be established by
using the formulae (12.43) for the characters.
The formula (13.16) yields the following values for the characters of
DJ(E) where R is a rotation belonging to the cubic group,
where the symbol I(J/2) means the integer part of J/2. With the help of

--- Page 646 ---

THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS 631
(14.2) and of the formulae (12.16), we obtain Table 3 for the reduction of
DJ by the cubic group for integer values of J up to 10.
All free ions with an even number of electrons naturally have an
integral value of J. However, even for an odd number of electrons, we
saw earlier that in fields of intermediate strength such as occur in the
iron group, the relevant quantum number of the free ion was not the
total angular momentum J but the total orbital momentum L, which is
always an integer. The wave-functions that span a representation DJ ',
where J is an integer, transform as the usual spherical harmonics. We
observe in Table 3 that, up to and including J = 4, no representation
appears more than once in DJ. The ' correct' zero -order wave-functions
that span the various representations r\ are linear combinations of
eigenfunctions of the free ion and can be obtained without explicit
knowledge of the cubic Hamiltonian V for J < 4.
They are determined most conveniently by considering the functions
with p+q+r = I. These functions are homogeneous polynomials of
degree I which satisfy the Laplace equation. Equation (14.3) defines
(Z-f l)(?+2)/2 such polynomials but the Laplace equation introduces
1(1 — 1)/2 relations between them, leaving (21 + 1) independent poly-
nomials.
I = 1
The three functions corresponding to (14.3) are (100), (010), (001),
which are proportional to x, y, z. They clearly span a three-dimensional
representation of the cubic group. A rotation of ?r/2 around Oz changes
them into —(010), (100), (001), and the trace of the transformation
matrix is %(C) = 1, which from Table 1 shows that we are dealing with
4
the representation F and not with F . This can be seen directly from
4 5
Table 3 since the representation D1 reduces to F under cubic
4
symmetry.
I = 2
The functions (Oil), (101), (110) proportional to yz, zx xy provide a
9
three-dimensional representation of 0 that can only be F since Z)2 is
5
split by 0 into F and F .
3 5
The two-dimensional representation F is spanned by the two
3
orthogonal combinations (002) and (1/V(3)){(200) — (002)} proportional

--- Page 647 ---

632 THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
to 3z2— r2 and <\/(3)(x2— yz). (The y^ factor ensures the same normal-
ization for both functions.)
It is quite easy to see how the three wave-functions rj oc yz,
x
r\ oc zx, r} oc xy transform under the cyclic permutations of (x, y,z), B
y z
and B2i that is, under rotations through angles 2^/3 and 4?r/3 respec-
tively round the threefold axis (111). It is less easy to see how
0oc(3z2— r2) and ecc\/(3)(x2—y2) transform under these conditions; we
therefore quote the results
The first of these can easily be verified, for example, by noting that
(3z2 — r2) = (2z*—x2—y2) transforms into
Z = 3
(111) proportional to (xyz) provides the unidimensional representa-
tion T . T is spanned by the three functions (300), (030), (003)
2 4
proportional to x(3y2+3z2— 2#2), etc.
F is spanned by the three orthogonal functions (102)-(120), (210)-
5
(012), (021)-(201), proportional respectively to x(y2— z2), etc.
I = 4
Here we quote just the results:
and two cyclic permutations,
and two cyclic permutations.
14.2. The fictitious angular momentum
Let V be a vector and consider the set of matrix elements (^1 V \^)
k
where $ , g, £ are the three wave-functions spanning a representation
x y z
F , which transform under 0 like x, y, z.
4
The vector components V , V , V that transform under rotations
x y z

--- Page 648 ---

THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS 633
like x, y, z, also transform according to F under 0. Since the reduction
4
of F x F contains F only once (see Table 2), it follows that all the
4 4 4
matrix elements (£J V If,-) are uniquely determined within a propor-
k
tionality factor. The same is true of the matrix elements (^| V |^)
k
where rj, r), rj span F and transform like yz, zx, xy, since F x F also
x y z 5 5 5
contains F only once. If we introduce the new functions \m) by the
4
formulae
or
the matrix elements of (m\ A \m') will be proportional to those of an
k
angular momentum I with I = 1, sometimes called the fictitious angular
momentum, that is,
Table 2 shows that the reduction of the direct product F x F does
3 3
not contain F and therefore a vector has no matrix elements within
4
the doublet F , a fact sometimes expressed by saying that this doublet
3
is non-magnetic. As above, we shall denote by 6 and s the two functions
that span F and transform under 0 like 3z2—r2 and <\/(3)(x2— y2).
3
For many purposes it is convenient to express the various states \ih)
that originate in the decomposition of a representation DJ as a linear
combination of eigenstates |J, m), where m = J, the axis Oz being one
z
of the C axes of the cube. Table 4 gives these expressions up to
2
J = 4. We have written |m) instead of | J, m) for brevity, since the value
of J is indicated unambiguously in the table. Besides each representa-
tion F and F we have written the value a of the proportionality
4 5
coefficient between J and the fictitious moment M1 : that is, J = a~l.
14.3. The multiplets F and F in trigonal axes
4 5
If the cubic environment of an ion is distorted along the direction
of one of the C axes of the cube, say Oz, it is fairly obvious that the
2
triplet F will be split into a doublet spanned by g, g (or 11) and | — 1))
4 x y
and a singlet g = |0). The same will be true for F , with the functions
z 5
7j instead of f. The functions |- for F and v\ for F (or the functions
t 4 i 5
|m) for both) are thus the 'correct' zero-order wave-functions for this
distortion of cubic symmetry. On the other hand, for a trigonal distor-
tion, that is a distortion along a body diagonal, it is preferable to use

--- Page 649 ---

634 THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
the following functions which will be the 'correct' zero-order functions:
where a is a normalization constant (for F , we use r\, r\, r\ instead of
5 x y z
%x> %y> £«)• The functions (14.7) can be obtained from Table 4, but it is
preferable then to quantize J along a body diagonal. The results for
z
this are given in Table 5 for the representation F contained in J = 2,
5
and for both F and F originating in J = 3.
4 5
14.4. The double cubic group
In order to find how a half-integer J-level of the free ion splits in an
environment of cubic symmetry we must introduce the so-called double
cubic group 0+. We recall that DJ with J half-integer is not strictly
speaking a representation of the spatial rotation group 0 but rather a
representation of the unimodular group U = D%, and that to each
rotation belonging to G there correspond two matrices ±u of U. The
double cubic group is then defined unambiguously as follows: consider
the 24 rotations in G that belong to 0, subgroup of G; to these corre-
spond twice as many, namely 48, matrices of U, which form a subgroup
o+ of U. The abstract group that has the same multiplication table as
o+ is, by definition, the double cubic group 0+. The group 0+ is
obtained by adding to 0 the element R which is represented in o+ by
the matrix R commutes with all the other elements of 0+
and its square is equal to the unit element: R2 = E.
If A is an element of 0, every element of 0+ is either A or RA — AB.
This definition of the double group 0+ can clearly be extended to any
finite rotation group.
The irreducible representations F to F of 0 are also irreducible
x 5
representations of 0+. They are representations where R is represented
by the unit matrix, but there are others. To elucidate them we must
find the classes of 0+. One might think naively that as 0+ has twice as
many elements as 0 it has twice as many classes, those already listed
for O plus
Actually this is not so: C and RC belong to the same class and
2 2
similarly C' and RC%. This can be shown as follows (Opechowski 1940).
2

--- Page 650 ---

THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS 635
Since the two elements C and EC of a double group have characters of
opposite sign it is a necessary condition that these must vanish if C
and RC belong to the same class. From (13.16) the rotation that
corresponds to these two elements is therefore through an angle 77. Let
us choose its axis as the z-axis. According to (13.8) with oc = TT-,
ft = y — 0 we can represent C by the matrix c = and RC
by —c. If there is in the group a twofold axis perpendicular to the
z-axis let us choose it as the ?/-axis, the corresponding rotation
a = y = 0, /? = TT according to (13.8) can be represented by
(or by —6) and one verifies immediately that bcb~1 = —c, which means
that c and — c belong to the same class.
We have thus shown that in a double group two elements, C and RC,
corresponding to a rotation TT around a certain axis Z, will belong to
the same class provided that the group contains another twofold axis
perpendicular to Z. This is clearly the case for the elements of 0+
belonging to C or C'^. 0+ has then 8 classes and 8 irreducible represen-
2
tations. Since we already know five of them, there must be three more
with dimensions Z, 1, 1 given by the relation
6 7 8
which admits of a single solution,
These representations, known in the literature as F , F , F or E',
6 7 8
.E", U (and possibly many other names), and sometimes called specific
representations, differ from the first 5 through the fact that the element
R is represented by the negative of the unit matrix. It is therefore clear
that DJ for half-integral values of J contains specific representations
only. Their characters are given in Table 6. The breakdown of DJ
into specific representations is computed in the usual manner and the
results are given for J = J up to J = l-/ in Table 7.
From the character tables we can calculate the decomposition of the
direct products. Table 8 contains results for the whole of the double
group 0+ and thus incorporates Table 2.
We have not written out explicitly the matrices of the different
representations T to F . For the non-specific representations F to F
l 8 x 5

--- Page 651 ---

636 THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
the fact that xyz is a basis function for F , x, y, z for F , xy, yz, zx for
2 4
F5, 3z2 — r2 and \/(3)(x2—y2) for F3, makes it easy to write them down if
desired, using simple geometrical considerations. For the specific
representations, we see from Table 7 that D^ reduces just to F . The
6
matrices of F are thus simply the 48 matrices of D% that correspond to
6
the 24 rotations of the cubic group. We shall represent the basis
functions of F as | ±i), the tilde being there to remind us that these
6
are not actually, except for J = J, the states \J, ±J). Similarly since
D^ reduces to F we can take as the basis functions of F , the functions
8 8
I ±f)? l±i) that will transform under the rotations S of the cubic
group in the same way as the functions |f, ±f), |f, ± £} would transform
under D&(S).
The nature of F is less obvious. Since F = F x F let us introduce
7 7 6 2
the functions
where p transforms according to F , that is as the function xyz, and
2
let the functions |±i) transform according to F . a and /? will then
6
transform according to F . The matrices of F are ± those of F . The
7 7 6
matrices of F , F , F cannot all be made real (see § 15.9, following
6 7 8
eqn (15.53)). However, as appears from Table 6, their characters are all
real and the F (i = 6, 7, 8) are equivalent to their complex conjugates.
z
This is why in Table 8 we are able to consider direct products F, x F,
rather than F* x F,.
We see in Table 7 that, in the decomposition of DJ, F and F
6 7
appear only once up to J = V5, except for J = V3 where F appears
7
twice, and that F appears only once up to J = |. We can therefore
8
write a priori the corresponding 'good' zero-order wave-functions as
linear combinations of |J, M). This is done in Table 9. (J = V and
V3 are omitted for they do not occur in practice as the ground states of
paramagnetic ions.)
The reader perusing Tables 4 and 9 may well ask from what hat
these rabbits have been extracted. A brief indication of the method
used to obtain these tables will now be given. Consider a ket | J, M}
belonging to a representation DJ of the rotation group. If S is an
operator belonging to 0 (or 0+) we know how to calculate the
ket S |J, M); it will be given by

--- Page 652 ---

THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS 637
where the D^ (S) are certain matrix elements of the representation
M
DJ of the rotation group, which are known in principle (see § 13.2).
We also know in principle the matrices Ak^ of the various irreducible
v
representations I\ to F of the cubic group, as explained above. In the
8
cubic group k stands for the index 1 to 8 of the irreducible representa-
tion concerned and ft and v refer to the various basis functions inside
each representation F . Each representation T is spanned by l
fc k k
functions Y^ which, under an operation 8 of the group, will transform
accordingly to
The various TJ; will be the linear combinations of the | J, M), given in
Tables 4 and 9 for the cubic group, which we wish to obtain.
Conversely each ket | J, M) will be a linear combination of the T^
Let us define now the operator
where g is the number of elements of the group (48 for 0+) and the sum
2 is over all the operations of the group. According to (14.10) we know
s
how to express P* \ J, M) as a sum of |J, M'). On the other hand, if we
take for | J, M) the expression (14.12), we get
or, using (14.11),
which, taking into account the orthogonality relations (12.9), reduces to
We can thus generate all the Y* of Tables 4 and 9 (apart from
normalization factors). The operation (14.14) will yield zero if
Ck(J, M) = 0, that is if the expansion (14.12) of the ket |J, M) does not
contain the function T*. One then starts from another ket | J, M'} until
all the YJ; are obtained.
In practice our previous advice is the best : as somebody has prepared
the tables, why not use them?

--- Page 653 ---

638 THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
14.5. Groups of lower symmetry
The tetragonal group, also known in the literature as the group D ,
4
is the group that leaves invariant a cube or an octahedron that has
been distorted along a C axis called the tetragonal axis.
2
It contains the following elements and classes:
E, the identity operation,
C2, rotation by an angle 77 around the tetragonal axis Oz (1 element),
(7 , rotation by ^rr/2 around the same axis (2 elements),
4
G' rotation by TT around two axes Ox, Oy perpendicular to Oz
v
(2 elements),
G" rotation by TT around two axes 0X, 0 Y at angles 77/4 to Ox and
v
Oy (2 elements).
Altogether we have 8 elements and 5 classes; whence (see § 12.3) there
will be just 5 irreducible representations which we call F*, F|, F*, F*, F*
(the index t is a weak attempt to avoid confusion with the representa-
tions of the cubic group), and which are also known in the literature by
other names. From eqn (12.14) it is readily apparent that they are all
unidimensional except the last, which has two dimensions. The
characters are given in Table 10.
We shall not write down the decomposition of DJ into the irreducible
representations F^ of Z) but be content to indicate the correspondence
4
between the representations F of the cubic group and those F* of the
fc
tetragonal group that is a subgroup of 0. Using the character tables, it
is possible to find, with the help of (12.16), that
It is apparent that there is no logic whatsoever in this choice of indices
(due to Bethe) but we shall not add to the confusion by proposing a
new notation of our own differing from the many that already exist.
As far as the 'good' zero-order wave-functions are concerned we can
see the following (taking the z-axis to be the tetragonal axis):
For J = 1, the cubic triplet F spanned by x, y, z is split into the
4
singlet F* spanned by z and the doublet F* spanned by x and y.
For J = 2, the cubic triplet F spanned by xy, yz, zx is split into the
5
singlet F* spanned by xy and the doublet F* spanned by yz and zx.
The cubic doublet F is split into the singlet F* spanned by 3z2— r2
3
and the singlet F* spanned by x2—y2.
For J = 3, the cubic singlet F becomes the singlet F spanned by
2 3
xyz, the cubic triplet F becomes the doublet Fg spanned by x(y2—z2)
5

--- Page 654 ---

THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS 639
and y(z2— x2), and the singlet F* spanned by z(x2— y*)\ the cubic
triplet F becomes the singlet F* spanned by z(3#2 + 3?/2 —2z2), and a
4
doublet F* spanned by x(3y*+3z2 -2x2) and y(3z2 + 3x*—2y2).
It will be noticed from (14.17) that already in the decomposition of
D3, F appears twice and that the correct zero-order functions spanning
5
F* cannot be obtained without explicit knowledge of the tetragonal
potential. The off-diagonal matrix elements of a tetragonal field
between the cubic manifolds F and F are given explicitly in Fig. 7.5.
4 5
The properties of the double tetragonal group are obtained in the
same manner as for the cubic group. It has 16 elements, twice as many
as the simple group, but two more classes only, E and RC±, since the
classes RC , RC'^ RC"^ are not distinct from C , C' G"^ in accordance
2 2 v
with the theorem in § 14.4. There are two specific representations F*
and F* with dimensions, Z and Z, such that
6 7
whence 1 = 1 = 2 showing that both F and F* are bidimensional.
6 7 6
We omit their character table and shall be content to notice that the
decomposition of the specific representations of 0+ into those of the
double tetragonal group is
The rhombic group or D contains, besides the unit operation, just
2
three binary orthogonal axes x, y, z and thus four classes and four
unidimensional representations. For an integral value of J there is no
degeneracy left in a rhombic field.
The double group has 8 elements and 5 classes, R being the only
extra one. It has one specific representation of dimension 2. A multiplet
J of the free ion with half-integral J will thus split into «/+ J doublets.
The trigonal group or D leaves invariant a cube distorted along a
3
body-diagonal. Its elements and classes are as follows:
the identity E,
the rotations (7 of angle ±277/3 around the threefold axis Oz (2
3
elements),
the rotations C' of angle TT around three axes perpendicular to Oz
2
(3 elements).
Altogether we have 3 classes and 6 elements, which shows that there
must be two one-dimensional representations that we call F^ and F^
and one bidimensional representation F^. The characters are given in
Table 11. The decomposition of DJ by the trigonal group is given in
Table 12.

--- Page 655 ---

640 THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
The connection between cubic and trigonal groups is as follows :
It is worth noticing that the degeneracy of the cubic doublet P is not
3
lifted by a trigonal distortion though it is by a tetragonal distortion.
The double trigonal group has 12 elements and 6 classes. (C' and
2
SC' are distinct since there is no binary axis perpendicular to the binary
2
axes of C'.) We find readily that there are two unidimensional specific
2
representations Fj7, PjT, and one bidimensional P;T. Their characters
are given in Table 13. The decomposition of DJ by the trigonal group
for half integer J is given in Table 14.
As the representations Pj7 and Pf are unidimensional one might
think that the decomposition of a half-integer J could contain singlets.
We shall soon see (§ 15.4), that there is a very general theorem due to
Kramers which proves that this can never occur. Therefore the two
representations Pf and P^ (which are complex conjugates) must
always correspond to the same energy of the system.
The decomposition of specific representations of 0+ into those of the
trigonal group is the following:
14.6. Improper rotations
We have only considered so far symmetry groups containing pure
rotations. Another type of symmetry element that occurs in nature is
the improper rotation. An improper rotation is a symmetry element
resulting from the combination of a rotation with an inversion with
respect to a centre situated on the axis of rotation. For instance,
reflection in a plane is the product of a rotation by an angle rr with an
inversion. In ordinary space an inversion corresponds to the reversal of
the signs of the three space coordinates and an improper rotation is
therefore represented by a real orthogonal matrix with determinant
— 1. It follows that the product of two improper rotations is a proper
rotation and that the product of a proper and improper rotation is an
improper rotation. A group G that contains at least one improper
i
rotation must therefore contain as many proper as improper rotations
and can be represented as the combination of a subgroup 6? of proper
p
rotations with a set of improper rotations of the form g£}^ where g
i
is an improper rotation. We write symbolically

--- Page 656 ---

THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS 641
We shall for brevity call a group such as (14.20) a group of improper
rotations, although it contains naturally proper rotations as well. A
finite group of improper rotations may or may not contain the inversion
operation itself. If it does, we can use for the improper rotation g in
i
(14.20) the inversion / itself and write
Since / commutes with all the elements of the group (? and its square
i?
/2 is just the identity operation, the matrix representing / in an
irreducible representation of G can be either the unit matrix, for so-
i
called even representations, or its negative for odd representations.
To each representation ^ of Cr correspond two representations
p p
3>f of G such that, if <7 is a proper rotation of 6? ,
i P p
In particular, if ^ is irreducible so is @f.
p
If 2f is a reducible representation of G of given parity there
i i
corresponds to it by (14.22) a single reducible representation ^ of
p
6? . If we know how to reduce ^ into its irreducible parts
p p
the reduction of 2 will be
i
with the same coefficients a .
k
As an example of a group of improper rotations that contains /, we
may take the cubic group of improper rotations O defined in accordance
h
with (14.21),
O = Q+IO. (14.25)
h
On the other hand, the tetrahedral group T&, which is the group of
improper rotations that transform a regular tetrahedron into itself,
does not contain the inversion /. Since each operation of T amounts
d
to a permutation of the vertices of the tetrahedron, T& is isomorphic
with the permutation group S and thus also with 0. It has the same
4
set of characters and the same representations as 0. Geometrically,
however, it is a different group. By adding to T& the inversion operation
we obtain again the full cubic group
showing that T and 0 are two isomorphic subgroups of O . It should
d h
be noticed that in contradistinction to (14.25), (14.26) is not a relation-
ship of the type (14.20) since T contains improper rotations as well as
d
proper ones.
42

--- Page 657 ---

642 THE CUBIC GROUP AND SOME OTHER GROUPS
We examine now how the introduction of improper rotations
modifies the splitting of a degenerate level of the free ion by the
crystal potential, as studied in the previous sections. If the group of
improper rotations O which describes the environment of the bound
i
ion does contain the inversion element, the crystal field splitting is the
same as calculated for the pure rotation group 6r associated with G
p i
by (14.21). This follows from the fact that the level J of the free ion
has a definite parity and that the wave-functions that span this level
provide a reducible representation ^(6^) of given parity which, as
explained earlier, is reduced in the same manner as the representation
^ (6r ) in the absence of inversion. Thus the splitting pattern of a level
P P
of the free ion will be the same in a field of symmetry O as in symmetry
h
0.
If the group O does not contain the inversion / we can still predict
i
the splitting pattern as follows. Let us call F(r) the crystalline potential
invariant by G which represents the effects of the environment of the
i
bound ion. We can write
Since the states of the free ion have a definite parity the matrix
elements of F vanish inside their manifold and we can in first
odd
approximation replace V by F . But F is invariant through / and
even even
thus through the group
which can always be rewritten according to (14.20) as
where G' is a certain pure rotation group. The splitting of DJ by a
p
potential of symmetry 6rj will then be the same as by one with
symmetry G[ and therefore, as we saw earlier, the same as by a potential
of symmetry G'. As an example, from (14.26) and (14.25) we deduce
p
that a level DJ will be decomposed in the same manner in a field of
tetrahedral symmetry T as in a cubic field 0 and we need not repeat
d
the detailed study of the last section.
The foregoing is valid provided we assume that the effects due to the
environment are small compared with the distance between two
configurations of the free ion with opposite parity.
The absence of a centre of inversion in the environment also modifies
drastically the response to an applied electric field as we shall see in
§15.10.

--- Page 658 ---

15
TIME REVERSAL
AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
15.1. Operations involving the time
IN the previous sections we have considered the effects of certain
purely spatial operations, namely proper and improper rotations, on the
eigenstates of a Hamiltonian invariant with respect to these trans-
formations. We consider now two new operations that involve the time.
The first is the displacement in time D which relates the wave-
t
function \F at time 0 to the wave-function *F(t) at time t. For a time-
independent Hamiltonian 3£', Dt = exp(— i3t?t/K) which, applied to
an eigenstate of 3? of energy W, yields
The second operation, usually called time reversal but which would
be better called reversal of direction of motion, is an operation where
all velocities (including those associated with the spinning of the elec-
trons) are reversed. If this operation, which we shall denote by the
letter 0, leaves the Hamiltonian ^ invariant and if Y is an eigenstate
of 3F with an energy W, ff¥ is obviously also an eigenstate with the
same energy. The invariance of the Hamiltonian of a system by time
reversal has far-reaching consequences for its magnetic properties.
The formalism involved is rather different from the usual calculations
of quantum mechanics and as it is sometimes misunderstood it warrants
a rather detailed discussion.
The following relation is a straightforward consequence of the
definitions of 6 and D:
t
This equation states in effect that if two states of a system have
opposite velocities at time zero they have opposite velocities at
opposite times.
Since time reversal, as we shall continue to call it, is a symmetry
operator it follows from general principles of quantum mechanics that
it cannot change the transition probability between two states T
and O so that we have

--- Page 659 ---

644 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
It can be shown (Wigner, Group theory, Chap. 26) that if a physical
relationship expressed by an operator 6 is such that (15.3) holds, it is
always possible to re-define the phases of all wave-functions in such a
way that 6 is either a linear unitary operator or an antilinear anti-
unitary one.
For convenience we re-state here that under a unitary transformation
we have for a linear unitary operator A
whereas for an antilinear operator we have
An antilinear operator that satisfies (15.3) is further said to be anti-
unitary. The first alternative (15.4) implies
The second (15.5) implies that
To establish the category to which 6 belongs, consider the relation
(15.2) where we expand <p into a sum of eigenstates 99 = ^ ak^k °f a
Hamiltonian J>(f. If 6 is linear and (15.6) holds, the left-hand side of
(15.2) can be written ^ ake~lWkt/n(^(Pk)y while the right-hand side becomes
k
which is contradictory. On the other hand, if 6 is anti-
linear, both sides of (15.2) yield 2 a*e-iWktlh(6<p). The time-reversal
k
operator must thus be antilinear and antiunitary. Some caution must
be exercised in the manipulation of antilinear operators. In particular,
the customary notation (O| A |T) for the matrix element of an operator
A between two states O and T" is ambiguous if A is antilinear. We shall
write instead (-4O, T) or (O, ^4Y), as the case may be.
15.2. Complex conjugation
One of the simplest antilinear operators is that which converts a
wave-function T into its complex conjugate T*. We denote this
operator by K and we use here the word wave-function in a rather
0
general sense. For instance, dealing with angular momenta, if a state

--- Page 660 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 645
II) can be expanded into a sum of state vectors
what we call the wave-function of ||) is the set of numbers C \ the
JM
state vector K \£) will then have as wave-function the set of numbers
Q
Clearly K is an antiunitary operator since
0
and it obeys the obvious relation
An operator K^AK^ the complex conjugate of an operator A, is
by definition an operator whose matrix elements are the complex
conjugates of those of A. It is clear that the definition of K depends
0
on the basis states chosen to define the representation. For instance, in
the representation r, the complex conjugate of the operator
is — L , but it is +L in the representation \L, M }. In the representa-
z Z L
tion r the operator^. = (h/i) djdx changes its sign under conjugation,
but not in the representation p where it is diagonal. We cannot there-
fore identify 6 with K in all representations since 6 should be inde-
Q
pendent of the representation chosen, while K clearly is not. There is,
0
however, a relationship between 6 and K that we establish now, by
Q
introducing the operator U = 6K or, since K* = I, 0 = UK .
0 0
We can show immediately that U = 6K is unitary; since 6 and K
0 0
are both antilinear, U = 6K is linear, and since both 6 and K leave
0 0
invariant the absolute value of the scalar product |(O, T)| so does U.
Hence it is unitary. We can also show that 02 = ±1. The operator 6
applied twice leaves the system in its original state and one must have
where c is a number of modulus unity and 1 the unit operator. From

--- Page 661 ---

646 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
(15.11) we find:
or, since U and U* are unitary,
the transposed of which is
cU whence U = c2U and
It follows that the square of the time-reversal operator is
15.3. Determination of the time-reversal operator
We begin by disregarding the spin. The dynamical variables are then
the coordinates x and momenta p which under time reversal should
X9
transform as
or
Hence, on writing 6 = UK , we have
0
Let us choose the r representation where x is real; i.e., x = K xK l
Q Q
and^,. is purely imaginary so that^, — —K pK~^. Then (15.14) yields
Q x
Thus the operator U commutes with all the dynamical variables x and
p and must therefore be a constant that we can choose equal to unity.
x
In the absence of spin and in the r representation (but not in the p
representation !) the time-reversal operator 6 is represented by the
complex conjugation operator K .
Q
We now include the spin and consider first a single electron. The
three components s of the spin operator change their sign under
q
time-reversal and must satisfy the relations
giving
or
so that

--- Page 662 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 647
In the usual representation where s and S are real matrices and s
x K y
is a purely imaginary one, U must anticommute with s and s and
x z
commute with s . We may take for U the matrix a = 2s which is
y y v
unitary and answers our requirements, or better still i<r which has the
y
advantage of being a real matrix so that it commutes with K . The
0
latter will be our choice. To recapitulate, in a representation where r
is diagonal (the r representation) and s and s real, the time-reversal
a z
operator for a single electron can be represented by
Its square is given by
For n electrons 1, 2, . . . , n the time-reversal operator 6 will be the
product
Its square will be ± 1 depending on whether the number n of electrons
is even or odd, a particularly important result.
15.4. Kramers degeneracy
Consider a system with an odd number of electrons for which
02 = — 1 and assume that its Hamiltonian commutes with 6. This will
be the case in the absence of a magnetic field for then the kinetic and
potential energy as well as spin-spin and spin-orbit interactions are
invariant through time reversal. Let T be an eigenstate of the system
with energy W; then the function O = 6*F is also an eigenstate with the
same energy. Consider the scalar product (T, O) = (T, 0T). Since 6 is
antilinear,
showing that O is orthogonal to T and is naturally distinct from it. It
follows that the eigenvalue W is at least twofold degenerate. This is
Kramers theorem. We shall call the state O = 0Y the Kramers-conjugate
of T and represent it by the symbol T.
A few useful relations are connected with the properties of 6. We
shall call an operator 0 time-odd if 006~l ~ —0^ and similarly an
operator time-even if 60 Q~l = +0^ If 0 is Hermitian, Of = 0 but it is
sometimes convenient to use non-Hermitian operators such as L or
j . ±
±

--- Page 663 ---

648 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
It should be noticed in this connection that the product of two non-
commuting Hermitian operators A and B of well-defined time-parity
(say for instance both even) does not have a well-defined time-parity
but is the sum of a time-even and a time-odd operator:
where C is Hermitian and D anti-Hermitian, and
Hence C is time-even but D is time-odd!
Spin-spin and spin-orbit interactions, which are Hermitian products
of time-odd operators, are time-even.
If 02 = —1, the following theorems hold.
(a) A time-even operator has no matrix elements between two
Kramers conjugate states, since
(b) A time-even operator has the same expectation value in two
Kramers conjugate states since
(c) A time-odd operator has opposite expectation values in two
Kramers conjugate states. The proof is similar to that in (b).
If 02 _ _|_]_ time reversal plays a much less important role because a
?
state Y can now coincide with its time-reversed state Y = 0Y. The
analogues of the previous results (a), (b), (c) are the following:
(a') A time-odd operator has no matrix elements between two
Kramers conjugate states. The proof is the same as for (a).
(b'), (c') The theorems (b), (c) do not depend on the value of 02 and
are therefore also valid for 02 — +1.
The result (a') leads to a generalization of Van Vleck's theorem on
the quenching of the orbital momentum proved in § 11.7. Consider a
time-even Hamiltonian 2tf with a non-degenerate eigenstate Y, which
necessarily implies 02 = +1. The state Y = 0Y is an eigenstate of 3P
with the same energy and since Y is non degenerate Y must coincide
with Y within a phase-factor. The matrix elements of time-odd
operators between Y and Y which vanish according to (a') are just the
expectation values in the state Y. It follows that all components of the

--- Page 664 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 649
magnetic moment, being time-odd operators have vanishing expecta-
tion values in non-degenerate states of time-even Hamiltonians, which
is a generalization of Van Vleck's theorem on the quenching of the
orbital momentum.
Invariance through time reversal is also connected with the so-called
Van Vleck cancellation that is responsible for the T9 temperature
variation of the Raman relaxation rate for Kramers ions (see Chapter
10). What is meant by the Van Vleck cancellation is the near cancella-
tion of two second-order probability amplitudes, caused by the exact
cancellation
where V and V are two time-even non-Hermitian operators (actually
lattice-orbit coupling operators for emission or absorption of a phonon)
and |a), |a) and |<?), |c) are two pairs of Kramers conjugate states (see
Chapter 10). The proof of (15.23a) is as follows (most of the proofs given
in the literature, except that of Van Vleck, are incomplete or incorrect).
The first term of (15.23a) can be written
which proves (15.23a).
Since Kramers degeneracy is directly related to invariance with
respect to time reversal one may ask whether this is or is not a new
degeneracy superimposed on that connected with the spatial symmetry
of the environment. There is no single answer to that question since
examples of either situation can be found. Thus, for instance, in an
environment of cubic symmetry, for an odd number of electrons all
representations are at least two-dimensional and no extra degeneracy
is brought about by the invariance of the Hamiltonian with respect to
time reversal. On the other hand, the double trigonal group (§ 14.5) has
two unidimensional representations, T% and F;T, which must correspond
to the same energy if Kramers' theorem is to be obeyed. The mathe-
matical criteria for the occurrence of either situation are discussed in
Wigner's book but we shall have no occasion to make use of them.
15.5. Time-reversal operator in the |J, M) representation
Since, as has already been stated, eigenstates | J, M) of the angular
momentum provide a convenient basis for expanding eigenstates of the
bound ion, it is useful to be able to write directly the effect of time

--- Page 665 ---

650 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
reversal on a state vector
Since J is a time-odd operator, we must have
or
With the usual choice of phases, J and J are real operators, in the
z x
sense that all their matrix elements are real, whereas J is purely
y
imaginary. According to (15.25) we need for U a unitary operator that
commutes with J and anticommutes with J and J. The operator
y x z
e17rjtf satisfies these requirements. This is obvious for J. For J
y x>
e>i7rj*j = —JeiirJv implies e-iirJvJ eirrJv = —J which is satisfied since,
x x x x
as we saw in § 13.1, e~17rjy expresses a rotation by an angle TT
around Oy which must change J into — J. The same is true for J. We
x x z
can thus take for 6 the form
For J = J
which is consistent with (15.19).
The only non-vanishing matrix elements of e17rjy can be shown to be
which gives for I = 0f the expression
The reader may verify that this sign rule is consistent with the expan-
sion of the various kets in Tables 4 and 9.
15.6. The 'Spin Hamiltonian' for a Kramers doublet
Consider a paramagnetic ion with an odd number of electrons in an
environment of symmetry sufficiently low for the ground level to have
only Kramers degeneracy. This will be the case for any symmetry
lower than cubic, and also for the cubic levels F and F .
6 7

--- Page 666 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 651
This degenerate Kramers doublet is spanned by two kets |£) and
1 1) = 6 |f). There is an arbitrariness in the choice of these basis states.
We can always choose two other states by a substitution of the form
with aa* +66* = 1. The substitution (15.30) is not only unitary but also
unimodular and, as we saw in Chapter 13 in considering the rotation
group, we can associate with it a certain rotation R by means of
eqn (13.14) and the formulae following it in § 13.2.
The degeneracy of the Kramers doublet can only be lifted by a
magnetic field, which may be either an applied external field or the
field produced by the magnetic moment ji = — yjil of the nucleus if
z
it is not zero. The corresponding energies can be written — (x . H and
e
— (JL . H where vector operators jx and H represent respectively the
7 e e e
magnetic moment of the ion and the magnetic field produced by its
electrons at the position of the nucleus. If we assume that either
interaction is much smaller than the distance between the doublet and
excited levels, we need only their matrix elements within the ground
manifold. It is well known that any Hermitian two-by-two matrix can
be expressed as a linear combination with real coefficients of the three
Pauli matrices and of the unit matrix. Since all components of JJL and
H are time-odd operators, their expectation values in the states ||)
e
and ||) have opposite values (theorem (c) of § 15.4) and we can write
for the components // and H
ff eq
with no contribution from the unit matrix. The index q refers to the
components x, y, z of the vectors (JL and H and a to the Pauli matrices
e
#i» #25 °V The set of matrices 0^/2, <r/2, cr/2 is often referred to as the
2 3
components of the fictitious spin s and the sets of real numbers g and
qa
a are called the magnetogyric tensor and the hyperfine structure
qoi
tensor. The deeply ingrained habit of calling the g and the a tensors,
qa qtx
proceeds from a confusion between the fictitious spin a/2 of the
Kramers doublet and a real electronic spin and is a serious misnomer in
general as will now appear.

--- Page 667 ---

552 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
There are two operations that can modify the set of numbers g
q(X
(and affa). The first is a spatial rotation S of coordinate axes whereby
the components ^ are replaced by another set
q
and consequently
The second is the substitution (15.30) of the basis states ||> and ||)
which, because of the mathematical connection between a matrix u of
the unitary group U and a real orthogonal matrix R of the rotation
group, results in the substitution
which leads to the substitution
If we decided, quite arbitrarily, always to associate with a rotation 8
of the coordinate axes, expressed by (15.32), a substitution (15.30) of
the basis states, such that the corresponding substitution B for the o*,
a
expressed by (15.34), would coincide with the spatial rotation 8, then
and only then would the g (and a ) transform as the components of a
q(X aci
tensor. A true tensor G^ does, however, appear when we look for the
q
eigenvalues of the Zeeman Hamiltonian — [i. H. Let A^, A, A be the
y 2
cosines of the direction of H. Then from (15.31)
where
The eigenvalues of (15.36) result from the well known properties of
the Pauli matrices,
The set of numbers

--- Page 668 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 653
is indeed a symmetric tensor that has the correct transformation
properties under spatial rotations and can always be made diagonal by
a proper choice of coordinate axes. Its eigenvalues are all positive and
their square roots give the three principal values of the Larmor
frequency of the electron spin in the applied field H. A tensor
can be similarly defined.
From what has been said about the 'tensor' g it follows that the
qg[
question of whether it is symmetric is of little importance. Since we
have six parameters at our disposal, three for the spatial rotation S in
(15.33), and three for the fictitious rotation R in (15.35), we have enough
freedom to make the 'tensor' g diagonal. Once the 'tensor' g has been
qaL
reduced to a diagonal form g g , g it is always possible to reverse the
l9 2 3
sign of two of the components, say g and g , by a rotation of 77 around
± 3
the i/-axis (or by a change of cf and cr into — a and — cr by an inter-
± 3 ± 3
change of the basic states). On the other hand, the product g±g$i which
is the determinant of the g , is an invariant.
qa
When g^ is diagonal, so naturally is O according to (15.38), since
vq
In the same manner, with two other rotations R' and S' we can make
the hyperfine 'tensor' a diagonal. The relevant question is then
p<x
whether both 'tensors' g and a be made diagonal simultaneously
q(X q(X
with the same choice of rotations R and 8, that is with the same choice
of coordinate axes and basis states.
We have so far said nothing about the spatial environment of our ion.
If we make some restrictive assumptions on its symmetry we shall
find situations where the 'tensors' g and a can be diagonalized
qx qx
simultaneously. For example, if the strength of the interactions due to
the environment is small compared to the distance between two J
multiplets of the free ion, we may assume that the wave-functions of
our Kramers doublet can be constructed from the wave-functions of a
single J level of the free ion (this may occur in the rare-earth group but
not in general in the iron group). Then, according to the Wigner-
Eckart theorem, all matrix elements within the doublet of the com-
ponents of any vector, and in particular of [x and H , will be proportional
e
to the corresponding matrix elements of the vector J. The 'tensors' g
qa
and a will be proportional to each other and can be diagonalized
q<x
simultaneously.

--- Page 669 ---

654 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
15.7. The rhombic group
Suppose that the environment of the ion has two twofold symmetry
axes, the z- and y-axes (it then has necessarily a third, the #-axis). We
now show that in this case g and a can simultaneously be made
qa aa
diagonal.
We can expand one of the kets spanning the Kramers doublet into
eigenstates | J, M) of the free ion (where i = a, J, M)
where J = M is quantized along the binary z-axis. The values of M in
z
(15.39) are half integer and differ by at least two units because of
binary symmetry. This prevents the values M and —M from being
simultaneously present in the expansion (15.39).
The matrix elements (|| p ||) = g and (£\ fa\£) = g* vanish
x x9 y
because ^ and fa obey the selection rule |AJf| = 1. To find the other
x
matrix elements let R be the rotation It = elirJv. Then from eqns
(15.26), (15,29) the Kramers conjugate ||) is given by
It is clear that (|| /A\j) = g —ig% vanishes since p obeys the selection
z zl z z
rule | AJkf | = 0. Since the y-axis is a binary axis, R ||) is also an eigen-
state with the same energy as |f) and clearly orthogonal to it. It must
therefore coincide with ||) = RK |£) within a phase factor and all the
Q
C- in (15.39) can be chosen to be real. We then have the relations
z
and hence
since fiz = — 1. Hence (f| /A ||) must be real and since it is equal to
X
9x1—19x2' ft follows that g vanishes. Similarly it is found that
x2
(f I fa If) ig imaginary and g vanishes. The 'tensor' g is thus diagonal
yl ga
with our choice of eigenstates and coordinate axes. Since we made no
assumptions about {x apart from its being a time-odd vector, this is
clearly also true for the 'tensor' a associated with H .
qaL e
15.8. Threefold symmetry
The trigonal symmetry C provides an example of a situation where
3
it may be impossible to diagonalize g and a simultaneously.
qa w

--- Page 670 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 655
Consider a system that possesses no symmetry beyond a threefold
z-axis and assume that the expansion (15.39) of |£) contains the value
M = +i- The other values of M in the expansion will be + J + 3p with
p integer. Similarly the expansion of ||> will contain the values
M = _i-j-3^'. This has the following consequences for the 'tensor' g.
and
From these last equations (15.42) we have
Thus the 'tensor' g has the form
which can be brought into diagonal form by a rotation S of the co-
ordinate axes around Oz through an angle O such that tan O = — g"/g',
giving
where g\ =g'*+g"*.
Similarly the hyperfine structure 'tensor' will initially have the form
which can be reduced by a rotation of the coordinates about the axis

--- Page 671 ---

656 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
Oz through an angle Y such that tan Y = —a" I a' to a diagonal form
However there is no a priori reason why tanY should be equal to
tan <D, and this implies that we have to use two different sets of axes:
Z, x, y for the components of the external magnetic field H and Z, X,
Y for the components of the nuclear magnetic moment fji = y SI.
7 n
The spin Hamiltonian can then be written as
The fact that the components of I are not measured along the same
axes as those of H would not be observable if there did not exist another
term in the Hamiltonian, the direct coupling of the nuclear moment
with the applied field H, which is
Although this term is very small, it can be measured with reasonable
precision in Endor experiments (cf. Chapter 4). In general the hyperfine
term will be much larger, so that we should use the (X, F, Z) axes for
the components of I. Then if H is, for example, along the a;-axis, the
diagonal term in (15.49) becomes — fyIJiIxHx cos(Y—O). Thus in
principle the difference in orientation that may occur in (7 symmetry
3
for the axes 0X, 0 Y and Ox, Oy could be detected, although it does not
appear to have been observed in practice.
15.9. Selection rules related to time reversal
Let us consider a system S with a Hamiltonian 34? invariant through
0
the transformations of a spatial group 6?, for instance, a paramagnetic
ion whose environment has a symmetry describable by that group.
As we have seen in § 12.6, a perturbation expressed by an operator Vp
belonging to a representation F' of 0 cannot lift the p-fo\d degeneracy
of an energy level of S, spanned by the wave-functions Y that belong
a
to a £>-dimensional representation F of 0, unless the direct product
F* x r x F' contains the unit representation of G. If this condition is
not satisfied all the matrix elements (YJ Vp |Y ) vanish. It was shown
y
in § 12.6 that if the representations F and F' are equivalent to their

--- Page 672 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 657
complex conjugates, respectively F* and F'*, that is if all their
characters are real (an assumption that we retain in the following
discussion), this condition is equivalent to the requirement that
(F x F) contains F'. Furthermore, we shall show that if the Hamiltonian
Jf is invariant through the time-reversal operation 6, the condition
0
for the lifting of the degeneracy is more restrictive than the one stated
above.
Let us define two symbols e and s equal to ± 1: e is equal to +1
v e v
if the operator Vp is time-even, and —1 if it is time-odd; s is equal to
d
the square 02 of the time-reversal operator: it is +1 if the number of
electrons is even and —1 if the number of electrons is odd (eqn (15.21)).
The result that we shall establish can be stated as follows. In order for
the operator P^, belonging to F', to have non-vanishing matrix elements
inside the manifold F the following are necessary conditions: if
s e > 0, F' must be contained in the symmetric direct product
v e
[FxF]^; if s e < 0, F' must be contained in the antisymmetric
v e
direct product [F x F]^. The characters of these products are given in
eqn (12.43). These conditions are more restrictive than the requirement
obtained in § 12.6 prior to the introduction of time reversal, namely that
F' must be contained in the direct product F x F.
The proof is as follows. Under an operation R belonging to 0 the
functions T transform according to the law
a
Let us introduce the set of functions
which are generated from the Y through time reversal. Under an
a
operation R the functions *F transform as
where we have used the facts that the time-reversal operator 0 com-
mutes with the operations R of the group G and that it is antilinear.
Equation (15.52) shows that the functions Y afford for the group G a
a
representation D* which, according to our assumption of real charac-
ters, is equivalent to Z>; hence there must exist a unitary matrix U
r
43

--- Page 673 ---

658 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
relating the two representations D and Z>* through the equations
r
The fact that the two representations D* and D are equivalent does
r
not necessarily mean that they can be made to coincide, that is in the
present case made real, by a similarity transformation as described by
eqn (12.5). In fact it can be shown that the matrices D can always be
r
made real by a similarity transformation if the square 62 of the time-
reversal operation is +1; on the other hand, D and D*, although
r
equivalent, are always different if 02 = — 1 (see, for instance, Fano and
Racah 1959, Griffith 1961) but we shall not make use of these results in
the following.
Instead of the set of matrix elements (YJ Vp |Y ) = Y^j it is
y
convenient to introduce the mixed matrix elements (Yj V |Y ) = Z j-
p y ay
Since the Y form a set of normalized orthogonal functions, spanning
a
the same manifold as the Y , it is clear that the vanishing of all the
a
Y ^ implies that of the Z ^ and vice versa. Let us then transform the
ay ay
expression Z as follows:
x7tP
We can write now :
It is clear from (15.55) that, depending on the sign of s e = ±1,
v Q
Z belongs to the representation [F x F] x F' or [F x F] x F'.
a7iP s A
In order for this set and therefore also for the set Y ^ = (YJ Vp |Y )
ay y
not to vanish identically the unit representation must be contained
either in the product [F X F] X F' or [F x F] x F' (depending on the
s A
sign of e s ), rather than simply in the product (F x F) x F' as proved
e v
in § 12.6. This in turn implies that F' must be contained either in
[F X F] or [F x F] depending on the sign of s e .
s A e v
Let us illustrate these results with a few examples. In § 13.5 we used
the Wigner-Eckart theorem to prove that inside a manifold J every
vector V is proportional to the angular momentum J:
where the constant a must be real if V is Hermitian. As the vector J is
time-odd, V must also be time-odd and s = — 1. Since V transforms
v
according to the representation Dl of the rotation group, the condition

--- Page 674 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 659
for a matrix element (JM\ V \JM') to be different from zero is that
p
DJ x DJ must contain D1, which of course it does, if J ^ 0, as shown by
the relation (13.17). However, our theorem tells us something more: if
J is half integer, e = — 1, e e = +1 and D1 belongs to [DJ xZ>J];
e v e s
if J is an integer, e = +1, s s = — 1 and D1 belongs to [DJ xDJ] .
e v e A
A less trivial example is that of the fictitious angular momentum
introduced in § 14.2. There again the Wigner-Eckart theorem predicts
that, inside a cubic triplet F or F , the matrix elements of the com-
4 5
ponents of a vector V are determined within a proportionality constant,
because (see Table 2) the direct product F x F or F x F contains
4 4 5 5
the vector representation F only once. Moreover, as shown in this
4
Table, it is the antisymmetric product [F xF ] or [F x F ] that
4 4 A 5 5 A
contains F and the product s e must be equal to — 1. Since the
4 v e
representations F and F arise only for an even number of electrons,
4 5
S = +1 and s must be —1. Therefore only time-odd vectors have
Q v
non-vanishing matrix elements inside the triplet F or F . We antici-
4 5
pated this result when we introduced the fictitious angular momentum
(necessarily time-odd) to which every vector must be proportional
within the triplets F or F .
4 5
15.10. The effect of an applied electric field on a
paramagnetic ion
The potential energy of an ion, due to the presence of a homo-
geneous electric field E can be written:
where is a summation over the positions of the electrons of the ion
and; is here the operator for the electric dipole moment of
the ion.
The energy changes induced by the electric perturbation (15.57) can
be separated into first-order effects that are linear in E and higher-
order effects, predominantly quadratic in the field strength, known as
polarization effects. The quadratic polarization effects give rise to a
change in energy expressed by the usual second-order perturbation
formula:
The electric fields E that can be conveniently obtained in laboratories
are at most of the order of a few thousand volts per millimeter and the

--- Page 675 ---

660 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
corresponding matrix elements (0\ p . E \n) expressed in wave-
e
numbers turn out to be of the order of one cm"1 or so, that is, very
much less than the energy separations W — W . The first-order effect of
n Q
(15.57)
where the expectation value (p ) is to be taken over the ground state,
e
or more generally inside the ground manifold if the latter is degenerate,
will thus be very much greater than ATf^ given by (15.58), unless it
2
vanishes because of selection rules. It is these selection rules that we
wish to investigate using a few specific examples.
If the environment and therefore also the Hamiltonian of the para-
magnetic ion is invariant through inversion, the ground manifold of
the ion has a definite parity positive or negative and in either case
(Pe) vanishes because p is a polar (or space-odd) vector which is
e
changed into — p through inversion. On the other hand, if the
e
Hamiltonian of the ion is not invariant through inversion, (p ) may be
e
different from zero.
If the starting point of our description of the ion is the free ion
placed in a crystal potential F(r), the lack of a centre of symmetry
in the environment implies the existence in F(r) of a part T^ that
dd
changes its sign through inversion. The energy change linear in E
appears then as a second-order term, cross product between — (p . E)
and F . Writing c.c. for the complex conjugate, we have
odd
where the states |0), \n) and the energies TF, W are those of a free ion.
0 n
Internal crystal electric fields are usually very much stronger than
applied electric fields; the matrix element (n\ T£ \0) is therefore very
dd
much larger than (n\ p . E |0), and correspondingly k±W as given by
E
(15.60), is very much larger than the polarization term AW^ given by
2
(15.58).
A different approach is first to diagonalize the Hamiltonian of the
ion embedded in the crystal and then to calculate the expectation value
The state \0) in (15.61) is the ground state of the bound ion which con-
tains both odd and even admixtures. This approach is more convenient

--- Page 676 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 661
when covalent rather ionic bonding exists between the ion and its
surroundings (see Chapter 20).
We shall now show that the absence of a centre of inversion is only a
necessary condition for a change of energy linear with E and that
selection rules connected with time reversal may also forbid such an
effect. The first and very general example is that of a system, whose
Hamiltonian is invariant through rotation without being necessarily
invariant through inversion (as for instance that of a free molecule).
Its energy eigenstates are degenerate manifolds spanned by eigenstates
of fl. Inside each manifold ^, according to eqn (15.56), only time-odd
vectors have non-vanishing matrix elements and the expectation value
of the dipole moment p , which is a time-even vector, vanishes (barring
e
accidental degeneracy).
A second example is an environment of cubic symmetry without
inversion symmetry that is invariant through the group 0 (but not O \).
h
We have already shown in § 15.9 that only time-odd vectors have
non-vanishing matrix elements inside the triplets F or F , and this
4 5
again precludes a finite expectation value for p . It is easy to show that
e
the same is true if the ion has an odd number of electrons, for which the
specific representations are F , F , F . In that case, for the time-even
6 7 8
vector p the product Sys defined in § 15.9 is equal to —1, which means
e
that the vector representation F should be contained in one of the
4
antisymmetric products [F xF ] , [F xF ] , [F xF ] for the
6 6 A 7 7 A 8 8 A
matrix elements of p to be non-zero.
e
We see, however, in Table 8, that none of these products contain
F , and we can state the result that in a cubic environment an electric
4
field cannot produce a first-order change in energy. To dispel a possible
misunderstanding, let us emphasize again that it is invariance through
time reversal rather than through space inversion which is responsible
for this selection rule. This misunderstanding arises sometimes because
a cubic environment is usually represented by drawing a cube or an
octahedron, a figure that does possess a centre of symmetry, and this
may create the mistaken impression that cubic symmetry does imply
inversion symmetry. As a counter example one can think, for instance,
of a cube with a left hand at each apex; such a figure is invariant through
the cubic group of rotations but not through inversion.
At the risk of increasing the confusion a little further we shall show
that if the environment of the ion has tetrahedral symmetry and
therefore is invariant through the group of improper rotations T^
which is isomorphic to 0, and does not possess a centre of inversion,

--- Page 677 ---

662 TIME KEVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
an applied electric field does produce a linear change in the energy of the
ion. The temptation to associate the absence of a linear effect in 0 and
its presence in T^ which is isomorphic to 0, with the mistaken notion
that 0 has a centre of inversion, must be resisted.
The gist of the proof for T& is as follows. The components of a polar
vector, which transform like the functions x, y, z under proper or
improper rotations and which therefore in the group 0 span the
representation F , in the group T& span the representation F . This can
4 5
be checked as follows. We have already stated respectively in §§ 14.1
and 14.6 that 0 and T& are isomorphic to the group of permutations
$ ; now the rotations of 0 permute among themselves the four body-
4
diagonals of the cube, while the improper rotations of T permute the
d
four apexes of the tetrahedron. Let us then consider for instance the
permutation (12) : for 0 it means a permutation of the body diagonals
1 and 2, that is a rotation C' around one of the six twofold axes passing
2
through the centre points of opposite edges ; for T& it means a reflection
in a plane passing through the edge 34 and the centre point of the edge
12. It is easy to check that the matrix for the transformation of (x, y, z)
through the transformation (12) has a trace equal to —1 for 0 and
+ 1 for T&. From the characters in Table 1 (which is the same for
isomorphic operations of 0 and T ) we conclude that the components
d
x, y, z of a, polar vector must span the representation F of T& rather
5
than F .
4
We see in Table 8 that F is contained once in [F xF ] ,
5 4 4 s
[F x F ] , [F x F ] . Therefore in all these multiplets a linear splitting
5 5 s 8 8 A
is induced by an applied electric field. In the same way as we replaced
a vector inside a multiplet F or F by a fictitious angular momentum
4 5
1, within the multiplets F , F and F of T^ we can replace the three
4 5 8
components of a polar vector, which transform through T according
d
to the representation F , by the three operators
5
In (15.62) / is an axial (or space-even) time-odd vector whose com-
ponents are transformed by T according to the representation F (in
d 4
contrast to a polar vector whose components are transformed by T as
d
F ). Inside F and F , / coincides with the fictitious angular momen-
5 4 5
tum 1 introduced in § 14.2. Inside F, as will be explained in more detail
8
in § 18.3, the matrix elements of / are those of a fictitious angular
momentum / = f . The splitting of each of the multiplets F , F , F
4 5 8

--- Page 678 ---

TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY 663
of T by an electric field E can thus be expressed by a spin Hamiltonian:
d
The combined effect of an electric and a magnetic field
Finally we investigate changes in the energy of the ion which are
bilinear in the components of an applied electric field E and an applied
magnetic field H, that is changes in the (g- tensor'.
For brevity we limit ourselves to the triplets F and F of the groups
4 5
T& and 0. (For F the situation becomes rather complicated.) The
8
general expression for an operator responsible for such a change should
be of the form
Here Hp, etc., are components of H, etc., and the vectors ^ and p^,
which depend on the electronic variables of the ion, have respectively
the time and space properties of the magnetic moment fx and of the
e
electric dipole moment p ; namely, fi is time-odd and space-even,
e e
whereas p is time-even and space-odd.
e
We begin with the group 0, within which JJL'^ and p' each transform
Q
as F . V is a time-odd operator that transforms through the group 0
4 EH
(see Table 2) according to
Since the operator V is time-odd, it will have non-vanishing matrix
EH
elements inside the triplets F or F of the group 0 only if at least one
4 5
of the representations on the right-hand side of (15.65) is contained in
the antisymmetric products [F xF ] or [F xr ] , (s s = —1).
4 4 A 5 5 A e r
We see in Table 2 that [F xF ] = [F xF ] = F . Therefore the
4 4 A 5 5 A 4
only part of the operator V given by (15.64) which has non-vanishing
EH
matrix elements both in F and F is that which contains the three
4 5
combinations of the bilinear products p^p* which transform according
to F . It can be shown that these three combinations are
4
Within the manifolds F or F of 0 they are proportional respectively
4 5
to / , / , / and V can be represented within F or F of 0 as
x y z EH 4 5

--- Page 679 ---

664 TIME REVERSAL AND KRAMERS DEGENERACY
or in a vector notation as
We see from eqn (15.67) that for the group 0, an electric field gives rise
to a skew-symmetric contribution to the (/-tensor.
We consider now the tetrahedral group T : here the space-even
d
vector [jig transforms like F , that is in the same way as through 0, but
4
the polar vector p^ transforms like F and the operator V given by
5 EH
(15.64) transforms like
For T&, as for 0, only the representation F on the right-hand side of
4
(15.68) is contained in [F xF ] and [F xF ] . However, the three
4 4 A 5 5 A
combinations of [Ji'^p'^, which transform like F through T and which
4 d
inside the manifold F or F of jT can be taken as proportional to
4 5 d
/& /y> /z> are different from (15.66). In this case they are
Within the manifolds F or F of T the operator V can therefore be
4 5 d EH
represented as
and we see that the contribution to the (/-tensor is symmetrical.
The present discussion is entirely based on symmetry considerations
and no attempt is made to investigate the actual physical mechanism
responsible for the (/-shifts induced by an electric field. (It leans heavily
on a set of unpublished lectures given by F. S. Ham in 1967 at the Nato
School in Ghent.) Let us say only that an expression such as (15.64)
for V results in second order from the perturbing electric and
EH
magnetic Hamiltonians — (fx. H) and — (p . E) and clearly cannot
e e
arise unless the system has states of mixed parity and therefore lacks
an inversion centre.
Both of the effects studied above, namely a linear splitting of the
energy levels and a linear (/-shift, induced by an applied electric field,
have been observed on transition ions of the iron group embedded in
tetrahedral coordination in silicon (Ludwig and Woodbury 1961, Ham
1961, Ludwig and Ham 1962).

--- Page 680 ---

16
ELEMENTARY THEORY
OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
IN this chapter we gather together some mathematical results useful
for the calculation of the matrix elements of the crystal field and the
determination of the wave-functions of the bound ion, in the frame-
work of the elementary crystal-field theory. It should be made clear
at the outset that this theory is a model that may or may not be an
adequate description of the physical reality. It is probably quite good
for rare-earth salts and rather bad for some complexes of the iron group,
but we shall not discuss this point now.
16.1. The crystal field (or crystal potential)
Once the assumptions describing the model are stated, the rest is
algebra. These assumptions can be formulated as follows. Let 3? be
0
the Hamiltonian of the free ion. The Hamiltonian «^ of the bound ion
is then assumed to be of the form 3C = 3ff + V where V is an electro-
0
static potential energy that satisfies the Laplace equation AF = 0 and
has the symmetry of the surroundings of the ion. The potential V can
then be expanded as a sum of spherical harmonics,
with the sign convention, F£* = ( — l)QY~q. Certain limitations are
imposed on the J3£ by the symmetry of the surroundings. For instance,
if there is a centre of inversion there will be no harmonics of odd k in
the expansion (16.1); also the reality of V requires B* = ( — I)QB~Q*.
The potential energy V is assumed to arise from the electronic and
nuclear charges of the atoms and ions surrounding the paramagnetic
ion under study. To calculate this potential the simplest method is the
so-called point charge approximation where each ion is replaced by a
point charge equal to the total charge of the ion and located at its
centre. For a monatomic ion the position of the centre is naturally that
of its nucleus but it is not so clear what its position should be for, say, a
negative ion such as (NO )~.
3
As soon as one tries to improve on this approximation, difficulties
arise. Even if one does take into account the spatial extension of the
charge distribution producing F, there are still polarization effects,
large and difficult to estimate. This comes from the fact that the closed

--- Page 681 ---

666 ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
shells of the paramagnetic ion are distorted by the potential V and
under this distortion create a modified potential 'seen' by the magnetic
electrons of the unfilled shells, which does not have the spherical
symmetry of the self-consistent Hartree potential of the free ion any-
more. Be it as it may, we start from (16.1), whatever its origin, and
proceed to carry out some algebra with it, postponing discussion of the
physics until later.
We are not interested in the absolute displacements of the energy
levels but only in their splittings by the crystal potential. We can then
without loss of generality omit the term k = 0 in the expansion (16.1).
The most important approximation we make is to take the electronic
configuration as defined in § 11.4, as a good quantum number. This has
the following implications. The wave-functions T between which we
calculate matrix elements of the crystal potential will be Slater deter-
minants or linear combinations of Slater determinants. Each deter-
minant will be of the form (% . . . , % , 9^, . . . , cp) in which the first
19 N p
N one-electron functions % . . . , % represent closed shells and unless
1? N
stated otherwise will be the same for all the Slater determinants appear-
ing in the expansion of the states T of the paramagnetic ion. The
remaining one-electron wave-functions 9^, . . . , cp^ are those of the
magnetic electrons of the unfilled shells, d- or/-electrons, depending on
the transition group considered; they are therefore of the form
\l, m m) where I = 2 for ^-electrons and 3 for/-electrons. The crystal
lt s
potential V is a sum of one-electron operators V = 2 ^ where V is
p
obtained by replacing in (16.1) r, 0, <p by the coordinates r^ 6 , 9^ of the
P
^>th electron. According to the rules given in § 11.6, any matrix element
(\p| y |\j^ ^^Q j^ a gum of one-electron matrix elements of the form
(y \ V |^ ), where ip and ^ are functions % from the filled shells and
a b a &
<p from the unfilled shells. The contribution of the closed shells to a
matrix element will be which vanishes if the
term k = 0 is omitted in the expansion (16.1). We can then omit closed
shells altogether and write our Slater determinant as (q> . . . , <p),
l9 v
building it solely from wave-functions of magnetic electrons (it should
not be forgotten that we are only able to do this because we deal with
one-electron operators such as F; it would not be quite correct for two-
electron operators). A one-electron matrix element then takes the form

--- Page 682 ---

ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD 667
where
and /j(r) is the radial wave-function of the Hartree-Fock approxima-
tion. VI is a component of an irreducible tensor and the corresponding
matrix element vanishes unless
The selection rule k < 21 decreases considerably the number of
parameters that are needed for the description of the crystal potential.
Furthermore, even in the absence of a centre of symmetry, terms F£
with odd k can be omitted because the corresponding matrix elements
vanish. (These terms will, however, admix excited configurations.)
The number of terms in (16.1) is further reduced by the symmetry
of the surroundings. Only even values of q are admissible if the sur-
roundings have either a twofold axis of symmetry parallel to the axis
of quantization or a plane of symmetry perpendicular to it. If there is a
threefold axis, only values of q that are multiples of 3 appear.
Pairs of terms in (16.1) with values of q of opposite sign can be
rewritten in the form
If there is a plane of symmetry passing through the axis of quantization
we take it as the plane xOz; the term sin{|#| 99} must vanish and
B^ is real.
If there is a plane of symmetry perpendicular to a threefold axis of
quantization (symmetry C ), B^ can also be made real by a suitable
3h
choice of the xOz plane. For symmetry C there is no term with
3h
q ^ 0 for I = 2 and a single one ^7«+J5-67-6 for I = 3 where it is
always possible to make B\—IP* vanish by a rotation around the z-axis.
By a parallel argument similar relations are obtained for symmetry
Ci or D , where only \q\ = 0 and \q\ = 4 are possible.
h 4
We consider finally a potential of cubic symmetry. Being invariant
under all transformations of the cubic group, this potential provides
the representation I^ of this group. We see in Table 3 that this
representation appears once for k = 4 and once for k = 6. Hence there

--- Page 683 ---

668 ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
must be a single combination of spherical harmonics of fourth-order
invariant by the cubic group and a single one of sixth order.
For Jc = 4 it is just the function corresponding to J = 4, I\ in
Table 4, that is,
For k = 6 it can be computed in the same way and is given by
The coefficients 6 and 6 are defined in such a way that T^/6 and
4 6 4
F /6 should be normalized to unity over the unit sphere.
6 6
The reader will observe that there is a positive sign within the
bracket in (16.6) but a negative sign in (16.7) ; this is not an accident. It
is important, in calculations where both occur, to preserve these signs,
since only then will (16.7) correspond to the use of the same set of axes
as (16.6). A rotation through an angle <f> about the polar axis multiplies
a spherical harmonic Y^ by exp(— ig$); thus a rotation through 77/4
just changes all the signs of the F^4 terms giving
These are equally valid with (16.6) and (16.7), but one must not take a
combination of one of these and one of (16.6) or (16.7).
These equations express the cubic potential in spherical harmonics
such that the polar axis is one of the fourfold axes of the cube. It is
sometimes convenient to have the corresponding expressions in the
form of a set of spherical harmonics whose polar axis is one of the
threefold axes (a body diagonal of the cube). With the same values of
6 and 6 , the corresponding expressions for V± and V are then
4 6 9
Note that rotation of the coordinate system through an angle (f> about
the threefold axis multiplies each spherical harmonic F£ by exp( — iq<f>),
so that rotation through TT changes the signs of the coefficients of the
but not those of the

--- Page 684 ---

ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD 66S
Although an expansion such as (16.1) for the crystal potential is the
more natural one, it has been customary in the literature to expand it
into homogeneous polynomials of degree k, each one a certain com-
bination of spherical harmonics, without paying much attention to the
normalization of these polynomials. When the symmetry is such that
the coefficients Bq of the expansion (16.1) are real, this new expansion
k
is of the form
where the P° are unnormalized homogeneous polynomials proportional
to rk( Y%-}-Y£) but which, in spite of the symbol, should not be confused
with Legendre polynomials. A list of those that occur most frequently
in the literature are given in Table 15 together with the relationship
between the A\ of (16.10) and the Bq of (16.1).
k
For cubic symmetry one introduces the polynomials
and the cubic potential can be written
where A± and A are related to 6 and 6 of (16.6) and (16.7) by
6 4 6
In the point charge approximation the coefficients A± and A§ can
be computed by an expansion of 2 lr-"R;!"1 where R^ are the positions
i
of the charges that produce the potential. The electrostatic energy of
an electron of charge — e in the potential produced by 6 charges — Ze,
situated at the six vertices of a regular octahedron is given by (16.11)-
(16.14) with

--- Page 685 ---

670 ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
Here R is the distance of each charge — Ze from the centre of the
octahedron.
For 8 charges at the vertices of a cube one finds
where R is again the distance of each charge — Ze from the centre of
the cube.
For a regular tetrahedron whose vertices are 4 of the 8 apexes of the
cube, the even part of the potential is half of that of the cube and
Since the tetrahedron (unlike the cube or octahedron) does not possess
a centre of inversion symmetry, its potential includes also terms of odd
degree involving spherical harmonics Y* of odd k. These have no
matrix elements within a manifold of electrons of a given value of I
(see the remarks following eqn (16.4)).
More detailed evaluations of these expansions can be found in
Hutchings (1964).
16.2. Equivalent operators
Having written down the expansions (16.1) or (16.10) for the crystal
field, the next problem is to calculate the matrix elements (T| V IT').
A simple pedestrian approach would involve expanding T and T'
into Slater determinants, thus reducing (T| V \*¥f) to a sum of one-
electron matrix elements of the type (Z, m^ V \l, m^ d(m, m').
s s
It is very much preferable to use for Y and Y' eigenstates of L, $,
M , M or L, S, J, Mj and apply the Wigner-Eckart theorem as has
L 8
been explained in § 13.5. The L, S M , M representation is suitable
9 L s
for crystal fields of intermediate strength (iron group) and the J, Mj
representation for weak crystal fields (rare-earth group).
For matrix elements within a manifold L or J such as
the best procedure is to use the equivalent operators mentioned in § 13.5.
With the components L , L , L of L or J, J, J of J, tensor
x y z x y z
operators 0£ are constructed which have the same transformation

--- Page 686 ---

ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD 671
properties as the polynomials P£ defined in Table 15. Thus, within
each manifold L we shall be able to write
where the summation ^ ig over all the electrons.
i
For the |J, Mj) representation, L is to be replaced throughout by J.
The value of the constant a depends on the structure of the level L or
k
J under consideration and has to be determined in each case by a direct
calculation. The current and unfortunate practice is to write a, ft, y
instead of a , « , # , and we shall write (l\\ a ||Z), (L\\ a \\L), (J\\ a ||J),
2 4 6
etc. to make it clear whether we are dealing with single electrons or
representations in terms of L or J.
The construction of the polynomials 0* is not trivial because the
various components J, J, J do not commute with each other. As a
x y z
result, whenever an expression xxy**zv appears in P* it should not be
replaced by J*JyJv in Oq but rather by the symmetrized product,
z k
average of all the products where J, J, J appear respectively ^, JLI, v
x y z
times. This average can then be simplified using the commutation rules
of J, J, J. A list of the 0% is given in Table 16, where we use the
x y z
notation [A, B} = ^(AB+BA). The non vanishing matrix elements
s
of these operators 0% are given in Tables 17 for values of J varying
from | to Vs and from 0 to 8.
To show how a, /?, y are calculated we start first with a single electron
with orbital angular momentum I, for which the parameters we require
can be written as (l\\ a \\l), etc. We take as an example the operator
Pj. In the state Z, m = I the expectation value of P° can be found by
l
direct calculation:
On the other hand, the value of (I, l\ 0\ |Z, I) is found from Table 16 by
writing J' = J = I to be
which incidentally shows that the matrix element of this operator
vanishes for all quantum numbers less than 2. Hence we have, since

--- Page 687 ---

672 ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
Similar calculations can be carried out for a, y and the results are
tabulated in Table 18, together with the numerical values for p-, d-,
and /-electrons (I = 1, 2, 3).
To proceed to the next step we must describe the structure of the
spectral terms (L, S) and multiplets (L, S, J) of the ground levels of
the free ion, encountered in the transition group; we begin with the
ions of the iron group listed in Table 19.
We notice in Table 19 that the values of L and S given by Hund's
rule are symmetrical with respect to the middle of the 3d shell and the
values of a and ft (there is no y for 1 = 2) antisymmetrical. This is a
consequence of a general rule that we derive as follows.
Consider two complementary configurations ^ and W containing
respectively x and 2(21 + 1)— x electrons outside closed shells. It is
possible to establish a one-to-one correspondence between a function
T of <g and Y' of «" such that
More generally, given a tensor operator
where the + sign applies when ^ is time-odd and the negative sign
k
when it is time-even; that is, odd or even through inversion of all l
f
and S;.
The correspondence between T and Y' is as follows. To each deter-
minant of &, <E> = (mj, m]; . . . m£ , mx ) we associate the determinant of
s
where mj1, m' l. . . , etc. are the one-electron states unoccupied in O.
s
The proof of (16.23) then goes as follows.
We introduce also the Slater determinant
which (apart from possible phase factors) is the time-reversed of <P'.
The sum (O| ^~ |O) + (®"| «^" |<D") vanishes, since, from the rules given
fc fc
in § 11.6 for the calculation of diagonal matrix elements of Slater
determinants this sum is a trace over a closed shell of one-electron
tensor operators

--- Page 688 ---

ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD 673
Hence where the nega-
tive sign applies for time-even operators. One says sometimes that the
configuration #' consists of holes. According to (16.22), (16.23) the
holes must be treated as positive charges for time-even operators such
as the crystal field or the spin-orbit coupling, but as negative charges for
the coupling with a magnetic field either applied or produced by the
nuclear magnetic moment.
As a consequence, the order in energy of the various terms (L, S) of
the free ion, which is determined by the electrostatic repulsion between
the particles, whether electrons or holes, is the same for ^ and *%' (we
have not really proved this since our reasoning applied only to one-
electron operators, but it turns out to be true). On the other hand, the
spin-orbit coupling constant A in A(L . S), and the constants a, /3,
have opposite signs and the order of sub-levels in the splitting of a
term (L, S) is reversed.
We now extend our previous calculation of (Z|| a ||Z), (l\\ (3 \\l) to find
the equivalent factors for a term (L, S), and consider first (L\\ a ||L),
for which an explicit formula can be obtained rather easily. Essentially
we wish to replace the operator (l\\ a p) 2 {3^—Z(Z + 1)} summed over
all electrons, by the operator
To find the value of (L\\ a \\L) we consider a term (L, 8) originating
from a configuration with r electrons of orbital momentum Z, and
obeying Hund's rule so that the state L = L, S = 8 is a single
z z
Slater determinant. Assume first that we are in the first half of the shell,
so that r < 2/ + 1 and r = 28. According to Hund's rule,
and
while {3L2—L(L + l)} = L(2L — 1). Hence, remembering that the
z L;=L
sign of (i|| a \\L) must be reversed for a shell that is more than half-
filled, we have
44

--- Page 689 ---

674 ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
where the upper sign applies to a shell less than half-full, and the lower
sign to a shell more than half-full.
Similar methods are used to find the values of (L\\ j8 \\L) and
(L\\ y \\L), but in these cases it is often as simple to carry out the
calculation numerically for each ion as to use a general formula.
As an example we calculate the value of ($ for the term 4jP of the
configuration 3d3. The state L = 3, L = 3, S = f, S, = f of this
z
term is a single Slater determinant ||) = (2+, 1+, 0+), for which
whence, using Tables 17 and 18, we have
for this particular ion.
The numerical values of (L\\ a \\L) and (L\\ /? ||j&) for the ground
states of the iron-group ions are listed in Table 19, together with
general formulae for these quantities.
We pass on now to the rare-earth group where the various terms are
given together with the values of the constants a, /?, y in Table 20.
The calculation of a, /?, y is more complicated than in the iron group
because not only do we couple the individual 1 and s to a total L and S
but we then couple L and S to a total J. However the problem is much
simpler in the second half of the rare-earth group, where the ground
multiplet is a state not only of maximum S and L but also of maximum
J = L+S. It follows that the state J = J is a single Slater deter-
z
minant and we can use the same method as for the iron group: first we
calculate <x, /?, y for a single /-electron by the same procedure as before
(the results are listed in Table 18) and find, for example, that
Consider then, for instance, Tm3+(4/12, *H ). The state J = 6,J = 6, or
B Z
16, 6) is also a state L = L = 5; 8 = S = 1 and therefore a single
z z
Slater determinant of holes (3+ 2+). Hence
and, using Tables 17, we obtain for (4/12,3H )
6

--- Page 690 ---

ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD 676
The first half of the shell is more difficult to handle for in the ground
multiplet (J, L, 8), J is not L+S but \L—S\ and no substate of this
multiplet is a single Slater determinant. We can, however, expand any
substate of this multiplet into eigenstates of \L, M ) and \S, M ) using
L s
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients,
Let us assume we wish to calculate <J|| a || J). We find first the expecta-
tion value of 2 Pl(*i) in the state (16.27). In the state \L, S, J, Mj) it
is equal to
and in a state
Equation (16.27) then yields
where the (L\\ a \\L) can be calculated by the same method as in the
iron group.
Actually, as we explained in § 13.5 dealing with the coupling of
angular momenta, the use of equivalent operators is a paraphrase of
the fundamental formula (13.38) which expresses the Wigner-Eckart
theorem, and the Tables 17 of the matrix elements of the 0% are
nothing but tables of Clebsch-Gordan coefficients apart from normaliza-
tion constants. The quantities <J|| a ||J), (J|| ft ||J), (J|| y ||J) that we
have tabulated are proportional to the diagonal values of reduced
matrix elements in formula (13.38),
Similarly (L\\ a ||i), (L\\ ft \\L), (L\\ y \\L) are proportional to reduced
matrix elements (l/\/(2L + l))(L\\ T \\L) and a relation between them
k
can be obtained in a closed form by means of the vector recoupling
6j-symbol of Racah.
Indeed the passage from (L\\ T \\L) to (J|| T \\J) involves two
k k

--- Page 691 ---

676 ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
vector coupling schemes: on one hand,
and on the other hand,
which, from the vector coupling properties of the 6?-symbol described
in § 13.5 leads to the formula
This enables us to rewrite formula (16.28) in a closed form,
16.3. Off-diagonal matrix elements of the crystal field
The approximation of the intermediate crystal field implies that
its magnitude is small compared to the distance between two terms
(L, S) and (L', S) between which it has matrix elements. A few calcula-
tions have been made in the iron group taking into account off-diagonal
effects of the crystal field. Even more important is the coupling
through the crystal field between two multiplets (L, S, J) and
(L, S, J') in the rare earths. The method of equivalent operators
becomes inadequate in that case and one must go back to the Wigner-
Eckart formula (13.38). One of the advantages of this more powerful
approach is that the calculation of a reduced off-diagonal matrix
element (J|| T \\J'), knowing (L, S\\ T \\L, S) or (L, S\\ T \\L' S), is no
k k k 9
more difficult than that of the diagonal elements («7|| T \\J) which are
k
proportional to the (J|| a, /3, y ||J).
The formula generalizing (16.29) is
This formula (16.31) combined with the fundamental formula (13.38)
enables one to calculate all the matrix elements

--- Page 692 ---

ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD 677
in closed form once the constants (SL\\ T \\SL) have been computed.
k
It is in a way unfortunate that the pioneer work of Stevens (1952a)
has not been expressed in the more rational formalism of Racah which
culminates in the powerful formulae (13.38) and (16.31). However, so
much of the published work in paramagnetic resonance has been
couched in the Stevens language that more would be lost than gained
by attempting to translate it all into Racah's language. Therefore even
for off-diagonal elements we shall keep the normalization (or lack of it)
of Stevens and give the following formulae useful in the theory of
magnetic resonance for rare-earth ions.
The coefficients <J+1|| a ||J), <J + 1|| ft ||J>, (J + l|| y \\J) are listed for
the rare earths in Table 20.
16.4. The electronic Zeeman interaction
We continue the list of electronic interactions by including first the
equivalent operators for the electronic Zeeman interaction. The
magnetic moment operator is [/, = — /?(L+2S) and inside a manifold
(J, L, S) we can write
where (J|| A ||J) is just the Lande factor. It is given by eqn (11.12b) in
the approximation we have made of taking g = 2, and numerical
B
values for the ground states of the rare-earth ions are listed in Table 20.
There are also off-diagonal elements (JM\ L+2S \J'M'). Here it is
useful to note that the matrix elements of J = L+S, being diagonal in
J, are zero between two manifolds for which J ^ J'. Hence

--- Page 693 ---

678 ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD
and these matrix elements vanish except for \J—J'\ = 1. The matrix
elements we require are
where the reduced matrix element is given by
whose values are also listed in Table 20.
16.5. Electron spin-spin interactions
In addition to the magnetic interaction between the electrons and
the external magnetic field, there are also spin-spin interactions
between electrons which may contribute to the fine structure of the
resonance line.
As shown by Breit (1929), the magnetic interaction between two
electrons can be written:
The last term of (16.42) is invariant under rotations of both spin and
orbital coordinates. It commutes therefore with L2 and S2, and within
a term (L, S) behaves as an additive constant. This constant vanishes
for a term obeying Hund's rule which, being completely symmetrical
with respect to spin coordinates, is completely antisymmetrical with
respect to orbital coordinates. The first term of (16.42), by arguments
(see § 17.4) similar to those that lead to eqn (17.45), can be rewritten
within a term (L, S) as
The constant /> can be evaluated by the usual methods of operator
equivalents. For an (L, S) term that obeys Hund's rule and is built
from ^-electrons, p is given by (Pryce 1950)

--- Page 694 ---

ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE CRYSTAL FIELD 679
where
in which E(r) is the radial wave-function of the ^-electrons. For free
ions, p can be estimated from the departure from the Lande interval
rule, leading to values of p of the order of 0-5 cm"1 in the iron group
(Pryce 1950), but, as pointed out by Trees (1951), this includes contribu-
tions from second-order effects of the spin-orbit coupling. Later
calculations by Watson and Blume (1965) give rather smaller values,
which are listed in Table 7.6 for ions of the 3d group. Just what value
should be used in interpreting a paramagnetic resonance experiment is
rather complicated. If an interaction of the form W is present, its
ss
magnitude should include contributions from all sources, including
second-order effects of the spin-orbit coupling. However the latter may
not be the same as for the free ion, just as the spin-orbit coupling itself
is modified through bonding effects.

--- Page 695 ---

17
HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
HYPERFINE structure in paramagnetic resonance lines was
discovered by Penrose (1949). It is due to the coupling of the electrons
with the electric and magnetic moments of the nucleus. In this chapter
we shall derive the form of the interactions responsible for these
couplings. We begin with the electrostatic interactions which, although
less important in practice, are conceptually simpler.
17.1. Electrostatic hyperfine interactions
Atomic energy levels are usually calculated under the simplifying
assumption of a point nucleus with a charge fie,. If the finite nuclear
dimensions are taken into account, the changes in the atomic energy
levels are exceedingly small and, for nuclear spins different from zero,
are best observed through the removal of the degeneracy of the atomic
levels associated with the various orientations of the nuclear spin. The
Hamiltonian responsible for the splittings between those levels can be
determined as follows, using the correspondence principle as a starting
point. If we describe the nucleus and the electron cloud as two classical
charge distributions p (r ) and />(r), their mutual electrostatic energy
n n e e
is
which can be expanded through the classical formula
where the functions are normalized spherical harmonics:
and where the symbols
mean that the larger of the two numbers r and r is in the denominator,
e n
and the smaller in the numerator. If the small penetration of the
electron inside the nucleus is neglected we may assume r > r and
e n
write

--- Page 696 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 681
where
If the state of the nucleus is described by a wave-function
xF (^ , . . . , R ) of the coordinates of its A nucleons, the nuclear
n 1 A
charge density can be written as the expectation value of the operator
density of charge at the point r :
n
where e,= e for a proton and zero for a neutron. From (17.3) and (17.4)
i
AI can be written as an expectation value A% = («*/£) where the
nuclear operator jtf* is defined by
R ® O^ being the polar coordinates of the A nucleons. Similarly,
it it
Bq is the expectation value of the electron operator 3S\:
k
where r 6 (p are the coordinates of the electrons and the minus sign
i9 i9 i
occurs because of the negative charge (— e) of the electron. The energy
of electrostatic interaction between the electrons and the nucleus is
then the expectation value of a Hamiltonian
From the definitions (17.6) and (17.7) it is clear that the operators j/£
and 3§q are tensor operators of order k. The tensor operator £# with
k k
2k + 1 components j/£ is called the multipole moment of order k of the
nucleus. Although for the calculation of the splittings of the atomic
energy levels, only the expectation value A% = (^} of the nuclear
multipole operator, taken over the wave-function of a nuclear eigen-
state, is required, this operator does in fact have off-diagonal matrix
elements between various nuclear states of different energy. The study
of these matrix elements, which are responsible for y-ray transitions
between those states, is outside the scope of this book.
For the diagonal matrix elements Aq = (£?%) odd values of k are
k
forbidden if we assume, as seems well established experimentally, that

--- Page 697 ---

682 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
stationary nuclear states have well-defined parities. In particular,
nuclei should have no permanent electric dipole moments (k = 1) in
agreement with experimental evidence. Invariance with respect to time
reversal (cf. the discussion in § 15.10) also forbids the existence of
nuclear electric dipole moments. Off-diagonal matrix elements of the
electric dipole nuclear moment between nuclear states of different
parity may of course exist. Further information and limitations on the
values of the matrix elements of the nuclear multipole operators result
from their tensor character and are based on the Wigner-Eckart
theorem. It follows from this theorem that for a nucleus of spin /,
A\ = (j2/2> will only be different from zero if k < 21. Thus nuclei of
spin I > I may have quadrupole moments, nuclei with I > 2 may
have moments of order 4, etc, .... The term k = 0 of the electrostatic
interaction between electron and nucleus clearly corresponds to the
coupling with a point charge Ze. Since the nuclear radius R is much
smaller than the electronic radius a, the various terms of W as given by
E
eqns (17.3), (17.4) decrease rapidly, roughly as (Bja)k. This explains
why there is little experimental evidence of electrostatic interactions
with k > 2.
Only quadrupole interactions will be considered from now on. The
components of the nuclear quadrupole moment operator can be
written in the form
According to the Wigner-Eckart theorem the 30\ have, for a nuclear
spin /, within the manifold of the (27 + 1) substates I = m the same
z y
matrix elements as the Hermitian tensor operator formed from the
components of the vector /,
The constant (7|| a ||7) is determined, for instance, by the condition
that Q\ and j/° have the same expectation value in the substate
I = I denoted by (//). The usual convention is to represent by the
z

--- Page 698 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 683
symbol eQ the quantity
Then writing
we find that whence
The components ^ of the electronic tensor (17.7) can be rewritten in
the same way as the st\ in eqn (17.9), giving
where the sum is over all electrons. The electron operators can be
replaced by equivalent operators (as described in the last chapter),
involving the orbital angular momentum vector of each electron. This
is then summed over all electrons, giving
For a term in LS- coupling the sums can be replaced by operators
involving the components of the total orbital angular momentum just
as in the case of the crystal field. This is straightforward if the value of
(r~3)i is the same for every electron involved but even if not all the
values are the same it can be shown that in the non-relativistic limit

--- Page 699 ---

684 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
only one constant is needed in the quadrupole interaction (Sandars and
Beck 1965). Hence we can write
where (r 3) is the mean inverse third power of the electron distance
ff
from the nucleus, averaged over the electronic wave-functions.
For an atom or ion with LS- coupling the form of the Hamiltonian
for the electric quadrupole interaction is thus
For the ground terms of the iron group the values of (L\\ a \\L) are
listed in Table 19. The angular momentum operator expression in
square brackets in (17.14) is in a form that is generally the most
useful in calculations for weakly-bonded ions of the 3d group; it is
equivalent to the more usual form
and in the notation of Abragam and Pryce (1951a,b,c)
When L and 8 couple to a resultant J, similar formulae for the
quadrupole interaction can be obtained in which L is replaced every-
where by J and (L\\ a \\L) by (J|| a ||J). This representation is useful
when considering ions of the rare-earth group, and is similar to that
used in atomic beam measurements with a constant B which is given
by the relation
We can of course retain a nomenclature similar to that of Abragam
and Pryce by introducing a symbol r\j such that (cf. eqn (17.16))
For the state J = L+S which is the ground state of the second half of

--- Page 700 ---

HYPERFINE STBUCTUBE 685
the rare-earth group we have the simple relationship
For any other value of J we find from eqn (16.30)
We shall defer until later the discussion of the influence of the
nuclear electric quadrupole coupling on the paramagnetic resonance
spectrum in bulk matter. However we notice that electron operators
such as (17.11) are time-even and will therefore have the same expecta-
tion value for the two time-conjugate states of a Kramers doublet and
will behave as constants as far as paramagnetic resonance is concerned.
In cubic symmetry we meet groups of substates whose degeneracy is
greater than twofold, and since for cubic symmetry a symmetrical
Cartesian form of the quadrupole operator is often convenient, we
make here some remarks about spatial symmetry of the operator in
connection with the transformation of (17.14) to a symmetrical
Cartesian form.
The electronic and nuclear tensor components (eqns (17.11) and
(17.9)) contain two types of terms, one of which transforms like F , that
3
is like (3z2— r2), (x2— y2), and the other like F , that is like xy, yz, zx,
5
which are of course just like the orbital wave-functions for a d-electron
with 1 = 2. Since the nuclear electric quadrupole operator as a whole
must remain unchanged under rotations of both electric and nuclear
variables belonging to the cubic group it follows that nuclear com-
ponents of F symmetry can only be multiplied by electronic com-
5
ponents of F symmetry, and nuclear F components by electronic F
5 3 3
components.
It can be seen that these distinctions are preserved in the following
transformations of the nuclear electric quadrupole operator components
to and from simple Cartesian forms:

--- Page 701 ---

686 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
and
These terms contain products £+/+, L2_P_ which are absent in (17.14).
However, if we take m = n = 1 and sum (17.22) and (17.23) such
products vanish and other products occur in just the ratios appropriate
to (17.14). Thus we have the symmetrical Cartesian form, equivalent
to (17.14),
This is appropriate to a free atom or ion with full rotational symmetry
(which imposes a relation between the coefficients m and n), but with
cubic symmetry m and n are not necessarily equal (see § 18.4) in an
equivalent operator where the components of L are replaced by those
of an effective spin 8.
In electron paramagnetic resonance experiments we are faced with
the difficulty, which exists also for free atoms, of deciding what value
to use for the quantity (r~3). The assumption often made is that it has
the same value as the parameter <r~3} that appears in the magnetic
hyperfine structure and that it can be determined from the latter if the
value of the nuclear magnetic moment is known independently.
However, distortion of the charge cloud of the inner closed shells of
electrons produces an appreciable change in the electric field gradient
at the nucleus due to the magnetic electrons, in contrast to the
analogous effect (cdiamagnetic shielding') in the magnetic case, which is
quite small and generally negligible compared to other effects that
produce uncertainties in the value of (r~3), particularly in solids. We

--- Page 702 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 687
may formally represent the effect of this distortion by writing
(r~3) = (1—jR ){r~3}, where the contributions to R from the various
(7 q
closed shells may be either positive (shielding) or negative (anti-
shielding).
Hitherto we have been concerned primarily with the Internal'
electric field gradient due to the asymmetric charge distribution of the
electrons 'on' the magnetic ion. There may also be an 'external' electric
field gradient arising from the ligand ions and the lattice generally. If
the paramagnetic ion is at a site of local cubic symmetry in the lattice,
the 'external' electric field gradient vanishes; otherwise, it is related
to the terms of second degree V\ in the crystal potential, eqn (16.1). The
relation is not however a simple one as there are shielding effects, both
for the magnetic electrons and for the nucleus, which may be quite
different in size from one another as well as from the effect discussed in
the previous paragraph. For the nucleus, the external electric field
gradient is multiplied by a factor (1— y^), where y^ ^ estimated to be
large and negative, with values ranging in some cases up to —100. We
cannot simply use this factor to multiply the values of V\ obtained
empirically by fitting the electronic spectra, since any shielding effects
for the magnetic electrons are already included in the latter. However,
it is clear that a large value of ly^l will greatly enhance the effect of the
external electric field gradient at the nucleus, making it comparable
with the internal electric field gradient in some cases, and almost
certainly the larger of the two for ions in ^-states such as Mn2+, 3d5 on
non-cubic lattice sites. The general question of shielding and anti-
shielding, based on the well-known work of Sternheimer, is discussed by
Watson and Freeman (1967a), where further references can be found,
and also briefly in § 17.7.
17.2. Magnetic hyperfine interactions
A logical procedure would be to develop the theory of the magnetic
interactions between the electron and the nucleus along the same lines
as for the electrostatic interactions, that is, to assign electric-current
densities to the electrons and to the nucleus (rather than charge
densities as in the previous section) and to calculate their interactions
according to the laws of classical electromagnetism. One would thus
define magnetic multipole operators for the nucleus which, like the
electric ones, would be tensor operators of integral order Jc.
If one recalls the opposite parity properties of the electric field (a
polar vector) and of the magnetic field (an axial vector) it is under-
standable that even, rather than odd, values of k are forbidden for

--- Page 703 ---

688 HYPEBFINE STRUCTURE
permanent magnetic multipoles, on the assumption of a well-defined
parity for the nuclear energy states. The first non-vanishing nuclear
magnetic multipole is thus a magnetic dipole, the next a magnetic
octopole, etc. Here again the fact that the magnetic field is a time-odd
vector leads to the same conclusion because of invariance through
time reversal.
Although the existence of magnetic octopoles may be established
by atomic-beam methods, they have never been observed by means of
magnetic resonance in bulk matter. Furthermore, the description of the
magnetic properties of a nucleus as those of a system of currents is more
complicated and at the same time, in our present state of knowledge,
much less satisfying than the description of its electrostatic properties
as those of a system of charges. We shall therefore be content to
describe the magnetic properties of the nucleus as those of a magnetic
dipole [ij = yHI (see however § 17.7). The reason why the magnetic
n
dipole is collinear with the spin vector I is again that, within the
manifold of the substates of a given nuclear state of spin I, all tensor
operators of given k (vectors in the present case) have the same matrix
elements. Magnetic fields of impossibly high values, of the order of
1016 G or more, would have to be applied to the nucleus before its
magnetic energy — (X . H became comparable to the interval between
7
two different nuclear energy states, invalidating the approximation
t*i = yn*i-
The interaction of the nuclear dipole (X with the electronic shell is
7
small even compared with atomic-energy splittings (let alone the
nuclear ones) and may be computed by a perturbation method.
The behaviour of an electron in a magnetic field H is obtained by
replacing the momentum p by p + (e/c)A in its Hamiltonian, where A is
the magnetic vector potential defined by
div A = 0, curl A = H.
According to classical electromagnetic theory a magnetic dipole (x
produces a magnetic field, at a point removed from it by a vector r,
deriving from a vector potential
Near the dipole the vector potential A has a singularity of order r~2
and H = curl A a singularity of order r~3, so that some care must be
exercised in the calculation of its interaction with an electron. In the

--- Page 704 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 689
non-relativistie Pauli description of the electron the Hamiltonian in the
presence of A is
where /? is the Bohr magneton and s the electron spin. In a first-order
perturbation calculation the only terms of (17.26) to be retained are
those linear in A:
This can be written, using (17.25), as
where HI — r A P is the orbital momentum of the electron.
The spin-dependent part of (17.27) gives
which for reasons to appear presently we rewrite as
The magnetic interaction of the nuclear moment with the electron spin
W* = (T | tf\ |T ) is obtained by multiplying (17.29) by the electronic
m e e
density p = Y*T and integrating over the electron coordinates. For
e
r ^ 0, J^a as given by (17.29), is a regular function where the first term
v
is equal to g f}{3(s . r)(jx . r)/r5— (s . fx)/r3}, which is the usual dipole-
B
dipole interaction, and the second term vanishes because of Laplace's
equation. When r tends toward zero we may remark that the first
term 3%*^ of (17.29) behaves as a spherical harmonic of order 2 under a
rotation of the coordinate system. Hence if T is expanded in a sum of
e
spherical harmonics, T = 2 ai^i> the only non- vanishing contributions
e
to (T | Jf* |T ) will come from terms (T,| tf J' |Y) such that J+r > 2.
e e r
It is well known that a wave-function 1P is of order r1 near the origin
1
so that in the matrix element
the integrand varies as r(l+l'+2 3) and the corresponding integral always
remains finite since l+V > 2. According to the theory of the Coulomb
45

--- Page 705 ---

690 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
potential the second term of (17.29) is equal to (8<7/3)7r/?(s . fx) <5(r) and
s
by integration gives
which is finite for s electrons and zero for the others. The Hamiltonian
for the magnetic interaction of the electron with the nucleus can then
be written without ambiguity as (writing g = 2)
a
If several electrons surround the nucleus, the interaction Hamiltonian
is the sum of the contributions of the individual electrons. Although
the expression (17.30) has been derived for the purpose of calculating
its expectation value (T | 3?^ \^e)> & ^ clear that it also gives un-
e
ambiguous results for off-diagonal matrix elements (T | Jff^ |O )
e e
between, say, the ground state and an excited state of the electronic
system. Use will be made of this to calculate some effects of J^
lt
using second-order perturbation theory.
We may write the expression in curly brackets in (17.30) simply as a
vector N so that (17.30) becomes
This is equivalent to an interaction
where
is the electronic magnetic field at the nucleus.
17.3. Alternative derivation of the magnetic hyperfine
interaction
There is a weak point in our derivation of (17.30), namely, the state-
ment that the first part of (17.29) gfi{(s . V)(fji. V)-J(s . fJi)V2}(l/r)
s
gives a vanishing result when the second term — (2gr/3/3)(s . fji)V2(l/r)
s
does not; that is, for an s-electron. This is based on an angular integra-
tion, performed before a radial integration. If we were to interchange
these operations we would find an infinite result instead. An alternative
derivation based on the relativistic equation of Dirac does not have this
drawback.

--- Page 706 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 691
In a magnetic field Dirac's equation can be written
In this equation a stands for the three Dirac 4 by 4 matrices a a , oc;
1? 2 3
/? is the fourth Dirac matrix (not to be confused with the Bohr
magneton); W is the kinetic energy of the electron and \F the four-
component spinor which is the electron wave-function in Dirac theory.
The spinor T can be written as where 99 and % are 2 two-
component spinors describing what is known as the large and small
components of the Dirac wave-function. If we neglect ecu . A, which is a
small perturbation, it is known from the structure of the matrices a,-
and |8 that (17.33) can be rewritten:
where a is the set of the three Pauli matrices. Neglecting W+eV in
comparison with 2mc2 we get
We may treat the coupling e(o . A) with the magnetic field as a
perturbation and proceed to calculate its expectation value :
Using the commutation relations of the components of a we find that
(17.36) becomes
and from the relation p = (fi/i) V we get
whence
which was precisely our starting point (eqn (17.26a)) for the non-
relativistic derivation above, provided that we take g = 2.
a

--- Page 707 ---

692 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
The operation (cp\ \<p) corresponds to an integration over orbital
and spin variables. In the Pauli approximation \<p) is the product of the
Schrodinger orbital wave-function *F times a spin function (or a sum of
e
such products). Leaving out the integration over spin variables, the
second part of (17.37) is a spin-operator
which, since p is a Hermitian operator, can be rewritten in terms of the
density p = 99*9^ as
If one assigns to the electron a spin current density
we can write (17.40) in the form
The expression (17.40) is equivalent to our starting point (17.38) but
has the advantage that if we replace A by curl ([i/r) the integral
converges absolutely; the singularity of the integrand is of order 1/r2
rather than 1/r3 and for an s-electron it leads unambiguously to the
last term of (17.30).
17.4. Equivalent operators for the magnetic hyperfine
structure
The dipole-dipole coupling {3(1. r)(s . r)—r2(I . s)}/r5 is a product
of two second-rank tensors and can be rewritten as
By a process similar to that used in § 17.1 in deriving the nuclear
electric quadrupole interaction, this is found for a single electron I to
be equivalent to
Similarly for a term (L, 8) obeying Hund's rule we obtain

--- Page 708 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 693
in which
where ^ is given by (17.16) and (L\\ a \\L) by (16.25).
Since the operator (17.43) is time-odd with respect to electron
variables, | has the same sign for two complementary configurations
of x and 2(21 + 1)— x electrons, in contrast to rj or (L\\ a \\L) which
L
were introduced in dealing with interactions that are time-even with
respect to the electron variables.
Within a ground term (L, 8) of electrons for which I ^ 0 the magnetic
hyperfine coupling can then be written
We now construct an equivalent operator for the hfs interaction within
the manifold (J, L, S). We define the vector N by
which is equivalent to (17.31) except that we have assumed the term
d(r) in (17.30) to be absent. Inside the manifold (L, 8) this is equivalent
to, using (17.47),
(L8\\ N \\LS) = L + ££(£ + l)S-f|{L(L . S)+(L . S)L}. (17.49)
Within the manifold (J, L, 8) we can replace N by a vector collinear
with J
where
in which

--- Page 709 ---

694 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
Here it may be useful to note that
and that the form of the magnetic hyperfine interaction is now simply
The values of (J|| N \\J) are tabulated for the rare-earth group in
Table 20.
For a single electron with j = Zi J a direct derivation leads to a
much simpler result for (17.51) since
where we have used the fact that (r. 1) is proportional to r. (r A p) = 0.
Hence
To find the off-diagonal elements (J'M'\ N \JM) of the vector N
between two manifolds J', J belonging to the same (L, S) multiplet we
make use of the fact that, from eqn (17.49), the matrix elements of N
are a linear combination of those of L and S. It then follows from (16.38)
that the off-diagonal elements of N are proportional to those of
L+2S, and vanish except for \J'—J\ — 1. Introducing a symbol
(J+l || N ||J), we can therefore write
and from (17.49) and (16.38) we have
where f (which is equal to — v in the notation of Elliott and Stevens
(1953a)) is given by eqn (17.46) and <J| (L . S) |J) by eqn (17.52).

--- Page 710 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 695
Values of f and (J + l || N || J>, as well as of <J + 1 1| A ||J> (eqn (16.41)),
are listed for the rare-earth group in Table 20. The off-diagonal elements
of L + 2S are given by eqns (16.39), (16.40), whence we have
17.5. The effect of s-electrons: configuration interaction
We have already commented on the fact that, to calculate the
coupling between an atom (or an ion) and a homogeneous applied field,
a detailed knowledge of the atomic wave-function is not required
(§ 11.3); in particular, for a term (L, S) it is not necessary to know in
what configuration this term originated. The position is quite different
for the coupling with the very inhomogeneous magnetic field produced
by a nuclear moment; a formula such as (17.45) rests on the explicit
assumption that the term (L, S) is built from a specific configuration of
i electrons each with angular momentum I.
In our calculations of the effects of the crystal field we have assumed
that the configuration is a good quantum number and on the basis of
this assumption we would have expected eqn (17.47) to give reasonable
agreement with experiment. In fact in the important case of the iron
group the agreement is miserable. The explanation resides in the fact
that s-electrons, especially those of low principal quantum number n,
have hyperfine couplings very much stronger than those of other
electrons with I ^ 0. It follows that if a term (L, S) belonging to an ion
of the transition group, whose ground configuration has no unpaired
s-electrons, is 'contaminated' even slightly with excited configurations
containing unpaired s-electrons (for brevity s-configurations), there
may be an appreciable change in the hyperfine coupling although all
other properties of the term remain practically unaffected. If there is an
admixture from s-configurations the contribution of the so-called
contact term, the last term of (17.30), will not be zero; within the
manifold of the term (L, S), this contribution can be represented quite
generally as A I . S, the value of the constant A depending on the
S s
nature and amount of s-configuration present. It is customary (though
perhaps unfortunate) to define a dimensionless constant K through the
relation

--- Page 711 ---

696 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
To sum up, within a term (L, S) the total hyperfine structure, electric
and magnetic, can be written
We examine below and in § 17.6 methods by which theoretical
estimates can be made of the magnitude of the constant K.
The original idea that configuration interaction is responsible for
anomalies in atomic magnetic hyperfine structure is due to Fermi and
Segre (1933a, b). Among the examples they studied, the most relevant
for our purpose, as will appear shortly, is the 6<s26p, 2P ground term of
atomic thallium perturbed by the excited 2P term 6s6p7s. Fermi and
Segre used a perturbation method to estimate the small admixture a
from the excited term into the ground manifold; the unperturbed one-
electron wave-functions in each configuration were eigenstates of an
approximate central-field Hamiltonian, the matrix elements of the
Coulomb repulsion V = 2 e*lrik between the two terms were computed
i<k
numerically, and the energy separation A between the terms was
10
taken from spectroscopic data.
Let T and T be atomic states, belonging respectively to the ground
0 x
and to the excited configuration, and linked by the electronic repulsion
7, which in first order changes T into T = T^ocY^ where
0
Since the coupling Hamiltonian V is invariant through spatial rotation
and does not contain the spin variables it is clear that the states T
0
and T! must have the same quantum numbers L, 8, M , M .
L s
For our purpose the essential feature of the excited configuration
6s6p7s is that it is obtained from the ground configuration Qs2Qp by
promotion of one electron from an s-orbit <p to another s-orbit (p .
6s 7s
Therefore the contact part J>^ of the hyperfine Hamiltonian does have
c
a non-vanishing matrix element between T and T!, and according to
0
the rules given in § 11.6 this is proportional to a one-electron matrix
element (<p | d(r) \y ), that is, to the product 9?(0) . <p(0). The
6s 7s 6 7
expectation value (T| ^if |T) of the contact hyperfine interaction in
c

--- Page 712 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 697
the state \F given by (17.62) contains therefore a term proportional to
2a^ (0)^ (0). This linear dependence on a of (\F| ^ |Y) has two
6s 7s c
far-reaching consequences: first, as a is small, the correction to the
hyperfine structure is very much larger than the second-order term
aPC¥i\ ^c lvi>> which is proportional to of(p*8(0); secondly, this
correction can have either sign, again in contrast to the second-order
term.
This feature proves to be of paramount importance in the explana-
tion, that now follows, of anomalous hyperfine structure in the para-
magnetic resonance spectrum of ions belonging to the iron group
(Abragam 1950; Abragam and Pryce 1951a, 6, c; Abragam, Horowitz,
and Pryce 1955). The conventional configuration assigned to the ions
of the iron group in their ground state is
^ = I8*2s*2p*38*3p*3dx. (17.63)
0
In the ground term, constructed from this configuration according to
Hund's rule, the total spin S is either x/2 or 5 — (x/2) depending on
whether x < 5 or x ^ 5. This configuration does not allow for a term
such as A I. S = -2y 8S(r-3)/cI . S (eqn (17.60)) in the hyperfine
S ni
Hamiltonian (17.61); however such a term is found to be necessary in
order to fit the experimental data in the iron group (see Chapter 7).
The sign of the coefficient K is found to be positive, that is such as to
make the electronic hyperfine field H at the nucleus parallel to the total
e
ionic spin S. In contrast the field H produced at the nucleus by a single
e
5-electron is antiparallel to its spin.
It is convenient to introduce a quantity x characteristic of the density
of unpaired spins at the nucleus:
The expectation value in (17.64) is to be taken over the state S = S
z
of the ground term. According to (17.30) and (17.60) x is related to K by
so that x must be negative if K is positive.
For each ion of the iron group x is found to depend little on the
surroundings of the ion, which makes it plausible that it is a feature of
the free ion. x is also found experimentally to vary little (by no more
than 25 per cent) inside the iron group, the mean value being of the
order of —3 in atomic units, a fact for which there is no simple physical

--- Page 713 ---

698 HYPERFINE STKUCTURE
explanation. The proportionality coefficient between #, expressed in
atomic units, and the electronic field H at the nucleus, expressed in
e
gauss, is given by H = — 2S X4-21 x 104#.
e
In contrast with the hyperfine structure the other features of the
spectrum such as the ^-factor and fine structure agree well with the
ground configuration (17.63). It is therefore reasonable to look for
small admixtures into this configuration that contain unpaired s-
electrons. In order for such admixtures to be able to modify appreciably
the hyperfine structure, while leaving practically unaffected the other
features of the spectrum, and also to produce hyperfine fields H of the
e
right sign, they must differ from the ground configuration through
promotion of one electron from an s-orbit into another s-orbit, as
explained in connection with the work of Fermi and Segre. Let us
denote by ^ one such configuration, in which a 3s electron has been
3
promoted,
(17.66)
In (17.66) JRs means an s-orbital that is orthogonal to all the s-orbitals
of ^ , Is, 2s, 3s (it is automatically orthogonal to p- and cZ-orbitals), and
0
at this point our treatment departs from that of Fermi and Segre. In the
latter, the excited s-orbital 7s is a physical orbital of the thallium atom ;
states belonging to the excited configuration 6s6p7s have actually been
observed and their energies have been measured by the methods of
optical spectroscopy. In a configuration such as ^ , given by (17.66), it
3
is not clear what meaning one should attach to the s-orbit Bs. In order
to elucidate this point let us return to the ground configuration ^ and
0
recall how the orbits Is to 3d of which it is composed are obtained in the
variational Hartree-Fock method. As explained in § 11.4 we build from
these orbits, each of which has the usual form
a many-electron wave-function T which has the required symmetry
0
and quantum numbers L, S, M , M . Terms obeying Hund's rule have
L s
a simpler structure than the others : the magnetic substate of such a
term with M = L, M = S (sometimes called the 'stretched' state)
L s
can be written as a single Slater determinant. Then we write down the
expectation value in the state T of an electronic Hamiltonian 3? which
0
is the sum of the kinetic energies of the electrons and of their potential
energy due to their attraction by the nucleus and to their mutual
repulsion (smaller magnetic interactions are neglected at this stage).
The expression (V \ 34? |T ) is expanded into a sum of one-electron and
0 0

--- Page 714 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 699
two-electron matrix elements by the rules of § 11.6, and minimized
with respect to the trial radial functions P (r) which are considered as
nl
unknown. The generalization whereby the configuration ^ of (17.63)
3
is introduced and the orbit Es as defined is now straightforward : as a
trial many-electron wave-function we use the linear combination
where Y is a wave-function belonging to ^ and having the same
3 3
quantum numbers L, S, M , M as *F. The latter, being the 'stretched'
L 8 0
substate of a Hund's term, is a single Slater determinant. (We have
tacitly assumed that the configuration ^ contains only one state Tg
3
with the right quantum numbers; we shall return to this point later.)
We formulate again the expression (Y| 3? |T) and minimize it with
respect to the functions P (r) and also with respect to the new trial
nl
function Us, which appears in the configuration ^ , and with respect to
3
the normalizing variable a. Since the set of trial functions *F is wider
than that of the functions Y , which it contains, it must be better than
0
or at least as good as the latter for the calculation of every physical
parameter. The parameter of interest to us is the hyperfine structure
and this is naturally the reason why we have augmented the set of the
trial functions by adding to it components to which the hyperfine
structure is most sensitive.
We now write out the wave-function T which has the same quantum
3
numbers as T . Since ^ results from ^ through promotion of an
0 3 0
electron from one s-orbit to another it is clear that Y will have the
3
same ~M. and L as T , provided each electron has the same m in T^
L 0 l
and TQ. Let us write the configuration ^ as P2Q and the stretched state
0
T as
0
where P is the orbital 3s, Q stands for 3d*, and Qs is the Slater deter-
minant formed from the 3dx electrons with all their spins up, thus
adding to a total spin S = S; the orbitals belonging to the other
z
closed shells of ^ are omitted in this shorthand notation. T itself is a
0 0
Slater determinant so that
We can similarly define
as the state of spin S with M = S — l.
s

--- Page 715 ---

700 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
The configuration ^ can be written as PR Q and two states with
3
total spin 8 and M = S can be formed from it: T where the spins of
s 3a
the electrons Ps and Es couple to zero and which is obviously of the
form
and the state where the spins of P and R couple to a spin S' = 1
which in turn couples to the spin 8 of Q to give a spin S again. This
state can be written
which is justified by the fact that, from (17.72), (17.73),
We can now write the expression to be minimized as
where T and T = T are given in shorthand notation by (17.69) and
0 3 3&
(17.73). (We shall show shortly that the state Y given by (17.72) is
3a
not coupled to T .) Minimizing (17.75) with respect to a, we find
0
If we use our assumption that the admixture from the excited configu-
ration is small, (17.76) becomes, in a good approximation,
which resembles the perturbation formula (17.62). It remains to vary
(17.75) with respect to all the radial functions P of ^ and with respect
nl 0
to Us. Since the admixture a is very small, it is a good approximation
to take for the P the unperturbed functions of the configuration ^ ,
nl 0
that is the functions that minimized (T | Jtf? l^o)- This enables us to
0
prove the statement that the state T given by (17.72) is not coupled
3o
to T in first order in a; using (17.69) and (17.72) we can rewrite
0
To + aT^, where a is an arbitrary small quantity, as

--- Page 716 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 701
This equation shows that as far as terms 0(<x2), T results from T by
0
giving a first-order increase (x.E/^/2 to P. Since, however, the functions
P have been determined precisely by the condition that they should
make <Y | 3i? |T ) a minimum, it follows that with T given by (17.78)
0 0
Since we also have from (17.78)
we must have
and, according to (17.77), the value of a that minimizes <T| 3? |T> and
gives the amplitude of *F in T vanishes. If we now minimize (17.75)
3a
with respect to Bs we get for this function an integro-differential
equation that must be integrated numerically. We shall not write out
its expression which is lengthy (see Abragam, Horowitz, and Pryce
(1955) where slightly different notations are used). Once this is done
and Es is known we can calculate % using eqns (17.64), (17.68), and
(17.73) and we find, neglecting terms of order 0(oc2),
or if we write
It was hoped originally (Abragam and Pryce 1951a) that the bulk of
the anomalous hyperfine structure in the iron group was due to the
configuration ^ and a numerical calculation of # as given by (17.84)
3
was attempted for Mn2+ (Abragam, Horowitz, and Pryce 1955) leading
to a value of ^ = — 0-3 . 10~3 in atomic units (instead of the experi-
mental value x & —3). This dismal failure is due to three facts.
(i) The unperturbed wave-functions P for the configuration ^ of
nl 0
Mn2+ were not available at the time of the calculation and those of the
cuprous ion Cu+ for the configuration Is22s22^63s23^63d10 were used

--- Page 717 ---

702 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
instead. It turns out that in the equation satisfied by Bs there occur
overlap integrals of the type (3s, 3d\ l/r \3d, Es) with large positive
12
and negative parts which nearly cancel each other, making the integrals
very sensitive to small changes in the wave-function. In consequence,
large errors may result through starting from incorrect unperturbed
wave-functions.
(ii) The assumption that the configuration ^ is the only one to
3
contribute appreciably to the anomalous hyperfine structure is un-
warranted, as will appear shortly. Instead of the set of functions *F
given by (17.63) a wider set should be used in the expression (Y| JJ? \*¥)
to be minimized, namely,
In this equation M^ belongs to a configuration <6 where an s-electron
i
from the shell i is promoted. Such a calculation was not attempted
through lack of adequate computing facilities.
(iii) Last but not least, it is not impossible that a numerical error was
made in the calculation by those in charge of the numerical computation
(W. Marshall, private communication). All further calculations of
anomalous hyperfine structure were made using the so-called core
polarization method to be described now.
17.6. The effect of s-electrons: core polarization
The idea of magnetic polarization of an atomic or ionic core of closed
shells by an unfilled external shell with a total spin S goes back to the
pioneer work of Sternheimer (1951). This idea is physically much easier
to grasp than the configuration interaction method outlined in the
previous section: let us consider a paramagnetic ion, say Mn2+, in the
state S = S = +i where the spins of its five 3d electrons are all 'up'.
z
The electrostatic repulsion between an s-electron of an inner shell, with
spin up, say ls+, and these 3d electrons will not be the same as that for
an electron in the state ls~ (for brevity, in the following, spin up or +
will mean spin parallel to the total spin of the ion).This is a consequence
of the exclusion principle that prevents two electrons with parallel
spins from occupying the same position in space. Mathematically this
principle is built into the formalism by using wave-functions that are
antisymmetric with respect to interchange of both spin and orbital
coordinates of any two electrons. For wave-functions approximated by
Slater determinants this results in the vanishing of the exchange matrix

--- Page 718 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 703
elements of the electrostatic repulsion between electrons of opposite
spins, such as <3*-(l), 3d+(2)| e*/r |3d+(l), 3*-(2)> (eqn (11.25)). It is
12
therefore not unreasonable to think that for the electron with spin up,
the density at the origin, |^(0)|2, will be different from |g?7(0)|2. Can
s
one predict the sign of the difference? Hand-waving arguments can be
produced for either sign. One could argue that the inner ls+ electron
with spin up is kept apart from the outer 3d+ electrons by the exclusion
principle and thus has a greater probability to be pushed near the
nucleus. One would then have
for the spin density at the origin. On the other hand, one can also argue
that for electrons with parallel spins the fact of being kept apart by
the exclusion principle reduces the expectation value of their electro-
static repulsion by so much that on the whole they are less repelled by
each other than by electrons with antiparallel spins. The sign of
(17.86) would then be reversed. Whatever the conclusion reached for
the sign of the spin density at the origin for innermost s-electrons it
would be reversed for s-electrons which are farther removed from the
nucleus than the magnetic 3d electrons, such as the two 4s electrons of
a free atom of the iron group.
In order to settle this question, and more generally to calculate %,
eqn (17.64) is rewritten as
For the 3d group, i goes from 1 to 3 for ions and from 1 to 4 for atoms,
and we again use a variational method. In contrast to the configuration
interaction approach, the wave-function Y for the stretched state of the
ground term (S = S, L = L, L and 8 maximum) is now written as a
z z
single Slater determinant constructed solely from orbitals belonging to
the unperturbed configuration ^ given by (17.63). The difference from
0
the conventional function YQ is in the choice of the trial one-electron
functions which, in the conventional Hartree—Fock method, are given
by (17.67). The trial wave-functions P (r) of (17.67) are assumed to be
nl
independent of the orientation of the spin, a restriction made for the
sake of simplicity. On the other hand, we have explained that the
radial functions of electrons with spin up and down are expected to be
different because of their different coupling with the magnetic d-
electrons. This is why it is reasonable to use trial one-electron functions

--- Page 719 ---

704 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
where P%i(r) is not required to be equal to P~i(r). This method is called
the unrestricted Hartree-Fock (UHF) method. The new ionic wave-
functions *F form a wider set than the functions ^* of the conventional
0
Hartree-Fock method, sometimes called restricted Hartree-Fock
method (RHF) because there the restriction is imposed that the orbitals
must be independent of the orientation of the spin. The functions Y are
therefore at least as good as the functions T ; the foregoing argument
0
suggests that they can be expected to be considerably better for the
description of the spin-density near the nucleus, that is of the anomalous
magnetic hyperfine structure. We shall not describe the procedure used
for writing down and solving the equations obeyed by the spin-
polarized orbitals in the UHF method (any more than we did for the
conventional RHF method). Some details and an abundant bibliography
can be found in the review articles of Freeman and Watson (1965),
Watson and Freeman (1967a).
The calculated values of # are in surprisingly good agreement with
experiment considering the uncertainties involved in the calculation.
First, the spin densities, that is the differences between the electronic
densities |^ (0)|2 and |<p~(0)|2 are, for each shell, very small fractions
g s
of the electronic densities themselves. Secondly, the contributions of
different shells have opposite signs and cancel each other to a large
extent. The calculation shows that the electronic densities behave as if
electrons with parallel spins did attract each other, the second of our
hand-waving conclusions. This is why, for the inner shells Is, 2s where
the electrons with spin up are attracted away from the nucleus by the
magnetic electrons 3d, the spin density is negative, i.e. opposite to the
orientation of the ionic spin. On the other hand, the spin density is
positive for 3s electrons and, in free atoms, for 4s electrons also.
Table 17.1 (Freeman and Watson 1965; Watson and Freeman 1967a)
TABLE 17.1
Ion Mn2+(3cZ5) Fe2+(3d8) Ni2+(3d8) Mn°(3d54s2)
£ (atomic units) -3-34 -3-29 -3-94 -0-54
Is shell contribution to % -0-16 -0-21 -0-27 -0-03
2s shell contribution to # -6-73 -7-80 -9-62 -6-63
35 shell contribution to £ + 3-55 +4-72 +5-95 + 3-23
4s shell contribution to ^ +2-89
illustrates these statements. The ratio

--- Page 720 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 705
is always a very small number; for example, for Mn2+: p & 6 x 10~6,
±
/> fv 3 X 10-3, /> ^ 1-1 XlO~2.
2 3
The foregoing discussion was centered on the hyperfine structure in
the iron group. For the 4/ group of the rare earths where the orbital
momentum is largely unquenched the effects of core polarization are
only a small correction and cannot be separated from orbital hyperfine
structure except for ions with the half-closed shell configuration 4/7
(see § 5.4 for a discussion).
Comparison between core polarization and configuration interaction
The explanations provided for the origin of the anomalous magnetic
hyperfine interaction by these two approaches appear to be qualitatively
different. It is true that quantitatively both are variational methods
that go beyond the conventional Hartree—Fock calculations by enlarg-
ing the set of the many-electron trial functions T from which are chosen
the solutions that minimize (T| 3? |Y). However the ways in which
these sets are enlarged in either method appear to differ considerably.
In the configuration-interaction method the one-electron orbitals, from
which are constructed the many-electron Slater determinants, are the
conventional functions (17.67) with a radial part independent of the
orientation of the individual electronic spins, but more than one
configuration ^ is required to represent adequately the ionic functions
Y. In contrast, a single configuration is used in the core-polarization
method but the one-electron orbitals from which it is built are spin-
dependent as explained earlier. We now show that this distinction is
more apparent than real and in the process we shall point out the main
theoretical weakness of the core-polarization method, however attrac-
tive its other features. Let us write again the ionic wave-function Y,
used in the configuration-interaction method, with T given by (17.69)
0
and Y by (17.73). Equation (17.88) can be rewritten
3&
If we disregard the last term of (17.89), which is there to make T an
eigenstate of S, we see that the wave-function Y is nothing but a spin-
polarized UHF function where the two radial trial functions with spin
46

--- Page 721 ---

706 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
up and spin down used in the core-polarization method are, respectively,
It remains to explain the last term of (17.89). Its absence in the core
polarization method is the main weakness of the method, in that the
Slater determinants it uses are no longer eigenstates of S. In principle
this is a serious matter, since the true ionic state is an eigenstate of S,
and the errors committed through disregard of this fact are very
difficult to evaluate theoretically (see, for a discussion and references,
Freeman and Watson 1965; Watson and Freeman 1967a; Moser 1967).
The justification for the neglect of a proper symmetrization of the
wave-function T is twofold: first, beyond the lightest atoms the
calculations become unmanageable; secondly, even in its imperfect
form the agreement of the UHF method with experiment is satisfactory
in most cases.
To conclude this discussion one can say that the origin of the anom-
alous magnetic hyperfine structure in the iron group is well under-
stood qualitatively. It is due to the existence of a finite spin-density at
the nucleus for which the method of core polarization provides both a
satisfactory physical model and calculated values in reasonable
agreement with experiment.
17.7. Finer effects in the theory of hyperfine structure
Since the discovery of Endor (see Chapter 4) the accuracy in the
measurements of the various parameters of hyperfine structure has
increased considerably. Many small effects that hitherto could be
observed only by the very precise method of atomic beams have
become accessible to paramagnetic resonance measurements. Some of
these effects are described below.
Hyperfine structure anomaly
This effect (not to be confused with the anomalous hyperfine struc-
ture discussed in the last section) is related to the finite size of the
atomic nucleus. When an s-electron penetrates inside the nucleus the
magnetic properties of the latter are no longer those of a point-like
magnetic moment. Instead the electron probes the detailed distribution
of the magnetization inside the nucleus which, like the electronic
magnetization of an atom, has a part due to the magnetic spin moments
of the individual nucleons and a part related to their orbital motion.

--- Page 722 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 707
For two different isotopes the shapes of these distributions may be
quite different and the ratio of their contributions to the magnetic
hyperfine structure has no reason to be equal to the ratio of the nuclear
magnetic moments. Another effect related to the former, but not
identical with it, is the fact that although two isotopes have the same
charge Ze, it may be distributed differently inside the two nuclei. This
modifies the electronic wave-function inside the nucleus, which is
another reason why the ratio of the hyperfine structures may differ from
that of the nuclear moments.
Let A I. S and A' I' . S be the scalar parts of the hyperfine inter-
S S
actions for two isotopes with spins / and /' and magnetic moments
fx = y M, [AJ = y'Jil''. The hyperfine anomaly can be defined as the
z n
parameter A in the following relation
The ratios A /A^ and y^/y'n can be obtained in principle from an
S
analysis of Endor measurements (or for y //n from NMR measurements
n
performed on diamagnetic compounds) and A, extracted from (17.91),
can be compared with theoretical values derived from nuclear models,
thus providing a test of their validity. For light nuclei A is very small,
of the order of a few parts in a million, but for heavy nuclei where,
because of the large Z, the electron spends an appreciable part of its
time inside the nucleus, A can exceed 1 per cent. In the analysis of
Endor measurements leading to A one should beware of spurious
effects (see, for example, § 4.8) which can simulate a hyperfine anomaly.
These are the second-order magnetic hyperfine structure and the
pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effects to be described in § 18.1; also, very
light nuclei have a zero-point motion that modifies the value of the
wave-function at the nucleus, making the ratio A /A$ different from
S
7n/7n even though the electronic penetration inside the nucleus is
negligible. The best example of this situation is provided by the nuclei
of 6Li and 7Li in silicon where an apparent A of the order of 1 per cent
was observed (Feher 1959).
The Sternheimer antishielding factor
We have already mentioned at the end of § 17.1 the fact that in
contrast to magnetic hyperfine structure, quadrupole interactions in
ions do not require the existence of an unfilled shell of d or / electrons;
if a diamagnetic ion such as say F~, with only closed shells, is placed

--- Page 723 ---

708 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
in a non-cubic environment, there will be an electric-field gradient at
the nucleus. This gradient can be written as
where q is the gradient produced by the charges outside the ion and
G
y^ is a coefficient, introduced and calculated by Sternheimer, which
represents the effect of the polarization of the closed shells by the
external charges. It is large and negative, reaching values of the order
of 100 for the heaviest ions. In paramagnetic ions the electrons belong-
ing to the unfilled shells d and produce at the nucleus electric field
gradients proportional to (r~3), which are usually larger than those
given by (17.92) for diamagnetic ions even when the anti-shielding
amplification is included. We must also add to the electric-field gradient
at the nucleus the effect of the polarization of the closed shells of the
paramagnetic ions by the electrons of the unfilled shell. This problem
has also been considered by Sternheimer and the polarization is taken
into account by writing
The remarkable fact is that in contrast to ly^l, which is large, \B \ is a
Q
small number of the order 0-1-0-2.
Without going into details of the heavy calculations of y^ and E it
q
is interesting to explain qualitatively the disparity between their
magnitudes. Let us consider a spherical electronic shell polarized by a
point charge e with polar coordinates R and 0. In the absence of this
charge the ground state \0) of the electronic shell is spherically
symmetrical and the expectation value of the quadrupole gradient
(V ) = e(0\ P (cos 0)/r3 \0) vanishes. The point charge itself produces
zz 2
at the nucleus a gradient q = e(P (cos ®)/E3). Its electrostatic inter-
c 2
action with the closed shell is e2/|r—R|, which admixes excited states
\n) into the ground state \0) so that the expectation value of
P (cos 0)/r3 has now a finite value that can be written symbolically
2
Let us assume first that the charge density of the closed shell
vanishes for r > R (external polarizing charge). A typical term in the
expansion of e2/|r—R| will be

--- Page 724 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 709
and (17.94) can be rewritten
where the expression multiplying eP (cos 0)/i23 appears as an anti-
2
shielding factor.
Suppose instead that the charge density of the closed shell vanishes
for r < R (internal polarizing charge). In the expansion of e2/|r—R| we
must now replace (17.95) by e2P (cos 0)P (cos 0)£2/r3 and (17.96) is
2 2
replaced by
A comparison of (17.96) and (17.97) shows that because of the factor
(B/r)5 in (17.97), where B/r < 1, the anti-shielding factor is very much
larger when the polarizing charge is outside the closed shell than when
it is inside. In applying these arguments to the electrons of the unfilled
shells d or / which play the role of the polarizing charges, we have the
problem that they are neither inside nor outside the closed shells but
are spread all over them. However the main contribution to their
quadrupole interactions comes from regions near the nucleus, where
they play the part of inside charges with respect to the closed shells
and thus should have a small anti-shielding factor. The foregoing
argument (Watson and Freeman 1967a) is admittedly very crude but
perhaps sufficient to give an inkling as to the causes of the smallness of
1^1 relative to lyj.
The different values of (r~3)
Equation (17.61), which is the operator expression of the hyperfine
structure for the manifold of states belonging to a term (L, S), contains
(besides the universal constants /3 and H) three types of parameters;
first, the purely nuclear constants y and Q; secondly, what one might
n
call angular parameters, namely f and (L\\ a \\L), which are determined
by the algebra of vector coupling of angular momenta; and thirdly, the
so-called radial constants, (r~s) and fc(r~3}, which have to be computed
numerically from a detailed knowledge of the electronic wave-functions.
We have explained in some detail in §§ 17.5 and 17.6 the origin of the
scalar interaction proportional to /c(r~3). Whatever the language used
to express it, core polarization or configuration interaction, this
interaction is due to the presence at the nucleus of a finite density of

--- Page 725 ---

710 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
unpaired s-eleetrons and it is a large effect, responsible in particular for
the bulk of magnetic hyperfine structure in $-state ions. Apart from
this 'anomalous' scalar interaction, the remainder of (17.61) or what we
might call its 'normal' part, results from the following assumptions:
the term (L, S) is constructed from a single configuration ^, which
contains a single unfilled shell; the one-electron orbitals are of the
restricted Hartree-Fock type given by (17.67); the values of L and S
are such that only one (L, S) term can be constructed from the configura-
tion ^. The last condition is always fulfilled if the term (L, S) obeys
Hund's rule; in that case | and (L\\ a \\L) are given by (17.46). A direct
consequence of these assumptions is that a single 'radial' parameter
(r~3) multiplies all the 'normal' terms of (17.61). We have already
shown in the preceding section that this assumption is invalid for the
quadrupole interaction, because of the polarization of the inner shells
by the electrons of the unfilled shell.
On the other hand it can be shown, using rotational invariance
arguments, that (17.61) is the most general expression that can be
written a priori for magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole hyperfine
structure within a term (L, S) if the constants f and (L\\ a \\L) can be
considered as adjustable parameters rather than well-defined algebraic
functions such as those given by (17.46). This is a direct consequence of
the fact that the hyperfine interaction is a sum of one-electron operators
and that individual electrons each have a spin \ (Sandars and Beck
1965). However the common practice is to retain for f and (L\ a \\L)
their calculated values and to assume that for the three terms of
(17.61), proportional respectively to <r~3}, f(r~3), and (L\\ a \\L)(r~3),
it is the constant <r~3), which can have three different values, that we
write as (r^8), (r~3), and (r~3). We had already done so for the quadru-
pole interactions in eqn (17.93). We can even extend it to the
'anomalous' scalar term by taking — K = I and introducing a fourth
value (r~3). We can then rewrite the magnetic hyperfine structure as
where we have used for the spin gyromagnetic factor the correct value
g rather than the approximate value 2.
s
In contrast to the comparatively large effects connected with the
'anomalous' scalar coupling the difference between (r^3) and <r~3> is
rather small. Experimentally a difference of 10 per cent has been

--- Page 726 ---

HYPERFINE STRUCTURE 711
observed in oxygen and fluorine atoms (Harvey 1965) and 1 per cent
for Sm (Woodgate 1966). There is no evidence so far for such a difference
from paramagnetic resonance experiments. The origin of this difference
must again be sought in the insufficient accuracy of restricted Hartree-
Foek functions. The arguments we used in § 17.6 to convince ourselves
that radial functions with spin up and spin down should be slightly
different is by no means restricted to s-electrons but applies equally
well to all the electrons of the ion whether they belong to closed shells
or to the unfilled shell, provided there is an unfilled shell. Furthermore
there is no reason to restrict the one-electron orbits with different values
of the magnetic quantum number m to have the same radial part : as
l
long as there is an imbalance between the values of m in the unfilled
l
shell, the variational equations to be satisfied by two trial radial
functions P and P i ^ will be different, and in particular P will
nZw?j n m nlmi
differ from P _ . It is clear that under these conditions closed shells
wi> w
will bring a finite contribution to the orbital and to the dipolar hyper-
fine couplings and that the corresponding values of (rjT3) and (r~3) have
no reason to coincide. The same will naturally also be true for the
contributions of the unfilled shell.
For quadrupole interactions the fact that P ^ P i_ will lead
nim n m
to a finite quadrupole interaction for 8- state ions with half -filled shells
such as 3d5 or 4/7 since it is proportional to
Such a small but finite quadrupole interaction has been observed in
paramagnetic resonance for the Eu2+(4/7) ion in cubic symmetry in
CaF (Baker and Williams 1962) and also in the free atoms Mn and Eu
2
(Evans, Sandars, and Woodgate 1965).
In the foregoing we had implicitly assumed that the non-relativistic
expression (17.30) for the one-electron Hamiltonian was correct.
However, as Sandars and Beck (1965) have shown, the magnetic part
of the hyperfine interaction can still be represented correctly by the
expression (17.98) when relativistic corrections, neglected in the
derivation of (17.30), are taken into account. It is therefore very
difficult to separate relativistic corrections from those due to the use of
unrestricted Hartree-Fock functions (UHF). Nevertheless this can still
be achieved under favorable circumstances for the scalar term
<7(r~3}(S . I) of (17.98). If this term originates in core polarization it
s
implies an unpaired spin-density at the nucleus and thus makes

--- Page 727 ---

712 HYPERFINE STRUCTURE
possible the existence of a hyperfine structure anomaly observable by
comparing the spectra of two isotopes. A scalar term of relativistic
origin is not necessarily associated with a finite spin-density at the
nucleus and in this case does not lead to a hyperfine structure anomaly.
The hyperfine structure measurements on the europium atom (4/7, 8S)
show a small isotropic magnetic hyperfine structure but no hyperfine
anomaly for the isotopes (151,153). Apart from contributions arising
from the breakdown of -LS-coupling, the hyperfine structure is therefore
attributed mainly to relativistic effects (Evans, Sandars, and Woodgate
1965) (see § 4.7).

--- Page 728 ---

18
IONS IN A WEAK
CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
WE are now in a position to apply the mathematical techniques
described in the previous chapters to the determination of the wave-
functions and energy intervals of the low-lying levels of paramagnetic
ions embedded in a crystal field. In this chapter we shall examine
the weak-field case that applies to the 4/ shell of the rare earths, delay-
ing the intermediate field case applicable to the 3d shell of the iron
group until Chapter 19.
18.1. Kramers ions in a weak crystal field
For experimental reasons the observability of paramagnetic
resonance in an ion is dependent on the existence of at least two energy
levels separated by a frequency gap AE/h which, using the technique
of microwave spectrometers rather than infra-red spectrometers, rarely
exceeds, say, five wave numbers (2 mm wavelength).
This condition singles out the so-called Kramers ions with an odd
number of electrons which, in the absence of a magnetic field, will
always possess at least a pair of degenerate levels. These levels, through
the application of a magnetic field, can be separated by the desired
amount. Kramers ions also have other features such as relatively long
relaxation times and relatively narrow lines that make them partic-
ularly suitable for magnetic resonance work. Among them $-state ions,
which are much less sensitive to the crystal field than any other ions,
also occupy a special position.
If we exclude the cubic multiplet F which requires a special treat-
8
ment, the description of the resonance properties of all Kramers ions in
the rare-earth group follows a uniform pattern. The ground multiplet
(J, L, S) of the free ion will be split by the crystal field into J + |a
doublets, and resonance, with a few exceptions, will in general be
observed only between the two substates of the lowest doublet, split by
the magnetic field. To calculate this splitting, that is the resonance
frequency, we must know the wave-functions that span the ground
level. This knowledge will enable us to calculate the magnetic 'tensor'
g and, for an ion with a nuclear spin, the hyperfine 'tensor' a and
voi pai
the nuclear electric quadrupole coupling constant.

--- Page 729 ---

714 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
In the course of the determination of the wave -functions of the
ground doublet the positions and the wave-functions of the excited
doublets will also become known. These data are of interest, first
because they can be confronted with the results of optical spectroscopy
and susceptibility measurements, secondly because, for temperatures
that are not too low, resonance can be observed between substates of
some excited doublets as well, and thirdly because, as discussed in
Chapter 10, down to the lowest temperatures obtainable, the relaxation
properties of the ground doublet are determined by the positions and
the nature of the excited levels.
The calculation proceeds in a series of steps :
(1) In first approximation one assumes that J is a good quantum
number. From the assumed symmetry of the environment an expan-
sion of the type (16.1) or (16.10) is written for the crystal potential,
and the P| are then replaced by the equivalent operators 0\. Secular
equations are set up and solved for the wave -functions of the various
doublets. In much paramagnetic work, the coefficients Al(rk) in the
expansion (16.10) are largely unknown and are adjusted to give the best
fit with the various experimental quantities listed above.
(2) The first-order approximation will often be inadequate and the
crystal potential will drag in admixtures from excited multiplets. These
can be handled mathematically by means of the off-diagonal matrix
elements (e/ + l|| a, /5, y ||e7) listed in Table 20. It may sometimes (e.g
with one electron or one hole) be simpler to go back to the (£, 8)
representation .
(3) Further theoretical refinements can be introduced if warranted
by the accuracy of the experimental data. For example, the spin-orbit
coupling 2 £t(l* • si) results in a small departure from .L$-coupling,
represented by an admixture into the ground state ( J, L, S) of contribu-
tions from excited states (J, L' ', $'). Thus for the free ion we have a
state of the form
Here all terms have the same value of J, and otherwise follow the
selection rules A£ = 0, ±1; AS = 0, ±1; but AL = AS = 0 is
excluded because the ground term, which obeys Hund's rules, is
unique.
For the magnetic moment JJL = — /?(L+2S) of the ion the matrix
elements (LS, . . . | (x \L'S', . . .} vanish unless L = L' and 8 = $', and

--- Page 730 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 715
it therefore follows that changes in the magnetic moment due to the
admixtures will be of order a2.
For the magnetic hyperfine operator (17.30), summed over all the
electrons, the orbital term obeys the selection rule A£ = 0, AS = 0
and therefore has no matrix elements linear in a. However the spin
dipolar term, which obeys the rule AZ/ = 0, ±1, ±2; AS = 0, ±1 may
well have matrix elements between | J, L, S) and | J, L1', S') leading to a
first-order correction due to intermediate coupling.
Fortunately for electron paramagnetic resonance experiments in
solids, intermediate coupling plays a less important role in the ground
(L, S) multiplet than in excited multiplets. Nevertheless, its effects
are quite appreciable in the 5/group (see Chapter 6).
For ions with a large hyperfine structure or low-lying excited states
or both, other second-order effects may be observable. Cross terms
between the electron Zeeman coupling and the hyperfine coupling give
a term, linear in the nuclear spin and in the applied field, which adds to
the nuclear Zeeman coupling (we shall call it the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman
coupling); and in second order the magnetic hyperfine coupling can
give a pseudo-quadrupole interaction.
The pseudo-nuclear Zeeman coupling is given by the formula (where
c.c. stands for the complex conjugate expression)
where —y HHe . I is the operator for the magnetic hyperfine structure.
n
\0) represents the ground doublet where the two substates are left
unspecified. (18.2) can be written as
where a is a tensor with components
The restricted summation in (18.4) is over all the excited doublets
where the two Kramers-conjugate substates of each excited doublet
give the same contribution. (18.4) can be written as the expectation
value (0\ s&yq |0) in the ground doublet of the operator

--- Page 731 ---

716 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
Here the Hermitian operator £&„„ is the symmetrized product of three
operators: The first and the last are
time-odd, the middle one time-even. The symmetrized product s/ is
vq
time-even and therefore has the same expectation value for the two
substates of the ground doublet \0). We can therefore treat a. as a
PQ
constant. We shall see later that the situation is different if the ground
state is a quadruplet F .
8
If J is a good quantum number we may write
and (18.4) becomes
(18.6)
where for brevity we have written A for (J|| A \\J) and N for (J|| N \\J).
The relative importance of the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman coupling is
given by the dimensionless expressions (18.4) or (18.6) for a . Roughly
yq
speaking, its magnitude is of the order of a Zeeman electron energy
()HQ divided by the splitting between two Kramers doublets, arising
from the crystal field. Electronic hyperfine fields He of the order of a
million gauss are not uncommon in the rare-earth group and fiH* can
be as large as a 100 cm"1, which is comparable to the crystal field
splittings. In many cases the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman coupling will be
as large or even larger than the direct nuclear Zeeman coupling. One
may notice that the tensor a is not fundamentally different from the
chemical shift tensor a, well known in nuclear resonance. The difference
in order of magnitude between a and a is due to the proximity of
excited levels in the rare-earth group (10 to 100 cm"1 as contrasted with,
say, 10 eV or 105 cm.-1 for an excited electronic state of a molecule).
Also, compared with nuclear magnetic resonance measurements on
light atoms we have a much larger value of (r~3) due to the high atomic
numbers Z in the rare -earth group.
The second-order term from the magnetic hyperfine structure can be
written
Some caution should be exercised here in using the concept of time-
even operators, as pointed out in § 15.4: the operator H^CHe with
Q
p ^ q is not time-even, for its transform by time reversal, 6H*CHeO~l

--- Page 732 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 717
is equal to itself, HeCHG, rather than to its Hermitian conjugate
v q
(HlCH*q)+ = H\CHl. Eqn (18.7) can be rewritten as
Here %yffi2(H^CH*+H*CHg) is a Hermitian time-even operator and
therefore within the manifold of a Kramers doublet, a component b
vq
of a symmetric tensor, which is a real number. On the other hand
%yffi{H]pH*q—H*£!Hfy is a time-odd anti-Hermitian operator, which
within the same manifold can be written i 2 ^cff°a where d™ = —d™
a
is real. The commutator (Iplq—Iqlp) can be written i]T ej>qrlr> where
r
s is the usual antisymmetrization symbol and (18.8) can be rewritten
PQr
where
The first term in (18.9) is the pseudo-quadrupole hyperfine inter-
action and the second a contribution that adds to the magnetic hyper-
fine interaction. Both are smaller than the first-order magnetic
hyperfine interaction by a factor of the order \HynHG\j^W, a ratio of the
order of 10~3. The pseudo-quadrupole interaction may be a very much
larger fraction of the true quadrupole interaction, but since an accurate
theoretical estimate of the latter is very difficult one might well
question the interest of calculating these terms. A point to remember in
calculating the second term of (18.9) is that it makes the ratio of the
hyperfine structure coefficients for two isotopes different from that of
their y . This effect may be a nuisance in so far as it interferes with the
n
measurement of the hfs anomaly, due to the penetration of the electron
inside the nucleus.
The experimental results for ions of the rare-earth group have been
discussed in Chapter 5, together with theoretical interpretations that
embody most of the features outlined above. The extra hyperfine terms
given above are of course most important in Endor measurements,
some specific examples being given in Chapter 4. (Further small terms
are mentioned in § 5.10.) It is thus unnecessary to give here an exten-
sive discussion of the application of the theory to Kramers ions. We
may however remark that for such ions in crystal fields possessing an

--- Page 733 ---

718 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
axis of threefold or sixfold symmetry, there may not be an allowed
resonance transition within the ground Kramers doublet. The selection
rule AJ = ± 1 requires that the wave-function for one member of the
z
doublet must contain at least one value of J = M that differs by one
z
unit from one of the values in the conjugate wave-function for the other
member of the doublet. This produces the following result.
If there is an axis of g-fold symmetry, the doublet wave-functions
will be generally of the form
For resonance to be observable we need
where n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . For sixfold symmetry (q = 6) this means that
resonance is observable in the doublets spanned by
but not in doublets spanned by
For threefold symmetry the wave-functions are more complicated in
that they contain all values of M differing by 3 instead of just by 6, but
the doublets in which resonance is allowed are otherwise unaltered.
For fourfold symmetry (q = 4) the position is different; all possible
doublets are of the form
or
where the higher values of M do not of course occur for lower values of
J. Inspection shows that resonance will be allowed in all such doublets
for values of J > f, the lowest half-integral value to occur for the
ground state of a 4/ or 5/ ion. For twofold symmetry the rules are
clearly the same (with the addition that resonance is also possible in
either doublet of J = f). We see therefore that we should always expect
a resonance in the ground state of a Kramers rare-earth ion in a
substance such as CaW0 , even if the fourfold symmetry of the Ca2+
4
site is not reduced by local charge compensation when a tripositive

--- Page 734 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 719
rare-earth ion replaces it. On the other hand resonance cannot be
observed, for example, in the ground doublet ±f of 4/13, Yb3+, *Fi in
lanthanide ethylsulphate or trichloride, for which q = 6.
18.2. Rare-earth ions in cubic symmetry
Following a suggestion by Bleaney (1959a,b), that rare-earth
Kramers ions in cubic environment should provide suitable maser
materials if their ground states were the quadruplet F , there have been
8
many studies both theoretical and experimental of the properties of
rare-earth ions in cubic surroundings. Trivalent rare-earth ions M can be
introduced substitutionally to replace divalent positive ions in such
cubic crystals as, say, CaO, CaF , MgO. Charge compensation will then
2
demand the presence of a negative charge in the neighbourhood of
M3+. If the compensating charge is, with respect to M, in a direction
(100) the symmetry of the distorted crystal field 'seen' by M will be
tetragonal; it will be trigonal for a direction (111); for any other
relative orientation of the compensating charge the symmetry will be
lower. The compensation may also be long range, the negative charge
being sufficiently removed from M to leave it in a symmetry
indistinguishable from cubic. It is this situation that we propose to
examine in this section. Often the cubic resonance spectrum will be
observed simultaneously with spectra of lower symmetry, coming from
ions M, less fortunate in their charge-compensating environment.
It has also proved possible to create in these environments divalent
states of rare-earth ions. If in their normal trivalent state these ions,
such as holmium or thulium, have an even number of electrons they
will now in the divalent state be Kramers ions. No charge compensation
is needed in this case and the symmetry is cubic.
Theoretically the problem of a cubic crystal potential is attractive
because for /-electrons this potential depends on two constants only as
ineqn (16.13),
V = AJPi+Af
%9
the polynomials P and P being defined in (16.11) and (16.12). The
4 6
wave-functions of the various crystal levels and the ratios of the
intervals between the different levels depend on a single constant,
the ratio of the fourth to sixth order potential; this makes it possible
to tabulate them for all the values of J occurring in the ions of the rare-
earth group at least in the framework of first-order theory, where J is
taken to be a good quantum number. Such tables (see Lea, Leask, and
Wolf (1962)) are organized as follows.

--- Page 735 ---

720 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
For each value of J it is convenient for practical reasons to write the
cubic potential as
Here O and 0 are the equivalent operators
4 6
where the 0\ are defined and tabulated in Table 16 and
The values of (J\\ p \\J), (J\\ y \\J) are tabulated in Table 20. The
quantities .F(4) and F(6) are certain positive factors common to all the
matrix elements of the 0^ for a given k separated out to keep all
the eigenvalues in the same numerical range. (In Lea, Leask and Wolf
(1962) they are not always the same as the values of F given in the
Tables 17.)
Two constants W and x are then defined by
or
With these definitions, B^BQ = 0 for x — 0 and i oo for x = ± 1 so that
all possible ratios of BJB are included in the range —1 < x < 1. The
Q
Hamiltonian is then rewritten as
For each value of x all the matrix elements of the operator in the
curly brackets are known and its eigenvalues and eigenstates are then
found by numerical calculations and tabulated, W being the single
energy parameter.
We know from Tables 3 and 7 the decomposition of each manifold
J into the irreducible representations F of the cubic group. If the
i
representation occurs only once, the kets that span it are determined
from symmetry alone and are independent of x. Their expressions are
given in a closed form in Tables 4 and 9 and the eigenvalues are
linear functions of x. We shall call such representations 'isolated'.
From (18.14a,b) we see that the sign of W is that of B and the sign of x
6

--- Page 736 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 721
is determined by BJB$. Since the /? and y are tabulated, to know the
signs of B± and B$ it is necessary to know only those of A± and A . If we
6
accept the qualitative validity of the point-charge model the latter are
given in the various coordinations by eqns (16.15)-(16.17).
Resonance in F and F
6 7
The pattern of resonance is very similar to that observed for lower
symmetry since F and F are Kramers doublets. The only difference
6 7
is that the magnetic 'tensor' g and the hyperfine 'tensor' a are isotropic
and the nuclear electric quadrupole interaction vanishes.
For 'isolated' F or F doublets the values of g' = g/A are independent
6 7
of x\ they are given in Table 22.
A number of experimental results are given in Tables 5.14 and 5.15.
They are close to the simple theoretical values given in Table 22,
but comparison with the free ions shows that even when intermediate
coupling is taken into account there are small discrepancies that are
presumably to be attributed to a certain amount of covalent bonding,
or to effects of the zero-point vibrations of the lattice (see § 5.8), or to
both.
18.3. The quadruplet F
8
We have been faced several times with the problem of finding the
matrix elements of a vector operator such as say the magnetic moment
pi or the electronic hyperfine field H , within a certain manifold. We
e
saw in particular that thanks to the Wigner-Eckart theorem, a vector
V could be replaced within a manifold J by aJ where a was a constant
depending on the vector V. Similarly in cubic symmetry within a
manifold F or F a vector could be taken proportional to a fictitious
4 5
angular momentum 1 defined by eqn (14.5). We have emphasized the
point that this representation was possible because the reduction of the
direct products 3)J x Q)J in the rotation group, or of F x F and
4 4
F x F in the cubic group, contained only once the representation of
5 5
the group spanned by the components of a vector, namely &1 for the
rotation group and F for the cubic group.
4
On the other hand, we have shown in § 15.6 that within a Kramers
doublet we could represent a time-odd vector V as V = T . s, where
s = o/2 was a fictitious spin and T a so-called 'tensor'. This result had
nothing to do with spatial symmetry but resulted solely from invariance
with respect to time reversal.
We require now to find the matrix elements of a vector within a
47

--- Page 737 ---

722 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
quadruplet F . This quadruplet is spanned by four kets |m) which we
8
have represented in § 14.4 as |±f) and |±i), meaning thereby that
under the rotations of the cubic group they transform in the same way
as the eigenstates |J, m) = ||, ±|) and ||, ± J) of an angular momen-
tum J = f. When the quadruplet F results from the reduction of a
8
given representation 2J, the states |m) can be expanded as a linear
combination ^,Cj m\J, m) as shown in Table 9, but an arbitrary
J,m
F can naturally be spanned by kets with arbitrary values of J.
8
We can define in the manifold F three operators S , § , § , com-
8 x y z
ponents of a fictitious spin 3 = f, by the condition that they have the
same matrix elements in the basis \m) as the components / , / , /
x y z
of an angular momentum fl = f have with respect to the states
|f, m). S S , S have naturally the usual commutation relations
xt y z
[£„, S,] = iS.,etc.
We see from Table 8 that the reduction of the direct product
F* x F (which is equivalent to that of F x F , since all the characters
8 8 8
of F are real) contains F twice. It is not too difficult to show by an
8 4
adaptation of the proof of the Wigner-Eckart theorem that the matrix
elements of a vector within a manifold F can be specified by two
8
constants. The detailed argument can be found, for instance, in Koster
and Statz (1959). We also see from Table 8 that it is the symmetrical
direct product [F xF ] which contains F twice, and therefore
8 8 s 4
according to the rules given in § 15.9 only time-odd vectors have non-
vanishing matrix elements inside the manifold F .
8
This result and also the form of the operator equivalent to a vector
V within F can be obtained by an elementary method (Ayant,
8
Beloritzky, and Rosset 1962). In the representation |m) the component
V has no off-diagonal matrix elements (m\ V |w'}, since a rotation of
z z
77/2 around the z-axis, which must leave V invariant, multiplies such
z
matrix elements by *l7r(m~m }. A rotation by TT around the axis Oy
e
changes (m\ V \m) into
z
Hence we see that the non-vanishing matrix elements of V are of the
z
form

--- Page 738 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 723
As a consequence, V can be written as
z
with
or
It is obvious from the nature of cubic symmetry that we must also have
It may be more convenient to use instead of (18.17) the form
with a' = a +ib{3S(S + !) — !}. This has the advantage that the
curly bracket in (18.20) is the operator 0° which vanishes for S < f.
Using (18.20) we can write the Zeeman and magnetic hyperfine
Hamiltonians in the form
Diagonalization of the spin Hamiltonian for F quadruplet
8
Complete diagonalization of the spin Hamiltonian (18.21) is obviously
rather complicated and we shall confine our treatment to two special
cases: (A) the remaining terms are all small compared with the first
term g($(S . H), which we therefore diagonalize first and then treat the
remaining terms by first-order perturbation theory; (B) the nuclear
spin is zero, and the complete electronic Zeeman interaction is
diagonalized exactly for an arbitrary direction of H. In the former of
these two cases we are assuming that the terms of third degree involving
the parameter U are also small compared with A(S . I); this situation
is likely to occur in the 3d group rather than the 4/ group, except for
the half-filled shell 4/7, 8$, where small terms of the third and even
higher degree may be required (see § 5.9).
(A) Perturbation treatment
Suppose that the external field H is directed along an axis OZ whose
direction cosines are (%, n , n ) with respect to the fourfold axes
2 3

--- Page 739 ---

724 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
(x, y, z) of the cube. Since g is isotropic the first term in (18.21) is
diagonalized simply by changing to a coordinate system (X, Y, Z) of
which OZ is the Z-axis. We introduce the component
and two other components S , S along two orthogonal axes that we
x Y
need not specify. We can write
together with two similar equations for S , S .
y z
On our assumption that all the terms except <//3(S . H) = gflSH are
z
small, first-order perturbation theory requires that we calculate the
expectation values (§1), (/§jj), (S3) in a state where S = M. From
Z z
(18.23), we get
where we have omitted terms of odd powers in § and S which
x Y
clearly have a vanishing expectation value in the state S = M.
z
The first term of (18.24) is n\M* and the second and the third have the
same expectation value:
The fourth term is more complicated
The last term of (18.26) can be written

--- Page 740 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 725
On summing over the similar terms for (S*), (§*) we find that in the
approximation in which we are working the eigenvalues of (18.21) are
given by
where the angular variation of the last term is iust that of the quantity
(B) Exact diagonalization of the electronic Zeeman interaction
This involves finding the eigenvalues of the Zeeman Hamiltonian
Z = — (x . H in the general case when the cubic terms are not small
(Ayant, Beloritzky, and Rosset 1962).
In order to deal with dimensionless quantities we take for
V = -pjfl the matrix form (18.16). Then, taking for V = -/*«//?,
z x
V = —JUylP the expressions (18.19), where a and b are related to
y
P and Q by (18.18), and calculating from the known matrices for S
x
and S those for 8^, and §*, we find the matrix expressions for V and
y x
Vy In fact it is sufficient to give the non- vanishing matrix elements of
V = V +iV that determine those of V and V :
+ x y x y
For P = 3Q the cubic coefficient b in (18.19) vanishes and the matrix
elements (18.29) take their normal values for an ordinary multiplet
$ — f. The secular equation for the eigenvalues (W//3H) = y of
Z = — fji . H is obtained from (18.16) and (18.29). It is given by
where n n , n are the cosines of the magnetic field with respect to the
l9 2 3
fourfold axes.
The absence of odd powers in (18.30) is a straightforward conse-
quence of invariance with respect to time reversal. The energy levels are
linear with H but they are neither equidistant nor independent of the
direction of the field, unlike an ordinary quadruplet S = f. For an
arbitrary orientation of the magnetic field with respect to the cubic
axes, transitions can be induced between any of the four levels.

--- Page 741 ---

726 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
If H is along the z-axis the roots of (18.30) are ±P, ±Q, as follows
immediately from (18.16). The selection rules and relative intensities
obtained from (18.29) are, in this case, with the oscillatory field normal
to Oz, as shown in Table 18.1.
TABLE 18.1
Transition Energy Relative intensity
2P (P-3Q)2
2Q (3P-G)'
P-Q 3(P+W
The transitions |A$ | = 2 are forbidden for this particular orienta-
Z
tion. It may be noted that if a rotating field H^ is used, some of the
transitions may require right-handed and others left-handed circular
polarization (Bleaney 1959a,b).
It may be convenient, especially for a study of trigonal distortions
of the cubic field to take as axis of quantization OZ a body diagonal
(see below). Three new operators S , S , S are defined through
x T z
together with operators V > VY> Vz given by
x

--- Page 742 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 727
In the representation where S is diagonal and S and S have the
z x Y
usual matrix form we find from (18.33) the non-vanishing matrix
elements of V , V , V using (18.32):
x Y z
Apropos of the last term in (18.34) it is worth pointing out that when a
body diagonal is chosen as axis of quantization OZ, a matrix element
such as (f | V I — f) need not vanish since it is left unchanged by a
z
rotation ±277/3 around OZ. Also,
Prom (18.34) we find that when the field is along OZ, two of the
eigenstates are | ±|) and the other two a mixture of the states | ±f ).
The eigenvalues are
Obviously (18.36) could have been obtained directly by solving the
secular equation (18.30). It is clear from (18.35) that the transitions
AJf = 0, ±3 between the levels «/ and y^ are forbidden for an
3
oscillatory magnetic field perpendicular to the trigonal axis, and it can
be shown that they are also forbidden for an oscillatory field along this
axis.
Comparison with experiment
A good example for which we can compare the foregoing theory with
experiment is the spectrum of Er3+, 4/11, 4/i£ in MgO. In a cubic field
the J = V5 manifold splits into five levels, of which three are F
8
quadruplets; resonance has been observed in the lowest of these, which
is the ground state of the ion in MgO. Assuming a value of <J|| A ||J) = f

--- Page 743 ---

728 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
(the simple Lande value) Descamps and Merle d'Aubigne (1964) found
that the resonance results, both for H along a fourfold and along a
threefold axis, corresponded to
In the expansions
the G and C' , tabulated by Lea, Leask, and Wolf (1962), are func-
M M
tions of the parameter x defined in eqn (18.14). This parameter is
overdetermined by the two relations,
and, using the tables of Lea, Leask and Wolf (1962) slightly different
values of x are obtained from the two eqns (18.38), respectively:
x = 0-765 ±0-005 from P',
and
x = 0-715±0-005 from Q''.
However a unique value of x can be obtained if in the relation
\L = —/JAJ, A is given a value smaller than f by a factor 0-983. Such
a reduction could perhaps be caused by a spread of the wave-functions
of the magnetic electrons on the neighbouring atoms, a phenomenon
which as we shall see in the chapter on covalent bonding leads to a
reduction of the orbital ^-factor below its value of one. This reduction
is similar to those found necessary in several F , F doublets, and in
6 7
this case it leads to corrected values P" = 5-01, Q" = 1-960 which
correspond to a unique value ofx = 0-72.
A number of other results in reasonable if not perfect agreement with
the theory of the F quadruplet are mentioned in § 5.8. Here we merely
8
note that if F occurs only once in the decomposition of DJ, the values
8
of P', Q' are independent of x and can be calculated from eqns (18.37)
and (18.38) using the values of C , C' given in Table 9, yielding
M Mj
the results:

--- Page 744 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 729
In general there are two possible ways of choosing which pair of
states to call | ±f) and which | ±1). A natural choice, which has been
followed above, is to denote by \M) that state which under a rotation
through an angle co = 77/2 or TT about the Oz axis simply multiplies the
state by e~}(oM. Then reference to Table 9 shows that in any F
8
quadruplet for J up to f the | J, Mj) states always contain one pair in
which M j = ±i occurs, and on the above choice these become
\M) = |±i), while the companion pair contains Mj = ±f, which
similarly become | ±f >. The same result holds for higher values of J.
The effect of crystalline distortions on a F quadruplet
8
There is an important qualitative difference between the transitions
+ !<-»— |, +|<->—| on the one hand, and the transitions
+f <—> + J, — J <—>• —| on the other: the former occur within two pairs of
Kramers-conjugate states. It follows that in first order they are
insensitive to small distortions of the crystal potential. Also, when
higher-order Zeeman effects are considered, the change in resonant
frequency involves terms proportional to H*. On the other hand, the
frequencies of the transitions +| <-> +i> — J ^ — f (and obviously also
±| <-> =F J, if allowed) are affected by a crystalline distortion in first
order, and by a higher-order Zeeman effect in second order. In large
magnetic fields along a fourfold axis, for example, random crystalline
distortions are likely to result in two relatively broad transitions of
energy (P—Q)±v.H2, while the transitions at 2P and 2Q (modified by
terms in H3) are much sharper.
For a tetragonal distortion, whose effect is small compared with the
energy separation to other cubic levels, we may add a term
D{S2— iS(S + l)} to the Zeeman Hamiltonian —(fx . H), the components
z
of — JJ.//J being given by eqns (18.17), (18.19) or the matrix elements
(18.16), (18.29).
For a trigonal distortion a similar term can be added, the OZ axis in
this case being the threefold axis. The components of — fx/j8 are then
given by the matrix elements (18.34), (18.35).
If the effect of the distortion, expressed by the constant D, is much
larger than the Zeeman energy, we can regard the quadruplet F as
8
split into two independent Kramers doublets, each of which has a
<7-'tensor' (neglecting off-diagonal effects of the Zeeman interaction
between the two doublets) given by the following formulae.

--- Page 745 ---

730 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
(a) Tetragonal distortion
The two doublets are clearly |±f) and l±i)- For the former, it
follows from the last matrix element in (18.29) that we must identify
one pair of states as | + ) = |— I) and |— } = |+f). Then, using
also eqn (18.16), we have
and
where 6 is the angle that H makes with the axis of tetragonal distortion.
Here we note that g is not zero as it would be if our F were an
L 8
ordinary D% quadruplet, for which (P—3Q) = 0.
For the other doublet | ±) = | ±i), we have
and
(b) Trigonal distortion
For the doublet | ±f } we may take | +f ) and | — f ) as basic states and
we find from (18.34) that the 'tensor' g defined in (15.31) has off-
qa
diagonal components
whereas g = g = 0.
xn TA
The tensor G defined by (15.38) has one non-vanishing component
VQ
and
No resonance is observable in principle in this doublet.
The doublet |±i) behaves quite normally and from (18.34), (18.35)
we find
with

--- Page 746 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CBYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 731
18.4. Representation of an irreducible tensor within the
quadruplet F —quadrupole coupling
8
To find how many constants are necessary to define an irreducible
tensor T\ whose components provide a representation D2 of the
rotation group, we turn again to group theory. A matrix element such
as (m\ T\ |m'}, where \m) and \m'} are the kets that span F , transforms
8
under the rotations of the cubic group like
The product F xF contains F once and F twice. A priori three
8 8 3 5
constants are thus necessary to define a tensor T within a multiplet F .
2 8
However, as we saw in § 15.9, more detailed predictions can be made if
the tensor T has a definite time-reversal parity. This is the case for the
2
quadrupole tensor which is time-even. Therefore according to the rules
given in § 15.9 it is the antisymmetric product [F x F ] which must
8 8 A
contain F and F , and we see in Table 8 that it contains each of
3 5
them once. Two constants are thus necessary to specify the quadrupole
moment tensor of the ion inside a multiplet F .
8
We can obtain the same result by writing out the combinations of
various products of the components 8 S , S of the fictitious spin f,
X9 y z
which transform according to a given representation of the cubic group.
We have already seen that S 8 S and 8^ S^ S* each provide a
X9 y9 z 9 9 z
representation of F . 5£—5j and 3S2 —8(8 + 1) transform like F and
4 z 3
(S S +S S ), etc. like F . A second representation of F is provided by
x y y x 5 5
S (S* —8) +(8^—8^)8 etc., but it is time-odd and cannot represent an
Z y Z9
electric quadrupole moment. It is contained in the symmetrical product
[r xr ] .
8 8 s
Within F we have the following relations :
8
The quadrupole interaction within F can thus be written (cf. § 17.1) as
8

--- Page 747 ---

732 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
where m and n are two constants that depend on the particular manifold
F under consideration. They are equal if F is an ordinary quadruplet,
j 8= i 8
If the multiplet F results from the decomposition of a single J,
8
and
The constants m and n can be calculated from the expansions (18.37)
of the kets |m) that span F .
8
The pseudo-nuclear Zeeman coupling given in formula (18.4) will
have the following general form quite different from that of a Kramers
doublet:
18.5. Non-Kramers ions in the rare-earth group
These ions have been much less studied by resonance methods than
the Kramers ions, for several reasons.
(a) There may be no degeneracy left even in the absence of an
applied magnetic field and the distance between two neighbouring levels
may be outside the range of microwave spectrometers. This require-
ment is all the more restrictive because, as we saw in Chapter 10, the
relaxation times of non-Kramers ions are so short in many cases that
only at helium temperatures can the resonance be observed at all. The
two sublevels between which the resonance can be observed must then
necessarily be the lowest or among the lowest of the bound ion, in order
to have non-negligible populations.
(b) When the symmetry of the surroundings is such that there is still
some degeneracy left in the absence of a magnetic field, this degeneracy
can be lifted by slight local departures from the general symmetry due
to crystal imperfections. This will result in an inhomogeneous broaden-
ing of the line.
We now consider briefly the main features of magnetic resonance for
non-Kramers ions of the rare -earth group.

--- Page 748 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 733
If the crystal potential had purely axial symmetry, a manifold J
would be split into a singlet J = 0 together with J doublets J = ±M.
z z
However in practice we find axes with 6-, 3-, 4-, or 2-fold symmetry.
(a) Sixfold symmetry effectively exists in the ethylsulphates and
anhydrous trichlorides : with C symmetry there are matrix elements
3h
| AJf | = 6, which couple together the states M = ±3, and also couple
states Jf = ±6 with the state M = 0 and hence indirectly with one
another. The behaviour of states |£) = 2 ^M 1-^0 with M = 3p is thus
different from those with M = 3p ± 1 .
(b) Threefold symmetry, typical of the double nitrates with nearly
C symmetry, gives additional matrix elements |AJf| = 3 which
3v
couple more states together but do not further lift the degeneracy
found with sixfold symmetry.
(c) Fourfold symmetry, for which CaW0 is a typical host lattice,
4
provided the full local symmetry at the Ca2+ site is not disturbed by
charge compensation when a tripositive lanthanide ion is introduced,
produces matrix elements |AJf | = 4. These couple together the states
M = ±2, and hence indirectly those with M = ±6; also states
M = ±4 (and hence indirectly Jf = ±8) are coupled to M = 0. Thus
in this case states with even values of M behave differently from those
with odd values of M .
(d) Twofold symmetry produces matrix elements |AJf| = 2, which
couple all states of even M to one another, and all states of odd M to
one another.
As an example of time-conjugate states that are not coupled with
one another we may take the lowest doublet of Pr3+, 4/2, 3# in the
4
double nitrate, for which the states given by eqn (5.67) are
The Zeeman Hamiltonian Z = A/?(J . H) has opposite expectation
values in the two states |£ ) and || ), separating them in energy by
0 0
There are no off-diagonal elements between the two states (18.53),
making it impossible to induce resonance transitions between them.
This is a direct consequence of the discussion in § 15.4: for an even
number of electrons, 02 = +1, and a time-odd operator such as Z
has opposite expectation values in two states conjugated by time
reversal but with no matrix elements between them. Note that although

--- Page 749 ---

734 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
values of M differing by unity appear in || ) and || ), the change in sign
0 0
of the coefficient of the | ± 1 > state (which follows from the rules for the
time-reversal operator given in § 15.5) makes the matrix element
(lol J. |fo> = 0.
A local distortion of crystal symmetry would result in a change
AF(r) in the crystal potential seen by the ion. AF(r) is a time-even
operator and, as shown in § 15.4, it will have the same expectation value
in || ) and || ), which displaces both levels by the same amount and will
0 0
not affect the resonance frequency. However there is nothing to prevent
AF(r) from having off-diagonal matrix elements between || ) and || )
0 0
of the general form
Inside the doublet spanned by |£ ) and \J ) we may introduce a
0 0
fictitious spin S = \ with
The spin Hamiltonian for this doublet can then be written as
with
where the last expression for g\\ is appropriate to a rare-earth ion. The
eigenvalues of (18.56) are given by
where A2 = A^ + A^. The eigenstates are no longer just |£ ), \j ) but
0 0
become
These are no longer conjugate states under time reversal, and the
operator S has matrix elements between them. This makes it possible
z
for an oscillatory field, parallel to the z-axis and at the frequency
corresponding to (Hco), to induce transitions between them. The
transition probability is given by the square of the matrix element,
1/^*1, whose value is given by

--- Page 750 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 735
If A2 < (ftco)2, this will of course be considerably smaller than that of
an ordinary allowed transition.
The existence of distortions represented by the terms in A^, A is to
y
be expected on the basis of the Jahn-Teller theorem, to be discussed
in Chapter 21, which predicts that a state with electronic non-Kramers
degeneracy may be unstable against small distortions of the surround-
ings, which would lower the symmetry of the crystal potential and lift
the degeneracy. One may suppose that A^ and A vary from one site to
y
another, independently of each other, and in a random way. If we
assume a Gaussian distribution for A^ and A , A2 will have an exponen-
v
tial distribution of the form
where A2 is the average value of A2.
Since the transition probability according to (18.60) is proportional
to A2 the resonance line will have an unusual shape which (assuming
all other causes of broadening negligible) is given by
The resonance is usually observed by keeping the microwave
frequency (00/2-77) constant and sweeping the field, which we assume
from now on to be parallel to the crystal axis : H = H . We define
z
the symbols
in terms of which eqn (18.58) can be rewritten
giving
For values of h < H , we further introduce the symbol
Q
and the line shape obtained by sweeping the field will have the form

--- Page 751 ---

736 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
The line will have a cut-off for h = 0 which from (18.63) is at the high-
field end, a maximum for h = h , or H = H —h and a rather long tail
Q Q 0
towards low fields. Increasing the microwave frequency should make
the line narrower since h is proportional to co"1, but also less intense
Q
since the transition probability varies as co~2. The existence of such a
cut-off is independent of the particular form (18.61) assumed for the
distribution P(A2) and follows from (18.58) and (18.60). It permits a
more accurate measurement of g\\ than would be expected from the
overall line width.
If a hyperfine structure is present, it is necessarily of the form
AI S and the only change is, for each hyperfine component, the replace-
Z Z
ment in (18.58) of g\\(5H by (g\\fiH+Am), where m = I. The hyperfine
z
lines are identical and separated from each other by an interval A.
If A is smaller than g\\ph , they will overlap. A quadrupole term of the
Q
form P\\I'l will not affect the resonant frequencies since all transitions
are of the type Am = 0.
Para-electric transitions
It must be pointed out that the fictitious spin S = | introduced above
for non-Kramers doublets differs in an important respect from that
discussed in § 15.6 for Kramers doublets. There the three components
of S were time-odd operators, whereas here S is time-odd but S , S are
z x y
necessarily time-even operators. This is a serious drawback in the spin
S = -J formalism for a non-Kramers doublet, and Mueller (1968) has
suggested alternative formalisms in which this drawback does not
occur. A simple possibility is to take an S = 1 manifold in which the
S = 0 state is suppressed, or removed by a term such as DS* away
z z
from the two S = ± 1 states, which are left as a non-Kramers doublet,
z
well isolated if D !> (Ha)); (cf. § 3.14, where we led up to the subject of
non-Kramers doublets by discussing the case of S = 2 with a splitting
of the form D/S2).
An important point made independently by Williams (1967) and
by Culvahouse, and Schinke and Foster (1967) is that for a non-Kramers
ion at a site lacking in full inversion symmetry, there may be terms
linear in an electric field for a non-Kramers doublet. For example, if the
crystal field has odd parity for reflection in a plane normal to the
#-axis, the system may have a permanent electric dipole along this axis
whose interaction with an applied electric field may be represented (in
the S = | formalism) by a term of the form g^pS^y.. In C
symmetry, where the only plane of even reflection symmetry is normal

--- Page 752 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 737
to the z-axis, there will be an equivalent term for the ?/-axis, giving
altogether
Thus if random crystal distortions are also present, the Hamiltonian
becomes (with S = J)
which gives again eigenstates of the form (18.59), with suitably
modified values of the coefficients a, b. The change in resonance
frequency resulting from an applied static electric field follows from
(18.58) if we replace A2 by
but with experimentally feasible values of the electric field it may not
be easy to detect. More important is the fact that transitions between
the two components of the doublet may be induced by a resonant
microwave electric field perpendicular to the z-axis. The matrix elements
for this and the transition rate are given by eqns (3.109)-(3.111); a
significant feature is that the line shape is different (see Fig. 3.26).
Transitions are now allowed for A^ = A = 0, because the perpendicular
tf
electric field has matrix elements between the states |f ), || ), in
0 0
contrast with the magnetic field along the z-axis, for which matrix
elements between the states exist only for ||), |T?) and hence depend on
the presence of a crystalline distortion. Experimental verification that
the transitions in some praseodymium compounds are primarily due
to the microwave electric field is discussed in § 3.14 (see particularly
Fig. 3.27).
Non-Kramers doublets with 'allowed' magnetic transitions
It was shown in § 3. 14 that for an ion with S = 2 and a large splitting
of the form DS^, the S = ±2 states are slightly split if a term
z
E(S2 — $2) = FJ is present. The latter has matrix elements between the
X
S = 0 state and the S = ±2 states, giving a splitting of the latter
z z
states, with an allowed transition between them when an oscillatory
magnetic field at the resonance frequency is applied along the z-axis.
This differs from the situation considered above because the V\ term
may have a unique value determined by the crystal potential in a
perfect crystal instead of a range of values associated with crystal
imperfections or Jahn— Teller distortions. The transition +2<— >> — 2
then has a sharp energy as far as the crystal potential is concerned,
48

--- Page 753 ---

738 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
giving a line of normal shape whose width is determined by other
interactions such as spin-spin and spin-lattice relaxation.
A similar situation can arise for non-Kramers ions of the rare-
earth group on sites of 2-, 3-, 4-, or 6-fold symmetry. Since it is easier
to discuss a concrete example, we consider the case of Tb3+, 4/8, 7 F^ in
the ethylsulphate (Baker and Bleaney 1958), where the ground doublet
is \J ) = [±6) with a small admixture of the state |J ) = |0). The
Z Z
component ^ of the magnetic moment parallel to the applied field does
z
have matrix elements between the two states spanning the ground
doublet even in the absence of local distortions of the crystal potential
and the lines are relatively narrow. The experimental value g\\ = 17-72
is very nearly the value 12A = 18 that one would expect for a doublet
| ±6), but it is precisely the difference g \\-l8, together with a splitting
A = 0-387 cm"1, that we have to explain.
In the absence of an applied field it is simplest to start from the states
The term F| of the crystal potential admixes into |6«) a certain
amplitude q of the higher state |0) and pushes it down by a certain
amount A; but |6a) is not coupled to |0). In first-order perturbation
theory
where
The use of perturbation theory is justified a posteriori by the fact that
experimentally it turns out that |c| < d.
The basic states are then, withp2+q2 = 1,
In the presence of a magnetic field it is convenient to replace |f) and
|?/} by the linear combinations

--- Page 754 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 739
The Zeeman coupling — (x . H == A/3(J . H) has no matrix elements
between |f) and \rj) and opposite expectation values in either state:
With a fictitious spin S = J the spin Hamiltonian becomes
where
The experimental results for terbium in the ethylsulphate are
discussed in § 5.6. It turns out that the major part of the difference
between the measured value g\\ = 17-72 and the simple theoretical
value of 18 is due to the influence of intermediate coupling, which leads
to a value A = 1-491 rather than f. Also there are appreciable correc-
tions to A through matrix elements of the crystal field with excited
states such as J = 5.
18.6. Non-Kramers rare-earth ions in cubic surroundings
There are few experimental resonance results on non-Kramers rare-
earth ions in cubic surroundings and we shall limit ourselves to a brief
group theoretical discussion of the form to be expected for the spin
Hamiltonian.
The ground level will belong to one of the five non-specific represen-
tations of the cubic groups I\ to F . I\ and F are non-degenerate
5 2
singlet states and as shown in § 15.4 have no permanent moment. There
is (in first order) no Zeeman or magnetic hyperfine energy in those
states. The quadrupole interactions vanish also because the spatial
symmetry is cubic; they would not vanish for a non-cubic singlet.
For the representations F and F , the direct products have the same
4 5
decomposition:
Since the representation F appears only once on the right-hand side of
4
(18.76) it follows that, as already explained at the beginning of § 18.3,
all vectors V have within either F or F the same representation, apart
4 5
from a proportionality constant. Furthermore, as shown in § 15.9, F
4
is contained in [F xF ] and only time-odd vectors V have non-
4 4 A
vanishing matrix elements inside F or F . We can thus write the
4 5
Zeeman coupling, as gr/?(H . S), and the hyperfine coupling as-4(I . S),
where S is a fictitious spin S = 1 .

--- Page 755 ---

740 IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS)
On the other hand, just as for F , two constants are necessary to
8
describe the nuclear quadrupole coupling. This coupling is represented
by the same formula (18.50) as for F ; the only change is that the
8
fictitious spin is S = 1 rather than f. The formulae (18.51) giving m and
n should be replaced by the following:
For instance in the F triplet for J = 3, we find from the kets in
5
Table 4 that
The doublet F
3
This has some rather peculiar features. The direct product
F x F = Fi + Fa + Fg and the matrix elements of any vector vanish
3 3
within the manifold F , which has neither Zeeman nor magnetic
3
hyperfine energy. Since F x F (more precisely [F x F ]^) does contain
3 3 3 3
F , this doublet does however have a non-vanishing quadrupole
3
coupling.
The components —e ^ (3z?— rj) and — e ^ (x%—yz) of the electronic
i i
quadrupole moment, which transform according to F , will have the
3
same representation, apart from a proportionality factor, in all doublets
F and we can therefore without loss of generality choose for the states
3
spanning F the eigenstates of J = 2,
3
and use as components of the electronic quadrupole moment,
3J 2-J(J + l)and(J*-J3).
2
The matrix representation of the quadrupole interaction which is
proportional to (see eqn (17.21))

--- Page 756 ---

IONS IN A WEAK CRYSTAL FIELD (/ ELECTRONS) 741
becomes in the basis |a'), \br)
which, by introducing a fictitious spin s = \ with
corresponds to a spin Hamiltonian
We can always define two new states \a) and \b) through a unitary
unimodular substitution of the basis states
This is equivalent to a 'rotation' of the components of s (which has
nothing to do with a spatial rotation of the coordinate axes). If we
choose for the 'rotation'
where s , s , S are the new components of the fictitious spin, the
x y z
Hamiltonian (18.81) takes the symmetrical form
We have explained in § 13.2 how coefficients such as p and q of the uni-
modular transformation (18.82) are related to those of the three-
dimensional 'rotation' (18.83).

--- Page 757 ---

19
INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS
(THE IRON GROUP)
19.1. Effect of the cubic crystal potential
WE have stated earlier that in the iron group, as contrasted with the
rare-earth group, the crystal potential is as a rule much stronger than
the spin-orbit coupling and that in a first step of the calculation the
latter can be disregarded altogether. At this stage the distinction
between Kramers and non-Kramers ions disappears, for the relevant
quantum number is L rather than J and it is an integer for both types
of ions.
A second difference from the rare-earth group arises from the impor-
tant role played by the cubic crystal potential. In most compounds
where resonance of iron-group elements has been observed, even if the
local symmetry 'seen5 by the paramagnetic ion is lower than cubic, the
cubic part of the crystal potential is much larger than components
of lower symmetry and it is very instructive for a first orientation to
examine the behaviour of the various ions in a field of cubic symmetry.
An inspection of Table 19 shows that the ground terms in the iron
group are S, D, F. The first is an orbital singlet unaffected by the
crystal potential in the absence of spin-dependent forces. Table 3
shows that D terms are split into a doublet F and a triplet F , while
3 5
F terms split into a singlet F and two triplets F and F . The cubic
2 4 5
potential energy may be written (eqn (16.13)) as V = AJP^ (the
cubic
sixth-order term gives a vanishing contribution for ^-electrons) where
P is defined in (16.11). Within a (L, 8) term, P can be replaced by the
4 4
equivalent operator /L4 (r4)0 (L), the values of jff = (L\\ ft \\L) being
4 4
given in Table 19 while 0 = #£+50* is defined in Table 16.
4
Using the matrix elements of the 0\ operators given in Table 17
and the expansions of the wave-functions that span the various levels
I\, given in Table 4, the energy levels of the paramagnetic ions in the
cubic field are easily computed. For D terms, with L = 2, we have

--- Page 758 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 743
and for F terms, with L = 3, we have
whence
The triplet F thus always lies between the singlet F and the triplet F
5 2 4
and nearer to the latter by a factor ~. With B± = /L4 (r4), these results
4
correspond to the splittings shown in Figs. 7.3-7.6.
If we assume that the point-charge model gives correctly at least the
sign if not the magnitude of the cubic potential, we see from eqn (16.15)
that A is positive for octahedral coordination but negative for cubic or
4
tetrahedral coordination, eqns (16.16), (16.17). Since, for a single d-
electron, (l\\ p \\l) = -^ is positive, (see Table 18), it follows from (19.1)
that for such an electron in octahedral coordination the triplet F is
5
lower than the doublet F by
3
In the point-charge model this becomes |(e2/R)((r4)/.R4). More generally
J
from the signs of (Z|| /? ||Z) in Table 18 and the formulae (19.1), (19.2),
the nature of the ground multiplet within the iron group in octahedral
coordination will be
In cubic or tetrahedral coordination the ground multiplets will be
The degeneracy and the spin of the ground level of an iron-group ion
in a field of cubic symmetry can be predicted by a simple qualitative
argument that makes it easy to memorize the important results (19.3),
(19.4). Let us choose, for instance, octahedral coordination; assuming
the validity of the point-charge approximation, let us consider for a
single e£-electron the two wave-functions x2—y2 and xy which belong
respectively to F and F and are obtained the one from the other by a
3 5
7T/4 rotation around the z-axis. The function xy vanishes along the
#-axis and t/-axis where four of the six negative charges surrounding
the paramagnetic ion are situated. The electrostatic repulsion between

--- Page 759 ---

744 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
a d-electron and these charges will thus be smaller for the xy function
than for the x2—y2 function (which has maxima along these axes) and
the triplet F will be lower than the doublet F . The 3d wave-functions
5 3
that span F are usually called ds in the literature, while the two
5
functions of F are called dy (an alternative nomenclature is respectively
3
t and e ).
2g g
With more than one d-electron, we obviously lower the energy of the
ion by placing further electrons in the orbitals de at lower energy.
On the other hand, because of Hund's rule we also reduce the energy
of electrostatic repulsion between the electrons by giving to the total
spin 8 the maximum possible value. When there is a conflict between
the two rules, as will be the case for more than three eZ-electrons, we
assume that Hund's rule should be the determining factor. This
corresponds to the assumption of a crystal potential too weak to break
the L8- coupling (we shall return to this question in Chapter 20 when
discussing covalent bonding). The ground states are then as shown in
Fig. 7.7. With one or two electrons in the de shell, there are three
possible arrangements with parallel spin, giving a triplet orbital ground
state. However, three electrons with parallel spin give a half-filled ds
shell, with only one possible arrangement; thus d* has a singlet orbital
ground state. At d* one electron must enter the dy shell in order to have
parallel spin, giving a twofold orbital degeneracy, while at d5 both the
de and the dy shells are half-filled, giving an orbital singlet and the
maximum spin 8 = f for the half-filled d-shell. At d* the extra electron
enters the de shell with antiparallel spin, giving a lower total spin; as
for dl, the antiparallel electron has three orbital possibilities, giving an
orbital triplet ground state. Further electrons can only be added with
anti-parallel spin, giving a progressive reduction in the value of 8; the
orbital ground state of d1, like that of cZ2, is a triplet, while for ds, like c?3,
we have an orbital singlet, in this case because the de shell is full and the
dy shell half-full. Finally at d9 we have just one hole in the dy shell, with
a twofold orbital degeneracy; at dw the whole shell is closed.
We have assumed above octahedral symmetry, which gives the de
orbitals a lower energy than the dy orbitals. In cubic (tetrahedral)
symmetry we can proceed similarly, but the dy shell now lies below the
de shell in energy. It is readily seen that the required results are simply
equivalent to working backwards in Fig. 7.7, interchanging the
configurations dn and dw~n, or just by considering the 'holes' rather
than the electrons.
The results for the orbital ground state are summed up in Table 7.2.

--- Page 760 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 745
This gives a useful classification in preparation for the deduction of the
appropriate spin Hamiltonian to describe the magnetic resonance
behaviour. In fact the singlet and doublet ground states can often be
treated together, for the following reason. As we have seen in § 14.2,
the doublet F is 'non-magnetic', and within its manifold there are no
3
non-vanishing matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling A(L . S). If a
crystal field of lower symmetry is superimposed on the cubic field, the
doublet F splits into two orbitals \0) and \0r) (except in the case of a
3
trigonal field which does not split F and requires a special treatment).
3
Since A(L . S) does not couple the ground state \0) to \0') but only to
states \n) lying above \0) by energies of the order of the cubic splitting,
which is much larger than |A|, it will prove possible to use the same
perturbation methods for treating the spin-orbit coupling for the
doublet states as for the singlet orbital ground states. (See however
§21.3).
For simplicity we shall call these ions with singlet or doublet ground
orbital states 'ions of Type A\ while those with triplet orbital ground
states will be called 'ions of Type B\
19.2. 'Singlet' orbital ground states (ions of type A)
In this section we are concerned with ions that have an orbital
ground singlet state well-separated from all excited states. By this we
mean that any excited states \n) that have matrix elements through
the spin-orbit coupling with the ground state |0), lie at energies W
n
such that W — W :> |/L|. We have written 'singlet' in inverted commas
n 0
in the title of this section to signify that, when appropriate, split F
3
doublet states are also included, as discussed in the preceding paragraph.
Our aim is to discover how the ground manifold, which has no orbital
degeneracy left but which still possesses a spin degeneracy of (2$ + l),
is split by the interactions we have not so far included. These inter-
actions are as follows.
Spin-orbit coupling:
Spin-spin interaction (see eqn (16.43)):
Zeeman interaction:

--- Page 761 ---

746 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
Magnetic hyperfine structure (see eqn (17.61)):
where
Quadrupole hyperfine structure (eqn (17.24)):
where
Nuclear Zeeman interaction:
We have put a single prime on the interactions that are even with
respect to components of the orbital momentum L and have non-
vanishing expectation values in the ground manifold, and a double
prime on those that are linear with respect to components of L and
whose expectation value, according to Van Vleck's theorem, vanishes
in the ground state. Thus in first-order perturbation theory, only the
single primed interactions contribute to the splitting of the ground
manifold.
The states spanning this manifold can be written \0) \i) where \0)
represents the non-degenerate orbital wave-function, and \i) specifies
the various (2S + 1) spin-substates.
In taking the expectation values of the single primed interactions it
is convenient to perform the integration over the orbital variables only,
leaving out the spin-dependent parts in the operator form. We obtain
thus a first contribution to what is called the spin-Hamiltonian
where
It would, however, be grossly incorrect to content ourselves with
first-order perturbation theory because the spin-orbit coupling is very

--- Page 762 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 747
much greater than the other interactions listed in (19.6)-(19.13), and
second-order contributions involving the spin-orbit coupling, either
quadratieally or as cross terms with other interactions, may well be
comparable to the first-order terms in (19.14). We can use for the
excited levels of the bound ion, which are eigenstates of the crystal
potential F, the same description as for the ground manifold: \n) \j)
where \n) represents an orbital state with an eigenvalue W and \j) the
n
spin substates. If we remain inside the term (L, S) of the free ion (which
is a necessary condition for eqns (19.5)-(19.12) for the various inter-
actions to be valid), there are as many spin substates, (25 + 1), as for
the ground level. In second-order perturbation theory the relevant
operator is
or, since 2 IJXjl = 1, we can write
3
which is a purely orbital operator that is clearly time-even.
Using the same procedure as for the first-order terms, namely,
performing the integration over orbital variables only, we find that the
double-primed operators bring in second order the following contribu-
tions to the splitting of the ground state:
where
for the term quadratic in the spin-orbit coupling. From the definition
(19.19), we see immediately that
Actually it can be shown from time-reversal symmetry that A is
pq
symmetrical, i.e. A = A and is therefore real. For, since the state
pq QP
\0) is a non-degenerate eigenstate of the crystal field Hamiltonian,
it must coincide within a phase factor with its time-reversed state
6 \0) and hence

--- Page 763 ---

748 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
The cross term between A(L . S) and Z" = /J(L . H) gives
where A is defined in (19.19).
vq
The cross term between A(L . S) and W" gives similarly:
We may also consider cross terms between A(L . S) and single primed
terms of (19.6)-(19.13). First, the spin Zeeman interaction
has no off-diagonal matrix elements between \0) and \n) and there is
thus no second-order contribution from that term. There is, however, a
cross term with the spin-spin interaction which is
where
A time-reversal argument very similar to that used to demonstrate
the symmetry of A shows that A = —A . Since from Hermitian
pq r vq pqr
properties A ^ = A* , it follows that A is purely imaginary. Eqn
r a r r m
(19.24) can then be rewritten
or, using the commutation relations
where

--- Page 764 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 749
From the symmetry of the A it follows that the coefficient A.' is
r qt vq
real but not necessarily symmetrical. In practice (19.27) is smaller than
the first-order effect of spin-spin interaction — pl 8 8 given in (19.14)
jtq p q
and indistinguishable from it.
The cross term between A(L . S) and W'^ will give similarly:
Finally, to be consistent we should add but will not write out the
small cross term between A(L . S) and the quadrupole interaction W' .
Q
Another second-order term which, although very small is by no
means unobservable because it competes with a first-order term also
small, is the nuclear pseudo-Zeeman coupling defined by eqn (18.2).
This is a cross term between the magnetic hyperfine structure W" and
the electronic Zeeman coupling Z" = j8(L . H). The calculation is
clearly identical to that which has given the second-order hyperfine
terms (19.23), provided A(L . S) is replaced by |8(L . H), and yields
with
Gathering together all the above terms, we obtain the so-called spin
Hamiltonian
which we rewrite as
We have already met various spin-Hamiltonians in previous chapters;
for instance in the description of Kramers doublets (eqn (15.36)) or of
the cubic multiplet F (eqn (18.21)). There are, however, important
8
differences between those expressions and the spin-Hamiltonian (19.33).
The former spin-Hamiltonians were written a priori as the most general
expressions in operator form capable of describing the splitting of, say,
a Kramers doublet or a F quadruplet. On the contrary (19.33) does
8
not claim such generality; it is an expression valid to the second order
of perturbation theory only but to that order of accuracy explicit
theoretical expressions are given for the various coefficients that appear

--- Page 765 ---

750 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
in it, which may at least in principle be compared with the numerical
values extracted from the study of the resonance spectrum.
An even more important difference between the previous spin
Hamiltonians and (19.33) resides in the fact that the former were
constructed from components of fictitious spins that bear little relation
to the actual spin of the ion. This was particularly striking in the
description of non-Kramers ions in the rare-earth group where, as
pointed out in § 18.5, different components of the fictitious spin had
different time-reversal properties.
In contrast the spin S in (19.33) is almost exactly the real spin of the
ion. We say almost exactly for the following reason: the coupling of
states of the ground manifold \0) \i) with excited states \n) \j) changes
the ground manifold into perturbed states
where T is a unitary operator. The fi are of first order in the ratio
ni
XI(W — W) while oc- is of second order. A matrix element (Oi\ S \0ir)
n 0 t q
will thus differ from the usual spin matrix element (i\ S \if) by terms
q
of the order of oc^ and (tjP%j', that is in second order only.
n
It follows that to the same approximation the coefficients D , g ,
pg pq
A in (19.33) are indeed tensors (P and u are always tensors since
pq pq pq
I and H are always real vectors). The tensors g and D are always
vq pq
symmetrical but A^ is not necessarily so because of the terms A' .
Q pq
However for symmetry no lower than rhombic, that is if the environ-
ment possesses three orthogonal binary symmetry axes, the off-
diagonal elements D , g , A vanish and all tensors admit these
pq pq pq
symmetry axes as principal axes. We shall demonstrate it for A^
which is the least obvious. According to eqn (19.28)
Since \0) is a non-degenerate eigenstate of the system, a rotation by an
angle TT: B = e~17TLl around the axis Ox changes |0) into itself
±
(within a phase factor) whereas it changes the sign of the operator
inside the symbol (0\ \0). Hence
For lower symmetry it is conceivable in principle to have, in the

--- Page 766 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 751
magnetic hyperfine structure, terms of the form
(A^-A^)(8A-SA) = (A' -A' )(SAI) ,
12 21 3
although no such terms appear to have been observed in practice,
Experimentally at least, the tensors D, g, A, P, and a have so far
always been found to have the same principal axes.
With respect to these axes the spin Hamiltonian (19.33) is usually
rewritten as (see Chapter 3)
For tetragonal or trigonal symmetry
We wish to emphasize once more that (19.33) is not the most general
expression for the spin-Hamiltonian permitted by symmetry considera-
tions. For instance in cubic symmetry in order to describe correctly the
observed spectrum, terms of the form $*+£J+$J have to be added,
and sometimes small Zeeman and hyperfine couplings involving /S*,
/SJ, S* as given in eqn (18.21). These terms can be obtained by methods
z
similar to those used in deriving (19.33) by going to higher orders in
perturbation theory.
A spin Hamiltonian such as (19.33) (augmented if necessary by
higher-order spin polynomials) is the meeting point between the
theoretician who attempts to calculate the various coefficients in
(19.33) from what is known or can be surmised about the crystal
field and the wave-functions of the free ion, and the experimentalist
who, using the methods of computation described in Chapter 3, extracts
from the observed spectrum numerical values for the same coefficients.
19.3. Triplet orbital ground state (ions of type S)
We consider now those ions which in a cubic field have as their
ground level an orbital triplet F or F .
4 5
Cubic symmetry
Assume first that the symmetry is exactly cubic. The degeneracy of
the ground level is then 3(2/S + l) including that due to spin. As we

--- Page 767 ---

752 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
pointed out earlier in § 14.2, within this manifold every orbital vector
can be replaced by an equivalent vector operator ocl, where 1 is a
fictitious angular momentum of magnitude 1. In particular, the spin-
orbit coupling can be written within this manifold as ocA(l . S), the
values of a being tabulated in Table 4. If we neglect the admixtures
into the ground manifold I\, where i is 4 or 5, from excited orbital
multiplets F,, through spin-orbit coupling, we can couple 1 and S
according to the usual rules of angular momentum coupling and obtain
J-multiplets where J is a fictitious total angular momentum that
takes the values S + l, S, \S —1|. (The tilde emphasizes the fictitious
character of J.) In order to have a concrete example, we consider the
ion Co2+ with a ground term *F, split in an octahedral environment into
a ground orbital triplet F , an excited triplet F , and an excited singlet
4 5
F . The spin-orbit coupling will lift the twelvefold degeneracy of the
2
ground manifold into three pseudo-J multiplets J = J, J = |, J = f
separated respectively by
Since for Co2+, which is in the second half of the 3d shell, A is negative
and a, from Table 4, is — f, the doublet J = J will be lowest. Its
^-factor can be calculated by an adaptation of Lande's formula where
the orbital gyromagnetic factor a or, more generally, g is — f rather
l9
than unity:
which for J = J gives
or for g = 2, 'g = — f, gj = V3 = 4-33, to be compared with experi-
s l
mental value obtained for Co2+ in MgO: g = 4-28. (Reasons for the
slight discrepancy will be discussed in Chapters 20 and 21.)
If we tackle the same problem using orthodox group theory we find
that the twelvefold degenerate ground manifold provides a representa-
tion F x D% = F x F of the cubic group which, according to Table
4 4 8
8, is split into:
We recognize F6 as being the level J = | and one of the representations
F as being J = f. The other representation F , and F , originate in
8 8 7

--- Page 768 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 753
the multiplet J = f which in cubic symmetry, according to Table 7,
contains the representations F and F . However, whereas the abstract
7 8
group-theory gives us no indication about the distances between the
four multiplets (19.41), our perturbation approach is much more
explicit. In first approximation the distances between the various levels
are given by (19.39), whereas the splitting of J = f into F and F
7 8
is very much smaller and due to a very much higher-order perturbation
mechanism involving matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling (for
which now the correct form A( L . S) rather than the reduced form
ocA( 1 . S) must be used) between the ground orbital triplet F and the
4
excited orbital multiplets F and F . Phenomenologically the splitting of
2 5
J = f into F and F can be described by an equivalent operator
7 8
(a/6)(J^+J^+J^)addedtothespin-Hamiltonianof J = f. The constant
a would involve the spin-orbit constant A in fourth order, or X in
second order and the spin-spin constant p in first order, or p in second
order. Similarly the Zeeman and hyperfine structure would involve
small terms in Jz and Jb for J — f and terms J^ for J = f with
x x
coefficients that would again be polynomials in A and p: (A4, A2/>, p2 for
the J^ terms and A2, p for the J* terms.)
Coming back to earth, that is to first-order perturbation theory, we
are in a situation very similar to that prevailing in the rare-earth group.
The main part of the magnetic hyperfine coupling will be of the form
A j(I . J) where the constant A j will be obtained by calculating in, say
the state | J, J = J) the expectation value of the magnetic hyperfine
z
structure as defined in eqn (17.61). Thus
For instance, the state J = f, J = f is the state l = 1, 8 = f.
z z Z
The state l = 1 of a multiplet F originating in the reduction of an
z 4
^-term is found from Table 4 to be: |1> = V(i) I—3> + <v/(f) I1)
where | —3} and |1) refer to the value of L , the true orbital momentum.
z
On replacing L by 3 in (19.42) and | ) by 11) ||) where |f) is an eigen-
state of S it is easily found that
Z9
The first term in (19.43) is the contact hyperfine interaction, the second
the orbital hyperfine interaction and the third the dipolar hyperfine
49

--- Page 769 ---

754 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
interaction. For I = 2, L = 3, S = f, f, given by (17.46), has the value
| = — 2/(9x7x5), so that
For J = J the calculation is complicated by the fact that the state
J = i 3, = i is
where # - 1/^6, g = -1/V3, r - 1/V2 (cf- Table 7-18) are Clebsch-
Gordan coefficients; |1), |6), | — 1) the three fictitious l eigenstates
z
given in Table 4; and | — J), | J), If) eigenstates of $3. The result is
It will be seen that the dipolar hyperfine contribution, that is, the last
term of (19.44) and (19.45) is very small, indicating that the distribution
of spin magnetization is not far from spherical.
The nuclear electric quadrupole interaction will obviously vanish
for the state J = ^, since it is a Kramers doublet F of cubic symmetry
6
similar to those discussed in § 18.2. For higher values of J it can be
derived as follows.
Within an orbital triplet state I — 1 we can use for the nuclear
electric quadrupole Hamiltonian a form that is an obvious modification
of eqn (17.24) in the light of the discussion preceding that equation (cf.
also § 18.6):
in which the coefficients m, n are found from the equivalences
The values of m, n for L — 2 and L = 3 are given in Table 21.
Within a manifold (I\, J) we can then replace the operators that
occur in (19.46) in terms of I by similar operators in terms of J giving a

--- Page 770 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 755
Hamiltonian of the form
where the value of the reduced matrix element (J|| a ||J) is found from
the relation
The quadrupole interaction (19.48) has a form similar to that given by
eqn (18.50) for a F quartet, with J replacing S.
8
Finally, we compute the pseudo-nuclear Zeeman effect, arising from
the cross term between the electron Zeeman interaction — (fi. H) and
the hyperfine interaction — y H(l . H ). This is
n e
Here | F^ J) is the ground J-multiplet and
The excited cubic levels F,- with j ^ i bring to (19.50) a much smaller
ccoonnttrriibbuuttiioonn bbeeccaauussee ooff mmuucchh llaarrggeerr eenneerrggyy ddeennoommiinnaattoorrss.. FFoorr JJ >> .
Z* has the same form as that given in (18.52) for F , S being replaced
8
byJ.
19.4. Departures from cubic symmetry
If we superimpose on the cubic field K another field T of lower
symmetry the situation does not change markedly for the ions of type
'A' considered in § 19.2. However for ions of type eB\ the situation
may become a good deal more complicated and the general predictions
of the magnetic behaviour of the ion much less detailed. A tetragonal
or trigonal field will split an orbital triplet F or F into a singlet and a
4 5
doublet. A field of lower symmetry will split it into three orbital
singlets.
(a) If the lowest level is a singlet and the distance to the nearest
excited orbital level (doublet or singlet) is very much larger than the

--- Page 771 ---

756 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
spin-orbit coupling, that is if T > A, we are back to the situation for
which we have derived a spin Hamiltonian in § 19.2.
(b) If T is comparable to A, and hence very much smaller than the
cubic field K, we can in first approximation neglect admixtures from the
higher cubic multiplets iy Inside the manifold of degeneracy 3(28 + 1)
we can represent the non-cubic field T by the equivalent operator
T = 2 A -(y,- +ljli) which by a suitable rotation of coordinate axes can
0 9
i^j
be brought to the form
with
and the spin-orbit coupling is again represented by ocA(l . S).
The secular equation for the diagonalization of T + od(l.S) will
factorize into equations of order no higher than cubic. Once the
eigenstates are found as linear combinations of states \l) \S ),
z Z
the expectation values of Z = ^H . (gS + ocl) can be calculated
s
immediately.
In particular, if T has tetragonal or trigonal symmetry around the
z-axis, A! = A = — A /2 = —A/3 and T can be written
2 3
T = A(^-f) (19.53)
and J = l-\-S is a good quantum number (while J is no longer so),
z z z
which simplifies the classification of the eigenstates according to the
values of J . However, for the calculation of the magnetic and
z
quadrupole hyperfine structure as expectation values of the operators
in eqn (17.61) one must use the expansions of the \l) as sums of
z
states \L ) given in Tables 4 or 5.
Z
Finally, if the field T is not very much smaller than K it may bring
into the lower orbital cubic multiplet I\ admixtures from excited
cubic levels iy Thus for an .F-term a tetragonal or a trigonal field will
mix into the triplet F , formed from an jP-term, wave-functions from
4
F (see Figs. 7.5, 7.6). Using Table 4 it is easy to show that the three
5
lower orbital eigenstates of K + T will be of the form
? i = #f +gi7-i, ft = fo, fli = pS-i+W+i, (19-84)
+ +1
where f and rj are the states \m) respectively for F and F for
m m 4 5
tetragonal symmetry; p and q depend on the field T and p2+q2 = 1.
Slightly different formulae are needed for trigonal symmetry, which
also admixes F into | F , 0) (see Fig. 7.6). Similarly, it is worth noticing
2 4

--- Page 772 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 757
that T formed from a D-term is coupled to the doublet F by a trigonal
5 3
but not by a tetragonal field; see Figs. 7.3, 7.4. We can still define a
fictitious momentum 1 by taking g' g' £_ of (19.54) as eigenstates of
+v Q9 x
1 = 1, 0, — 1. Within the manifold of these states T keeps the form
3
A(If —f) but the equivalence
with a single constant is replaced by
In the new Hamiltonian for the 3(2$+ 1) manifold
J = l-\-S is still a good quantum number. The expectation value of
z z z
is calculated as before. For the evaluation of the expectation values of
the hyperfine interaction, care should be taken to use for the states
1 1)? |0)> |— 1) the correct expansion (either (19.54) or its equivalent
for trigonal symmetry) and Tables 4 or 5.
To proceed further one must consider separately the cases of Kramers
and non-Kramers ions.
(i) Kramers ions
For these, J is a good quantum number and there will be a certain
z
number of Kramers doublets \J \ = m. For instance for Co2+, *F there
Z
will be one doublet \J \ = f , two doublets \J \ = f and three doublets
Z Z
\J\ = i. The secular equation factors into three equations of the third,
z
second, and first order. Resonance will be observable in the doublets
| J | = i only. A doublet \J \ = J happens to be the lowest in the case
2 Z
of Co2+ in tutton salts where the field T is approximately tetragonal
and in the fluosilicate where it is trigonal. If we add to T a component
of lower symmetry it will naturally not be able to lift the Kramers
degeneracy, but as J ceases to be a good quantum number, the
z
resonance may become observable in all doublets.
(ii) Non-Kramers ions
In tetragonal or trigonal symmetry there will be a singlet J = 0
z
and doublets | J\ = m.
z
Higher-order perturbations may lift the degeneracy of some of the

--- Page 773 ---

758 INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
doublets, and so will a field of lower symmetry in first order. No general
prediction about the observability of resonance can be made.
19.5. The influence of excited terms
In the foregoing we have consistently assumed that the wave-function
of the ground level of the bound ion was constructed from eigenstates of
the ground term (£, S) of the free ion. We have used this assumption in
several places: in the expressions (19.5)-(19.12) for the spin-orbit
coupling, spin-spin coupling, and hyperfine structure couplings, in the
expansion given in Tables 4 or 5 for the kets spanning the various
multiplets F, etc. . . . This procedure rests on the assumption that
t
off-diagonal matrix elements of the crystal potential between the ground
term (L, S) of the free ion and excited terms (Lr, S) are small compared
to the energy differences W(L, S) — W(L', S). We shall defer to a later
chapter the study of situations where this assumption is completely
unwarranted, as in covalent complexes, and describe briefly the changes
introduced in our description of the paramagnetic ion by relatively
small admixtures from excited terms brought by the crystal potential
(admixtures caused by the spin-orbit coupling are very much smaller
and will be disregarded).
Let us consider first the case of ions of type B and to be specific the
example of Co2+, 3d1, where to the cubic multiplet F of the ground
4
term *F the cubic field admixes the excited term 4P, the amplitude of
the admixture being of the order of r ^ 0-2. The lifting of the twelve-
fold degeneracy of the ground manifold can still be described for
tetragonal or trigonal symmetry by a reduced equivalent Hamiltonian
of the same form as (19.57)
but the eigenstates |1), |0>, | — 1) of l will involve admixtures from
z
states belonging to the 4P level.
To obtain the constants Aoc, Aoc' of the spin-orbit coupling in (19.57)
it is necessary in principle to start from the general expression 2 £ (1* • SJ
i
for the spin-orbit coupling. However, because of the selection rule
|Ai| = 0, 1, the operator 2 £(1* • SJ has no matrix elements between
i
the terms *F and 4P and the representation of the spin-orbit coupling
by A(4.F)(L . S) leads to an error only of the order of r2. Similarly, for
the Zeeman coupling fill . (<7 S+L), which has no cross terms between
S

--- Page 774 ---

INTERMEDIATE CRYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP) 759
4P and 4F, the admixture from the excited term 4P changes its expecta-
tion value by a quantity of order r2.
For instance, for Co2+ in octahedral environment, for the lower
triplet F , the admixture of 4P changes g from — f into — f+5r2/2,
4 t
causing according to (19.40a) a change dg of —5r2/3. To explain the
discrepancy —0-05 from the observed value it is sufficient to take
2 0-03, or |T| = 0-17 which is of the right order of magnitude.
T =
It is in the calculation of hyperfine structure that the changes are
most important. The expressions (19.8)-(19.11) for the hyperfine
structure can be used for diagonal terms (LS\ \LS); for instance,
for Co2+, this yields
the first term being the contribution of the *F and the second of the 4P
term. The constant f in (19.8) has a different value for the terms 4J7
and 4P and for the latter cannot be computed by eqn (17.46) since
4P is a term that does not obey Hund's rule. Off-diagonal terms
(LS\ W \L'S) or, for Co2+, (4P| W |4P) must be computed using for the
n n
hyperfine interactions the more general expressions (17.12) for the
quadrupole interaction, and (17.30) or (17.42) for the magnetic inter-
action, summed over all the electrons. The actual calculations although
straightforward are too lengthy to be outlined in a general survey.
Passing on to ions of type A for which the spin Hamiltonian (19.33)
has been derived by a perturbation method, the following remarks can
be made. The assumption that the ground state has no orbital
degeneracy and that it is an eigenstate of S (but not necessarily of L) is
sufficient for the derivation of a spin Hamiltonian of the form (19.33).
The only other important assumption is that of the smallness of the
spin-orbit coupling relative to the crystal field, that permits the
treatment of the operator C in (19.16) as a purely orbital operator.
The assumption that the ground state and the excited states are
eigenstates of L and, for the excited states, the assumption that they
are eigenstates of the same value of 8 as the ground state, are not
essential. On using for the various interactions, the more general
expressions £ ^T (l • s) for the spin-orbit coupling, (17.12), (17.30) for
f t
the hyperfine interaction, and (16.42) for the spin-spin interaction, we
end up in the ground state with an operator expression linear or
quadratic with respect to the components of the spins of the individual
electrons, which by the Wigner-Eckart theorem can be cast into the
form (19.33). The various symmetry properties of the coefficients of

--- Page 775 ---

760 INTERMEDIATE CBYSTAL FIELDS (THE IRON GROUP)
(19.33) based on time-reversal and spatial symmetry will be valid as
well. On the other hand, the various analytical expressions (19.32)
giving the coefficients of (19.33) will no longer be valid.
The main advantage of these expressions is their relative simplicity.
For the more complicated situations where L is not a good quantum
number general formulae become unwieldy and each special case is
best dealt with separately.

--- Page 776 ---

20
THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
20.1. Summary of the foregoing theory
IN the theory of paramagnetic ions described in the previous chapters
we have assumed throughout that the magnetic electrons were strictly
localized on the paramagnetic ion itself.
The neglect of configuration interaction (with one exception, see
§ 17.5) resulted in the even more restrictive assumption that, apart from
closed shells, the one-electron wave-functions, from which the wave-
function of the ion was built, were / or d Hartree-Fock wave-functions
with the same radial function as in the free ion. Many-electron wave-
, S) or (L, S, J, J), can be built as
z z z
linear combinations of Slater determinants constructed using these
one-electron wave-functions. Finally the low-lying states of the bound
ion were represented as linear combinations of states \L, S, L , S) or
z z
\L, S, J, J), the former representation being more convenient for the
z
iron group and the latter for the rare-earth group. In first approxima-
tion a single set of values was required for L, S in the iron group and for
L, S, J in the rare-earth group. The amplitudes of the component states
\L, S, L , S) or \L, 8, J, J) were obtained by solving a secular equation
z z z
whose coefficients were matrix elements
(L, S, M M \ V \L' S', M' , M') or (L, 8, J, Mj\ V \Lf, S', J', MJ
L9 8 9 L s
of a certain crystal potential V = 2 ^(r*) which was intended to
i
represent the influence of the surroundings of the paramagnetic ion.
The number of independent constants in V was severely limited by
symmetry considerations and even more so by the neglect of
configuration interaction.
The fact that a wealth of magnetic resonance data could be made to
agree with calculated values, simply by adjusting these few constants
to 'reasonable' values, might be considered as a justification of the
crystal field model. The fact that a single set of (L, S) values was
generally sufficient in the iron group and a single set of (L, S, J) values
in the rare-earth group pointed further to the approximate correctness
of the hypothesis of 'intermediate crystal field' and 'weak crystal field'
respectively. There are, however, serious reasons for believing that for
3d electrons (and even more so for £d and 5d) the above picture is

--- Page 777 ---

762 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
incomplete. Among the evidence pointing in this direction we can list
the following facts.
(a) Some paramagnetic compounds such as cyanides have anomalous
values of spin and magnetic moment which contradict Hund's rule.
Thus, for instance, K Fe(CN) and K Co(CN) , where in an ionic model
3 6 3 6
the iron should be Fe3+ and the cobalt Co3+, would be expected through
Hund's rule to have in their ground states respectively spins 8 = f
and 8 = 2, but turn out to have an effective spin | for K3Fe(CN)6 and 0
for K Co(CN) .
3 6
(b) In compounds with 'normal' values of the spin the orbital contri-
bution to the magnetic moment turns out to be systematically smaller
than the theoretical value calculated by using the crystal field model.
(c) While crude calculations of the magnitude of the crystal field
using the point-charge model can give values in qualitative agreement
with those extracted from the analysis of resonance and spectroscopic
data, attempts to improve the model by taking into account the spatial
extension of neighbouring ions and the overlap of their wave-functions
with those of the central ion, destroy the agreement, leading to values
for the crystal field wrong in magnitude or in sign or in both.
(d) The most cogent argument against the purely ionic model is the
observation in the resonance spectrum of hyperfine structure with
neighbouring nuclei, demonstrating unambiguously the presence of
unpaired electrons on these ligand ions.
While some of the discrepancies above can be explained away by
suitable modifications of the purely ionic crystal field picture, the
molecular orbital model appears to provide a consistent explanation
for them all and will be discussed next.
20.2. The molecular orbitals model for covalent bonding
We shall describe this model using the specific example of an
octahedral complex XY where the central atom X is surrounded by six
Q
identical atoms Y, called ligands, each at the apex of a regular octa-
hedron. In the purely ionic picture X is a paramagnetic ion and the
ligands are six diamagnetic ions with closed shells. The complex NiF
6
constitutes a good example. The central ion Ni++ has 3d8 electrons
outside closed shells and each surrounding ion F~ has the closed-shell
configuration Is22s22p6. In the ionic picture we study the 3d electrons
of the central ion under the influence of the crystal potential created by
the neighbouring fluorines (and also by ions further removed). The next
step is to treat the XY complex as a single isolated molecule.
6
In principle we could conceive of a generalized self-consistent field

--- Page 778 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 763
method where one-electron orbitals are determined in a self-consistent
field that has the octahedral symmetry of the molecule rather than the
full rotational symmetry of the isolated atom. In practice this is
neither possible nor indeed necessary. Instead we assume first that the
wave-functions of the inner electrons, Is2 through 3pQ of the central
atom X, and of the inner electrons Is2 of the surrounding atoms Y, do
not participate in the bonding and are correctly described by the
Hartree-Fock functions of the corresponding atoms. For the external
or valence orbitals of X and Y we make the drastic approximation that
they are linear combinations of the atomic Hartree-Fock orbitals of
these atoms. The number and nature of these combinations is pre-
determined to a large extent by symmetry considerations. Once these
combinations have been written down, the remaining independent
amplitudes can be determined either from experiment by adjusting
them to fit the observed data, or from theory by a variational method:
the molecular orbitals, consisting of linear combinations of atomic
Hartree-Fock orbitals are considered as trial functions and the
amplitudes are determined from the usual condition that the energy
be stationary. The two sets of values can be compared to provide a test
of the validity of the model.
We begin by examining the symmetry limitations on the linear
combinations of atomic orbitals to be used as molecular orbitals.
The three (7 axes of the octahedron are chosen as coordinate axes Ox,
4
Oy, Oz. We label respectively 1 and 4 the ligands on the positive and
negative side of Ox, 2 and 5 those on Oy, 3 and 6 those on Oz. Each
ligand has a 25 orbital which we label a through <r . It also has 3
± s 6 s
p-orbitals. The ^-orbitals with zero orbital momentum along the
direction towards the central atom, we label a through <r . Since
lflp 6)J)
each function c^ has a positive and a negative lobe we adopt the
v
convention that all the positive (we could choose all the negative) lobes
of the <r- point towards the central ion. There are twelve other
t v
^-orbitals on the ligands, the so-called 7r-orbitals. We call Y and Z
1 l
the two 7r-orbitals of ligand 1, whose angular momentum components
are zero along axes parallel to Oy and Oz respectively and passing
through the nucleus of ligand 1. The other orbitals will be ]T, £/ ; X , Z ;
4 4 2 2
X , Z i JT , r ; X , F . Their relative signs can be defined by the conven-
5 5 3 3 6 6
tion that the symbols X, Y, Z in X Y^ Z transform under the opera-
i9 t
tion of the full cubic group O (that includes the inversion / through the
h
centre of the octahedron) in the same way as the coordinates x, y, z, the
transformation of the indices i being obvious. Thus for instance a
rotation of 90° around Oz will turn F into — X while the inversion
4 5

--- Page 779 ---

764 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
operation / turns F into —Y^ In either case,
4
We could have labelled the a functions: X JC ; Y , T ; Z , Z ;
v l9 4 2 5 3 6
however, if we applied to their transformation the rules outlined for
the 77-functions, we would contradict the earlier convention that all
positive lobes point towards the centre.
Different sign conventions may be adopted, and are sometimes used
in the literature. Since we are going to use definite linear combinations
of the cr, tfp, and 7r-orbitals, the signs of the coefficients in these com-
s
binations depend on the sign conventions made for the 0 , a^ TT and the
S
latter must therefore be clearly specified.
Returning for a moment to the central atom we recall that its
d-orbitals provide a basis for the irreducible representations F and F
3 5
of the cubic group. Since the d-functions are even under inversion these
representations are customarily written as e and t (g stands for
g 2g
'gerade' or 'even' in German). Similarly the orbital 45 provides the even
representation F^ or a and 4p the odd representation F or t (u for
lg 4 ln
'ungerade' which means 'odd'). Similarly the orbitals of the ligands,
which transform into each other under operations of O , provide
h
representations of this group which are reducible and can be reduced
by the usual methods using the character tables of O . In these trans-
h
formations (a , cti 3,) and 7r-orbitals clearly do not mix and the represen-
t 8
tations they span can be reduced separately. It is also clear that a
ifS
and Gi p transform in the same way (thanks to our sign convention for
the Gi J and will give rise to the same irreducible representations. It is
easy to verify that the reduction of the representations spanned by the
six functions a (or a ) yields a +e +t , whereas the reduction of that
s p lg g lu
spanned by the 7r-functions yields t +t +t -\-t . The corresponding
lu 2u lg 2g
proper linear combinations can be calculated by the method outlined
in § 14.4 for the reduction of the rotation group.
The results are given in Table 23 for the representations a ,
lg
e , t , t , which are the only ones that can be coupled by a Hamiltonian
g lu 2g
of octahedral symmetry to orbitals 3d, 45, 4p of the central ion. The
representation £ would couple to /-electrons on the central atoms.
2u
20.3. Bonding and anti-bonding orbitals, overlap, andAND
covalency
We consider for the sake of definiteness an orbital of the complex
XY belonging to the representation t and denoted by
69 2g

--- Page 780 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 765
where 99^ is the usual d-function of the central ion
and # is the linear combination, given in Table 23, of p^ functions
c
belonging to the ligands 1, 2, 4, 5,
We use (20.1) as a trial function where the 'best' values must be selected
for the amplitudes a and ft. It is important to notice that since the
functions 9^ and ^ which belong to different atoms are not orthogonal,
the normalization condition for (20.1) is not oc2 + /?2 = 1 but rather
where S = (99^ | ;^} is an overlap integral. If h is an approximate one-
electron Hamiltonian that contains both the kinetic energy of the
electron and its electrostatic interactions (including exchange terms)
with the electrons on the central ion and on the ligands, the energy W
of the orbital w is
r
By varying a and ft in order to make (20.5) stationary, under the
subsidiary normalization condition (20.4) we find two sets of values
(a , ft ), (oc, ft ) for (a, ft) and two values W and W for the energy W.
a & b b a b
Writing W = (<p| h |^), W = fa | h |^), W = (<p| h \%$, the equa-
l c 2 c 12 c
tions for a and ft can be written
The secular equation (W1-W)(W2-W)-(W12-WS)* =0 has clearly
two roots, W and W , with W > W W ; W < W W . Let a , ft and a , ft
& b a l9 2 b l9 2 a & b b
be the amplitudes of <p and ^ in the orbitals whose energies are W and W .
c a b
If we assume W^ > W we can extract from (20.6) the following expres-
2
sions for W and W :
& b
It is clear from (20.7) that since W > W± > W > W we must have
& 2 b

--- Page 781 ---

766 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
(oc//?)2 > 1, (a //? )2 < 1. The two orbits with energies W and
a a b b &
W < W are called respectively anti-bonding and bonding. The anti-
b a
bonding orbital contains a greater admixture a2 of the orbital of higher
energy cp^ and the bonding orbital a greater admixture /? of the orbital
b
of lower energy, #£.
It is convenient to rewrite eqn (20.1) for the anti-bonding and
bonding orbitals in the form
where A = — /?/oc, y = oc//?, and the normalization conditions are
a a b b
So far no assumption has been made about the magnitudes of A and y.
For instance A = y = I corresponds to a complete sharing of the
electron between the two atomic orbitals cp and #. However a complex
XY such as, say, NiF is still mainly ionic and we expect the electrons
& 6
to stay mainly either on the central ion or on the ligands. This implies
that the overlap S = (y \ %) is small compared to unity and that the
coupling matrix element W = (<p\ h \%) is small compared to the
12
difference (W^-W^) = (q>\ h \v)-(x\ h \x). If we treat S, TF /(Wi-W£),
12
A, and y as small quantities of first order and neglect terms of higher
order the formulae become much simpler. From the orthogonality of
y£ and ^ as given in (20.8) we get
tHE VALUE OF Y=SB\BBEDTRACTED FROM (2036) TAKES TEH SIMPLE FORM
The expression (20.11) resembles the usual first-order perturbation
formula except for the term 8(x\ h |%) which takes into account the lack
of orthogonality of <p and x- Similarly,
It is reasonable to assume that the unperturbed orbitals x of the ligands
constructed from 2s and 2p electrons lie much deeper than the 3d
orbitals (and a fortiori deeper than 4s and 4=p) of the central atom, and

--- Page 782 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 767
to assign the bonding orbitals ^ to the ligands and the anti-bonding
b
orbitals to the central ion.
Since the overlap S = (<p \ x) is not zero, the definition of covalency
needs to be sharpened. We shall agree to call the complex purely ionic
if the surrounding ions Y carry no charge transferred from the central
ion, that is if in the bonding orbitals (20.8), y = 0. But from (20.10) it
follows that A = y+S = S is not zero for the anti-bonding orbitals.
From a knowledge of the Hartree-Fock wave-functions of the atoms
X and Y it is possible to calculate from first principles, using (20.7),
(20.10), and (20.11), the admixture coefficients A and y, the overlaps
S, and the energies W of the various anti-bonding orbitals. The
a
description of such a calculation is outside of the scope of this book.
Performed for the complex NiF by Sugano and Shulman (1963) it has
6
led, for the admixtures A and y and the anti-bonding energies W , to
&
values in excellent agreement with most of the observed data, contrast-
ing with earlier calculations based on the ionic model (even when
generalized to take into account the overlap between orbits of the
central atoms and of the ligands). Some of the results of this calculation
will be mentioned in a later discussion (§ 20.6).
We have so far considered the case when an orbit y of the central
ion was coupled by the Hamiltonian to a single orbit # of the ligands.
The generalization is straightforward. With the functions (p — dy
e
belonging to the representation e we have an example of a coupling
g
with two orbitals %% and %* of the ligands. We now have three
8 v
orbitals, one which is mainly % with admixtures from <p, a second
0t8 e
Xa which is mainly ^ and a third anti-bonding orbital
tP v
where
which is mainly <p = dy and is primarily localized on the central ion.
e
Finally, on the ligands there are non-bonding orbitals which transform
according to t and t and which have no counterpart on the central
lg 2u
ion.
20.4. The ground states in weakly covalent compounds
We now pass on to the description of the magnetic behaviour of the
central ion by means of anti-bonding molecular orbitals, adopting
therefore a 'strong field' representation. Let 3dn be the configuration of
the central ion in the ionic picture. In this picture, since we have

--- Page 783 ---

768 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
assumed that all the orbits 2s and 2p of the ligands lie much lower in
energy than the orbits 3d (and a fortiori lower than 45 and 4p) of the
central ion, the number of bonding and non-bonding orbitals will be
exactly equal to the number of ligand orbitals 25 and 2p, i.e.
6 x(1+3) =24. The corresponding 6x8 = 48 electrons, which fill
these 25 and 2p orbitals in the ionic picture, will be housed in the
bonding and non-bonding orbitals. The n remaining electrons that are
purely 3d in the ionic picture, will be housed in the anti-bonding
orbitals whose wave-functions are listed in Table 24.
The model we use to construct the ground state of a many-electron ion
is the following. The effects of covalency are taken into account by using
the orbitals (20.13) as basis one-electron wave-functions and by assign-
ing a different energy to the orbits t and e . The splitting W(e) — W(t )
2g g s 2g
is not here considered to arise from a classical crystal field but now
represents the difference
A = (vy h i^ )-(K lh K )> (20-15)
g g g
computed by means of the formalism outlined in the last section, a
straightforward calculation in principle but very heavy in practice. In
the case of NiF where such a calculation has actually been carried out
6
completely (Sugano and Shulman 1963) it turns out that probably most
of the splitting A is due to terms proportional to the covalency coeffi-
cients 7, thus explaining why the best calculations based on the ionic
model have led to values of A which are an order of magnitude too small.
(For further discussion see Owen and Thornley (1966).)
The eigenstates of the ion are obtained by filling the various orbitals
t and e with electrons and constructing from these orbitals many-
2
electron wave-functions that transform according to irreducible
representations of O . If at the first stage we neglect spin-orbit coupling,
h
these functions must be eigenstates of the total spin S and belong to
one of the five single-valued representations of 0: T F , F , F , F ,
19 2 3 4 5
also called A A , E, T T . We may by analogy with free ions call
19 2 ly 2
these states cubic terms. Very many cubic terms can be built in this
fashion which are needed for the interpretation of optical absorption
spectra of the transition elements. In magnetic resonance we may take
a narrower view of the problem by concentrating on the cubic term of
lowest energy, and possibly one or two low-lying excited cubic terms.
The assumption of weak covalency means that the nature of the cubic
term is the same as in the ionic picture, given in § 19.1. To illustrate this
point consider, for instance, the configuration 3d!5 which in the ionic

--- Page 784 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 769
nodel gives the sextet term BS, which is also the cubic term (t^e2)^A .
1
By placing five electrons in five £ orbitals we are able to form the
2
loublet cubic term (^)2^i- With little or no covalency this doublet is
well above the sextet in energy, but with increasing covalency the
separation A = W(e) — W(t ) may increase to such an extent that it
2
becomes energetically more advantageous to place five electrons in £
2
orbitals giving a doublet spin state, rather than to decrease their electro-
static repulsion by having their spins parallel. If we were to plot the
energy of the ion as a function of A, the two levels would cross for a
certain value of A and the doublet would come below the sextet (cf. Fig
7.13). This is the situation that prevails in the 4d, 5d groups and in the
complex cyanides of the 3d group (see Chapter 8).
We return now to the case of weak covalency for which the ground
cubic terms for the various ions are listed in Table 25. The weak
covalency assumption implies that they are the same as in the purely
ionic picture as given in § 19.1, but their expression in terms of one-
electron orbitals has a somewhat different form.
We see from Table 25 that the cubic term 327 which is the ground
1
state for the configuration 3d2 can be built from either one of the two
cubic configurations £2 or t e. Similarly the cubic term 427 which is the
2 1
ground state for seven electrons 3d7 (equivalent to three holes 3d3) can
be built from either one of the two 3-hole configurations t e* or t*e.
2
This shows that the simple-minded argument that we used in § 19.1 to
predict the structure of the ground states in cubic symmetry had only
approximate validity. For instance, for 3d2 we had argued that by
putting two electrons with parallel spins into two orbits £ of lower
2
energy we minimized both the cubic field energy and the electrostatic
electron-electron repulsion. Actually, by allowing one electron to spend
some time in an upper orbit e, that is by using a combination of the
two configurations t2 and t e, it is possible further to lower the overall
2
energy of the cubic term *T The same is true for the cubic term 41\
V
with three holes. In fact 3T (3d2) and 4l\(3d3) are the only cubic terms
x
of maximum spin for which the state S = S is not a single Slater
z
determinant. This is related to the fact that in the weak-field representa-
tion they are respectively mixtures of (3F, 3P) and (*F, 4P). As an
illustration we discuss in some detail the form of the wave-function of
4I7 (3d!7 = 3d3) which applies to Co2+ in octahedral environment. We use
1
the formalism of the fictitious orbital momentum introduced in § 14.2
where the one-electron functions TJ, r\, r\ that span the triplet t are
X y z 2
related to the eigenstates \m) of l by the formulae (14.5) which we
z
50

--- Page 785 ---

770 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
rewrite here for convenience:
If %., %, q are purely d-functions (which they are not if covalent
z
bonding is allowed) the states |m) are related to the states l = m of the
z
true orbital-momentum by the formulae given in Table 4,
where the symbol |2, —1) represents the state I = 2, l = — 1.
z
The functions 6 and e that span F = E transform like 3z2—r2 and
3
-y/(3)(#2— y2). Their transformation law under permutation of the
coordinates is given by eqns (14.4).
For the cubic term T± we use the symbols
to represent again eigenstates of the fictitious orbital momentum.
Equations (20.16) and (20.17) differ in two respects: the former represent
one-electron wave-functions belonging to the cubic triplet t ; the latter
2
deal with many-electron wave-functions spanning a cubic triplet
term T .
x
If now we single out the state S = f, all electrons have spin + !•
The three orbital states of 4?\(^ e2) are then simply
2
The cubic term *Ti(t\e) is less simple since from t\e we can also construct
a term *T(t*e). We give the result first and then explain how to obtain
2
it simply.
The expression is obvious;

--- Page 786 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 771
it is the only Slater determinant unchanged by a rotation of ±77/2
around Oz. To find the expressions for 11} and | — 1} in (20.19) we notice
that \X) = -(|1>- I —l»/<v/2 and Y = i (|1>+ | — 1»/V2 are deduced
from Z = |0) by the cyclic permutations R and R2 of {x, y, z}. We can
then write
and on replacing R6 and .B20 by the expressions (14.4) we get \X) and
|F> and then |1> and |-1) in (20.19).
In general we can write the cubic term of the ground state as
cos a ^(^e^+sin a ^(t\e). (20.21)
For Co2+ where the hole orbitals e are below the hole orbitals t we
2
expect the configuration to be mainly t e2, and a to be small. To
2
determine the amplitudes cos a and sin a we must know the matrix
elements of the electrostatic energy between the two states ^T^t^e2)
and 4?7 (^e). These can be found by going back to the weak-field rep-
1
resentation and expressing the states ^T^e) and ^T^t^e2), where we
assume that the orbitals t and e are pure eZ-orbitals, as linear com-
2
binations of the free ion states, 4P and *F, using (20.18) and (20.19).
A simple calculation gives
Since the electrostatic interaction has no off-diagonal matrix elements
between *F and *P the secular matrix can be written as
where we have taken the electrostatic energy as zero in *F and d in 4P
and denote by A the cubic splitting W(t ) — W(e) (which is positive for
2
holes). The parameter 6 is related to a certain radial integral B, known

--- Page 787 ---

772 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
in the literature as a Racah parameter, by d = 15B. Then from (20.23)
we get
When J3/A goes to infinity we are back to the purely ionic case where
the admixture from 4P is negligible and our state 437 is pure *F. In this
1
case tan 2oc = — -J, cos a = 2/\/5, sin a = —1/\/5. In the opposite
case when £/A -> 0 we find a = 0 and the configuration is pure (t e2).
2
For the sake of completeness we also consider the other cubic term of
Table 25 which has components belonging to two different strong
field configurations, namely *Ti(t\, t e) where the orbitals £ an(i e &re
2 2
either electrons or holes, depending on whether there are two or eight
electrons outside of closed shells. We use a notation similar to that
for the term 42i(J ea, t\e) in (20.18) and (20.19) and obtain the formulae
2
The wave-functions (20.18a) can be written down at once: they are
the same as those of a 3P term constructed from two ^-electrons. The
relations (20.19a) are obtained in the same manner as (20.19): we start
from the expression |0, e) for \^T^(t^e) 0} as the only Slater determinant
9
unchanged by a rotation ±7r/2 around 0z, and then use a cyclic
permutation to generate the two other states of (20.19a), as explained
for (20.19). A calculation similar to that which gave (20.22) yields
The signs in (20.22a), as in (20.22), are not completely determined
since there is a certain freedom in the choice of the phases of the

--- Page 788 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 773
different states. We have made the choice that gives the same coeffi-
cients and thus the same secular equation as (20.22) (cf. § 7.3).
20.5. Orbital momentum and spin-orbit coupling in the
presence of covalent bonding
In a uniform external magnetic field the fact that the electron spin
may no longer be localized on the central ion does not affect its contribu-
tion to the magnetic moment. The situation is different for the orbital
momentum and we now show that covalent bonding leads to a reduction
of the matrix elements of the orbital momentum.
The matrix elements of the orbital momentum taken between the
anti-bonding orbitals of Table 24 are somewhat different from those
taken between pure d-functions. Using (20.16) we rewrite the formulae
of Table 24 in the self-evident form
There are two types of matrix elements of L: those inside the manifold
t and those between t and e. (We have shown in § 14.2 that they all
2 2
vanish within e.)
If the A in (20.25) are all zero, the matrix elements of L within t
those of a fictitious angular momentum 1 = aL with a = — 1. Between
e and t a typical matrix element is
2
Use of the augmented orbitals (20.25) results in multiplication of the
(t \ L \t ) matrix elements by a certain numerical factor, written in the
2d 2d
literature as k^, and the (t \ L \e) matrix elements by another factor
v 2d d
The calculation of k^ is straightforward:
The first two terms in the curly bracket give —l+2AS, where
t t
S = (l | l ) = (q> | %) is the overlap integral for vr-bonding. To
t d ff t t
calculate the last term, we get from Table 24,

--- Page 789 ---

774 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
We introduce the vector operators,
where L(i) is the orbital momentum operator with respect to the
position a of the ligand i. Clearly L (3) = L (6) = L \ (X,-ir )/<Y/2
t 2 g z 3
and (X —iY )/^2 are normalized eigenstates of respectively L(3) and
Q Q z
L (Q) with eigenvalue — 1. Then in the expansion of ( + 1J L \ + l ) all
Z z v
terms can be seen to vanish except the expectation values of L(3)
z
and L(6) in these two states, whence,
z
and
The calculation of
is more involved and its details are outlined below. From (20.26) we
have
or, using (20.25),
To compute the last two terms of (20.34) we replace e, e^ and [0^) by
s
their expressions from Table 24. We now encounter terms such
as (% \ L \% ) where %. and % are orbitals located on ligands i and j.
vj z ai v ai
Replacing L by L (i) + (a A p) /S (cf. eqn (20.29)), we get
z g i g

--- Page 790 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 775
The first term on the right-hand side of (20.35) vanishes if % is a <j
oi s
orbital that carries zero orbital momentum, and the second vanishes if
X is a OQ orbital because of parity conservation.
ffi
We thus find
where p and s are wave-functions 2p and 2s of a ligand and a its
y
distance from the origin. Also
whence
From the equations for N and .2V, in Table 24 we have approxi-
ff
mately,
and in the same approximation we have, from (20.38),
The dimensionless quantity a(p\ d/d \s) in the last term of (20.40)
y y
must be computed numerically.
For instance, for Ni2+F~, Owen and Thornley (1966) find it has the
value —1-6, using analytical Hartree-Fock functions for the 2s and
2p orbitals of F~, and taking a = 0-21 nm. For M2+F~ (20.40) can then
be rewritten as
Spin-orbit coupling
It is sometimes said that the spin-orbit constant £ is reduced by
covalent bonding. In this form the statement is misleading and needs to
be clarified.
The introduction of covalent bonding modifies the spin-orbit coupling
in a way which is related to, but not identical with, the reduction of the
orbital momentum through the coefficients k and k of (20.31) and
vv vff
(20.40). The covalent bonding does not affect the form of the operator

--- Page 791 ---

776 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
L in the ^-representation and the change in its matrix elements is
solely due to the change in the one-electron wave-functions that are
the augmented orbitals of Table 24 rather than pure d-functions.
On the other hand the spin-orbit coupling operator is already changed
in the ^-representation. We recall that the spin-orbit coupling is
represented in the Pauli approximation by the operator
where V is the potential energy of the electron moving in a self-
consistent field. It could only be cast into the familiar form (11.19)
of £1 . s with £ = |(S/wc)2(l/r)(dF/dr) becaus V was assumed to have
spherical symmetry. We can write quite generally the spin-orbit
coupling operator in the form U . s. The vector U, like all vectors, has
matrix elements within t proportional to those of L, and others
2
between t and e also proportional to those of L but with a different
2
proportionality constant. We can then write
and
where k and k are given by (20.31) and (20.40).
vw vff
The actual matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling between t
2
and e, responsible for the orbital contribution g—2 of the orbital
momentum for ions of type A (see § 19.2), are thus reduced in the ratio
^ffk^ffl £ where £ is the spin-orbit coupling constant for the free ion.
0 0
On the other hand, the matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling inside
t that occur for ions of type B such as, say, Co2+ considered in § 19.3,
2
are reduced in the ratio ^k^/^Q.
It is sometimes argued that the main contribution to the matrix
elements of the spin-orbit coupling comes from the region near the
nucleus of the central ion where (a) the potential energy V(r) is
practically equal to that V (r) of the free ion and (b) the values of the
Q
wave-functions from the ligands, admixed into the augmented orbitals
of Table 24, are small. In that case one should have
and
where U = £ L. In practice there is considerable uncertainty about
0 0

--- Page 792 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 777
the actual value of the matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling and
it is preferable to consider £ /£ and £^£0 as adjustable parameters.
ffir 0
(For a discussion of these points see Owen and Thornley (1966).)
20.6. Ligand hyperfine structure for ions of type A
As we have already stated, the presence in the resonance spectrum of
hyperfine structure due to the coupling of the electronic spins with the
nuclei of the ligands is the most clear-cut evidence for the transfer of
spin density onto the ligands.
If the ground state of the central ion has a spin S (real or fictitious),
in cubic symmetry we shall expect the hyperfine structure of say
ligand 3 placed on the positive side of the z-axis to have a hyperfine
structure of the form
Here we use A\\ for the value along the bond axis, that is the line
joining the nucleus of the ligand ion to the nucleus of the central ion.
Thus for the ligand 1, for instance, (20.47) becomes obviously
Here our problem is clearly that of calculating the coefficients A\\
and A . As we shall see, these coefficients are directly correlated to the
±
admixture coefficients A of Table 24 and their measurement affords
the most direct information on the amount of covalent bonding. In this
and following sections the more detailed formulae (in particular those
where specific reference is made to 25-, 2p-orbitals) assume that the
ligand ions are fluorines.
We consider first the case when the central ion is of type A, that is
effectively without orbital degeneracy in its ground state, as in Cr3+,
V2+(d3); Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3+(d5); Ni2+(d8). If in a first approximation we
neglect admixtures from higher cubic terms through the spin-orbit
coupling, the substate of the ground state with S = S is a single Slater
z
determinant of molecular orbitals, and the expectation value of the
operator «?f(3), describing the hyperfine structure coupling with the
nucleus of ligand 3, will be a sum of expectation values of J^(3) taken
over the orbitals composing the ground term. Let y be one of the
orbitals of Table 24. It can be written as
where the index i refers to the ligand i, the coefficient a is of the order
of unity, and the /? are small. The hyperfine structure operator J^ (3)
Ai

--- Page 793 ---

778 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
decreases rapidly with the distance from the nucleus of ligand 3 and
it is reasonable to keep in the expectation value (y\ ^(3) |y), only the
terms
We have retained the second term because |a|2 is of order unity, but
even so it is often small compared to the first and will be disregarded
for the time being. We rewrite (20.48) as \p = F(3)+y', where F(3) is
the part of y> constructed from orbitals of ligand 3, and we wish to
calculate (^(3)| 3^(3) \F(3)).
From Table 24 we extract the F(3) that differ from zero ; these are
Note that in ^ (3) our sign convention for the CF leads to a = — Z .
0 V v3 3
Also it is customary in the literature to introduce the so-called spin-
densities
which are the squares of the amplitudes in (20.50).
For £)-ligand orbitals we take as magnetic hyperfine operator the
form (17.45) with L = 1, 8 = i and f given by (17.46) = f. For
5-ligand orbitals we take (W7rl3)ftfy Hd(r)(I. s). Omitting as usual
n
the electron-spin operator from the expectation value we obtain
with
Clearly (JT | ^(3) |Z ) and <F | ^(3) |F > are deduced from (20.52) by
3 3 3 8
cyclic permutation of x, y, z.
Similarly
with

--- Page 794 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 779
Disregarding the second term in (20.49), we find
Let us apply (20.56) to our three ions of type A which have singlet
ground states.
(1) V2+, Cr3* (d3)
The ground cubic term is *A (t^), and the substate S = S = f is
2 z
^ = «> <> *£)for which
where S(1) , $(2) are the spins of the two electrons in the orbits \rj) and
x
Within the manifold S = f of *A (tl), the expectation value of a
2
component of the spin of each electron is a fraction (1/2$) (that is for
8 = f, one-third), of that of the total spin S. Hence in (20.47) we find
from (20.56), (20.57) expressions for A\\ and A \
L
where
(2) Cr+ Mn2+, Fe^ (d5)
The ground cubic term is ^A^e2) and the substate S = S = f is
z
(y*, Tj*, rj*, 0+, e+). We find by the same method as before
where

--- Page 795 ---

780 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
(3) Ni2+ (d*)
The ground cubic term expressed by means of holes is 3A (e2) and the
2
ground substate S = S = 1 is (0+e+). We find
z
From a measurement of A^ and A and from a Hartree-Fock
L
calculation of a and a for the fluorine ligand ions we can obtain the
2p 2s
spin densities/,, f , f .
ffp as
It is reasonable to assume that since the orbits 2s of the ligands lie
well below the orbits 2p, they must have a smaller amplitude A in the
s
anti-bonding orbitals and the corresponding spin density f = (A%J3)N~1
as
must be a good deal smaller than f and f. (This is not to say that
ffp t
A = /<7 a s/2$ should be much smaller than A or A for the smallness
s S 2 9 v
of f is more than compensated by the fact that a > a .) On the other
a$ 2s 2p
hand, it had generally been assumed that the a orbitals of the ligands,
v
directed towards the central ion, were much more strongly bound to it
than 77-orbitals and that f should correspondingly be much larger than
ojt
f. It came therefore as a great surprise that in the first experiment on
t
Mn2+(d5) in KMnF3 by Shulman and Knox (1960) the value offffp-ft.
(attributed for the larger part to f ) turned out to be ~0-3 per cent,
ffp
whereas f was of the order of 0*5 per cent.
as
One possible explanation was that actually/^ and/< were comparable
and that the small value observed for f —f resulted from a near
ffp t
compensation between two larger quantities. Striking confirmation of
this explanation and of the general correctness of the model was
provided by the study of d3 compounds, for which f = 0, and ds
op
compounds, for which f = 0. For Cr3+(d3) in K NaCrF it was found
t 2 6
that f = 4-90 per cent whereas values of f = 4-95 per cent and
t oj>
f = 0-5 per cent were found for Ni2+(d8) in KNiF establishing that
as 3
fop **ft >f°s-
Finally, further evidence that the bulk of the isotropic hyperfine
structure on the ligands does indeed result from covalent a bonds and
s
not from some other mechanism, such as fluorine core -polarization, has
been provided by the small value of the isotropic spin density f in d3
as
compounds where a bonds cannot be formed. Values of f ^0-02
s a8
per cent, which is some twenty times smaller than for d5 and d8
compounds, have been observed for V2+(d3) and Cr3+(d3). The reader is

--- Page 796 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 781
referred to the review article of Owen and Thornley (1966) for further
discussion of the experimental evidence.
20.7. Orbital singlets: correction terms for the ligand
hyperfine structure
Direct coupling with the central ion
We have so far neglected the interaction of the nuclear moment (x/
of the ligand with the distribution of magnetization carried by the
c?-part of the anti-bonding orbitals of the central ion, which is described
by the second term of (20.49). If the distance E from the ligand nucleus
to the nucleus of the central ion is large compared to the mean radius of
d-orbitals, we can argue that the field H^ created by (Xj is uniform all
over the ion and that its coupling with the central ion is given by
H^ . g . /?S, where — /?g . S is the magnetic dipole moment of the central
ion. Even if R is not very large compared to the ionic radius we can
still treat the central ion as a point dipole if its charge distribution has
spherical symmetry as for d5 compounds (Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3+). Under these
conditions for, say, the ligand 3, the corresponding coupling can be
written
with
For R = 0-2 nm, a typical distance in fluorine compounds, we find
A & 3 X 10~4 cm"1. This is to be compared with values of A of the
d s
order of 15 X 10~4 cm"1 observed in d5 fluorine compounds.
The comparison of Ad with values of Aff—Av observed for d5 com
pounds is not very instructive since, as we mentioned earlier, the fact
that (A — A,,) is experimentally found to be small does not necessarily
ff
imply that A , A taken separately are small. For d* fluorine com-
ff v
pounds, values of A of the order of 7 X 10~4 cm"1, and for ds compounds
v
values of Aff of the order of 10 X 10~4 cm"1, have been observed.
Multipole corrections to the coupling with the central ion
For d3 and d8 compounds small corrections arising from higher
multipole moments of the distribution of magnetization of the central
ion have to be introduced. These corrections have different forms for
the distributions of magnetization due to spin and to unquenched
orbital momentum. We quote only the results (Marshall (1963)).

--- Page 797 ---

782 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
For the spin magnetization the spin constant Ad = 2^ynn/EB has
to be multiplied by the following correction factors in which (r4) is the
mean fourth power of a 3d wave -function :
For the unquenched orbital magnetization the constant
must be multiplied by a correction factor (which has the same form for
d3 and d8)
A second correction is a small scalar coupling
which must be added to the overall dipolar coupling.
Such multipole corrections are usually quite small.
Effects of the spin-orbit coupling on the ligand hyperfine structure
We saw in § 19.2 how in second order the spin-orbit coupling modifies
the hyperfine structure on the central nucleus by adding to the hyper-
fine structure operator (17.30), where n is a unit vector along r,
t t
the operator
with
The same procedure yields correction terms to the hyperfine structure
of the ligands (Marshall 1963). We quote the results only for U*(*F)
and 3ds(*F).
The orbital part (2ffy»/r8)(l . I) of (20.70) adds through (20.71) a
j n

--- Page 798 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 783
contribution of the same form for (3d3, *F) and (3d8, BF), namely
This represents a contribution to (Ay—A^) equal to
and a contribution to A equal to
8
Similarly the spin part of (20.70) adds to (A — A ) the following
a w
corrections :
Effects of the fluorine Is wave-functions on the ligand hyperfine structure
(Marshall and Stuart 1961)
In our model of covalent bonding we had assumed that the augmented
anti-bonding orbitals did not contain any admixtures from the Is
orbitals of the ligands. Although such admixtures are undoubtedly
small their contribution to the ligand hyperfine structure may not be
negligible, for a = (167r/3)/?y S |<pi(0)|2 is very much larger than a .
ls n s 2s
If instead of a single admixture coefficient A we introduce two, namely
s
A and A , into the anti-bonding cr-orbitals we find that the isotropic
ls 2s
hyperfine structure constant A instead of being proportional to
s
^L l^sWI2 is now proportional to
The magnitude of the second term in the curly bracket is difficult to
estimate: <pi(0)l<p2(Q) i*1 F~ is of the order of —4-5. For A , assuming
s S 2s
that the effect of (p is a small correction, we can take the value
ls
extracted from the measurement of

--- Page 799 ---

784 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
For A we could tentatively take the overlap integral
ls
Si. = (3^ I «,is),
X
which is equivalent to taking the covalent bonding constant
7i. = Ais-Sis = 0.
Unfortunately this integral depends very critically on the shape of the
3d wave-function near the fluorine ion, which may be quite different
from that of the 3d wave-function of the free ion. For instance, with
S = A = 0-0045, calculated using 3d functions of the free ion
l8 lg
Mn2+, and with A ^ 0-12 compatible with A = IGxlO^cm-1 in
2s s
KMnF , we get {l+(# <pi(0)/A <p (0))}2 & 0-70, which is a sizeable
3 ls s 2s 2s
reduction. The correction is negative because <p has a node whereas
2s
q> has not. If we choose <p and <p to have the same sign in the
ls ls 2s
overlap region with 3d, they will have opposite signs at the fluorine
nucleus, in accordance with the sign convention we have chosen. How-
ever in view of the uncertainty in the magnitude of the correction
some authors prefer to omit it altogether.
20.8. Ligand hyperfine structure for ions of type B
When the ground cubic term of the central ion is degenerate the
calculation of the hyperfine interaction for the ligands is much more
complicated than for orbital singlets. The spin-orbit coupling, which
now acts in first order, scrambles orbital and spin states in a way
that makes each substate of the ground level a sum of many Slater
determinants, and the expectation value of the hyperfine coupling
with the nuclear moment of a ligand is a sum of many terms. To
illustrate the principle of the calculation we shall take the specific
example of Co2+ (Thornley, Windsor, and Owen 1965).
To start with, the ground cubic term 4jTj of Co2+, composed of three
holes, must be described in the strong-field formalism, which is suitable
for the study of covalent bonding, using the formulae (20.18), (20.19),
(20.21). On introducing the spin-orbit coupling, its effect in first
approximation is to split the ground level which has a degeneracy of
3(2$+ 1) = 12 into three fl multiplets, J = f, f, J, resulting from the
vector coupling of the fictitious orbital momentum 1 = 1 with the spin
S = f. It also mixes into the ground cubic term 4J\ the excited cubic
term 4T but we shall disregard this smaller effect to keep our treatment
2
as simple as possible. The ground level is J = J, for which the states

--- Page 800 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 785
zJ = | and Jz = — \ are given by the vector coupling formulae
The notation in this equation requires some clarification. Let \A) be an
orbital state which is a single Slater determinant {&, 6, c}. The com-
bined orbit-spin state \A) ||) will be the Slater determinant {a+b+c+}
and can be written symbolically
The state \A) ||) can similarly be written symbolically {a, 6, c}
[+, +, — ] where [ + , + , — ] is a symmetrized spin Slater determinant
(l/A/3)[{+, + , -}+{ + > -> +}+{-> + > +}]• Thus (a, 6, c)[ + , + , -]
means (l/^/3){(a+b+c-) + (a+b~c+) + (a~6+c+)}.
This factorization of orbit and spin variables is a special feature of
Hund's states with maximum spin. The state | +) of (20.79) can now be
rewritten in detail using (20.18), (20.19), and (20.21),
with a similar formula for | —}. In this formula G and 8 are the
amplitudes cos a and sin a (see eqn (20.21)) of the cubic configurations
(te2) and (t\e) in the ground term 4T . The one-electron orbital states
2 1
|1), |0), | —1) (not to be confused with the many-electron states |1>, |0>
| —1}) are defined in (20.16) where rj, r\, rj and also 0 and s are the
x y z
augmented antibonding orbitals of Table 24.
The calculation of the hyperfine structure with, say, the nucleus of
ligand 3 is now straightforward in principle. The result can again be
written in the form A^IzSz+A±(IxSx+IySy) where the fictitious spin S
is the fictitious total angular momentum J = -|. The values of A y and
A are given by
L
where J^(3) is the Hamiltonian for the hyperfine coupling with the
nucleus of ligand 3. In order to evaluate (20.81) we must replace the
51

--- Page 801 ---

786 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
orbitals |1), |0), | — 1), |0), \e) in (20.80) by their expansions given in
Table 24, using (20.16). The calculation is lengthy but offers no
special difficulties. To illustrate it we consider in ^(3) the contact
interaction part
The only orbital in (20.80) that gives a non-vanishing contribution to
( + | ^0(3) | + > and < + | ^fc(3) | —> is the orbital |0), which contain
the wave-function 9? (3) with an amplitude ( — A /\73)(^V~^) = —/|.
2s S
From (20.7<^ wo obtain
which, using (20.80), becomes
Similarly
whence
A feature of this result, which we have not met before, is that the
contact interaction is not perfectly isotropic. The anisotropy, as
measured by (A*\—A±)/A^ — (— ^)(tan2a)/(l+f tan2a) which is quite
small. For a vanishing splitting A = W(t ) — W(e) the ground cubic
2g
term is pure *F and tan2a = ^ (see after eqn (20.24)) giving an aniso-
tropy of about —3 per cent. It is actually much less because experi-
mentally tan2a turns out to be of the order of 0-08.
The calculation of A§ and A\ follows the same principle but is more
involved, in particular because the ^-hyperfine structure Hamiltonian

--- Page 802 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 787
Jf , in contrast with ^f , can have off-diagonal matrix elements
p c
between two different antibonding orbitals.
Since a is small, it is not a bad approximation and a great simplifica-
tion to take in (20.80) C = 1, 8 = 0. Then the part of (20.80) that
contains ^-orbitals of ligand 3, which we need to calculate the expecta-
tion value of the ^-hyperfine structure Hamiltonian .^,(3), can be
written
where | — l ), (O^,), \l ) are ^-orbitals of ligand 3, eigenstates of l(3)
p p e
with eigenvalues —1, 0, 1. A similar formula can be written for the
Kramers conjugate state |—).
The one-electron ^-hyperfine structure Hamiltonian 3?^(3) can be
written
Here the last term in N allows phenomenologically for possible core
polarization on the fluorine ion.
The hyperfine structure coefficients A^ and Av are given by
±
A\ = 20>( + \ N.\+), A*± = 20>( + \ N \-)
x
and, using (20.87), (20.88), we obtain
The complete expressions for A\\ and A for a ^ 0 can be found in
L
Thornley et al. (1965), where finer effects such as spin-orbit mixing of
42\ and 4jP are also considered.
2
We have outlined this calculation of ligand hyperfine structure in
some detail because it is the first example of a situation where we

--- Page 803 ---

788 THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING
could not use the Wigner-Eckart theorem generalized for the cubic
group and have had to write out the Slater determinants explicitly.
The reason for this state of affairs is clear: the hyperfine structure with
one given ligand is not invariant under cubic symmetry.
20.9. Ligand quadrupole hyperfine structure
If the ligand nuclei have spins / > 1 there exists, besides the hyper-
fine magnetic coupling, an electric quadrupole coupling between the
nuclear quadrupole moments and the electronic field gradients at the
nuclear sites. Since most studies of transferred hyperfine couplings have
been performed on compounds where the ligands are fluorine ions with
nuclear spin / = -J, the experimental evidence on quadrupole effects is
scarce. Furthermore, the relationship between these couplings and
covalency is somewhat more complicated than in the case of magnetic
hyperfine coupling. One obvious difference between magnetic and
quadrupole couplings with the nuclei of the ligands is that s-orbitals,
so important for the former, do not contribute to the latter. Another
essential difference is the fact that in contrast to magnetic hyperfine
structure, bonding orbitals do contribute to the quadrupole couplings.
In order to minimize the total energy of the complex, each bonding
orbital is filled with two electrons with opposite spins whose contribu-
tions to the magnetic hyperfine structure of a ligand nucleus cancel
each other. On the other hand, their contributions to the quadrupole
coupling of a ligand are spin independent and add.
Let us again consider ligand 3, and the contributions from its
orbitals to the anti-bonding orbitals of the complex given by (20.50).
The quadrupole hyperfine interaction will have axial symmetry around
the 2-axis. If ^^ is the quadrupole Hamiltonian we know that for a
^-electron
where (r~3) is of course the value for a ^-orbital on the ligand ion.
Using (20.50) and (20.51) we find the following contributions to the
quadrupole couplings from the antibonding orbitals of ions in singlet
states:

--- Page 804 ---

THE EFFECTS OF COVALENT BONDING 789
To these we must add the contribution of the filled bonding orbitals.
If these orbitals were exactly ^-orbitals of the ligand their contribution
to the quadrupole interaction would be that of a closed shell and
therefore vanish. Actually each bonding ^-orbital contains admixtures
from 3d orbitals of the central ion (and possibly admixtures from other
orbitals) which behave like holes in the ^?-shell. This remark makes
possible an estimate of the quadrupole interaction of the ligands if the
following simplifying assumptions are made (Owen and Thornley 1966) :
bonding ligand p -orbitals contain admixtures from central 3d-orbitals
which have the same magnitude as the corresponding admixtures from
ligand ^-orbitals in the central antibonding 3d-orbitals (this assumption
is equivalent to taking the overlap 8 as much smaller than the covalency
coefficient y in eqn (20.10)).
With these assumptions the contribution of an electron in a bonding
p-orbital to the quadrupole interaction is equal and opposite to that of
an electron in the corresponding anti-bonding orbital. The contribution
of the bonding orbitals to the quadrupole interaction is thus, using
(20.50), (20.51),
Adding (20.91) and (20.92) we find the following approximate expres-
sions for the quadrupole interaction :
These expressions should be compared to the eqns (20.58), (20.60),
and (20.62), which give the magnetic hyperfine structure due to
^-electrons. It will be noticed that while for 3d5 and 3d8 the magnetic
hyperfine structure contains the same admixture coefficients, namely
ft—fffp, and fffv, the situation is different for 3d3 where the magnetic
hyperfine structure is proportional to f.
t

--- Page 805 ---

21
THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE
21.1. Introduction
PARAMAGNETIC resonance of transition elements is studied most
conveniently in dilute samples. Given a crystal containing a regular
array of diamagnetic ions such as, say, Zn2+, a few of these are replaced
by paramagnetic ions such as, say, Cu2+ or Mn2+, whose paramagnetic
resonance is then observed. To interpret the results of the observations,
the following simplifying assumptions are usually made.
(a) the influence of the environment on the electronic wave-function
of the ion can be described by means of a static crystal field.
(b) if the paramagnetic ion has the same charge state as the dia-
magnetic ion which it has replaced, so that no charge compensation
occurs, the symmetry (if not the magnitude) of the crystal field it
'sees', is unchanged.
There are, however, cases when these assumptions are invalid. Let us
begin by neglecting spin-orbit coupling, a usual procedure in the iron
group, and assume that the symmetry of the crystal potential is
sufficiently high to leave some orbital degeneracy in the electronic
ground state of the paramagnetic ion. In a cubic field this state will be a
F doublet or a F triplet for a Z>-state of the free ion, and a F triplet
3 5 4
for an Estate. There exists a general theorem due to Jahn and Teller
(1937) which predicts that such a degenerate state is unstable with
respect to small displacements of the neighbouring atoms which lower
the symmetry of the crystal field 'seen' by the ion. As a consequence
of this theorem, whose precise meaning will be discussed in the following
sections, either assumption (a) or (b) may be violated.
(a) The environment of the paramagnetic impurity ion may keep the
same symmetry that it had for the diamagnetic ion but the description
of this environment by the device of a static crystal field is invalid. This
is the so-called dynamic Jahn-Teller effect.
(b) The approximation of using a static crystal field is still valid but
this field has a lower symmetry than in the original crystal. This is the
so-called static Jahn-Teller effect.
In either case, the consequences for the features of the paramagnetic

--- Page 806 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 791
resonance spectrum are far-reaching. In the following sections we shall
outline the general theoretical treatment of the Jahn-Teller effect, which
will then be applied to situations that actually occur in paramagnetic
ions.
Since the original work of Jahn and Teller (1937) and the pioneer
work of Van Vleck (1939) a large number of articles, some of them of a
highly sophisticated nature, have been published on the theory of static
and dynamic Jahn-Teller effects. The reader will find in the detailed
bibliography of the review article by Ham (1969) the references to the
important work of Opik and Pryce, Liehr, Moffitt and Thorson,
Longuet-Higgins, Child, O'Brien, Bersuker, and many others, whose
contributions have helped to clarify the various aspects of the theory.
In spite of this theoretical effort and in contrast to it, experimental
evidence of the existence of the Jahn-Teller effect had until recently
been remarkably scarce, with the exception of the pioneer work of
Bleaney and his colleagues on Cu2+. Neither the reasons for the failure
of the Jahn-Teller effect to materialize in the form in which it was
expected nor its dependence on the temperature, when observed, were
fully understood, in spite of the early work of Abragam and Pryce
(1950), which has been considerably expanded, along different lines, by
Bersuker (1962, 1963) and O'Brien (1964).
A major advance was achieved with the theoretical work of Ham
(1965, 1968, 1969) who was the first to push to its logical consequences
the idea, which somehow had escaped general attention, that the
Jahn-Teller coupling between the nuclear and the electronic motion
had necessarily the same high symmetry as the electronic Hamiltonian
responsible for the degeneracy of the paramagnetic ion, and thus could
not possibly lift that degeneracy. Ham pointed out that the Jahn-
Teller effect whose influence had seemed to be mysteriously absent from
certain paramagnetic spectra had been there all the time as large as
life if one knew where to look for it. A second major advance has been
the discovery by Coffman (1965) and Hochli (1966) of a new type of
Jahn-Teller spectrum previously unobserved, which fitted beautifully
into the general theory of the dynamic Jahn-Teller effect.
The treatment of this chapter owes much to the ideas and even the
presentation of Ham in his two major papers (1965, 1968) and also to
his review article (1969) which through his kindness was made available
to the authors prior to its publication. This treatment, where the ion
and its nearest neighbours are considered as an isolated molecule
interacting only through relaxation mechanisms with the rest of the

--- Page 807 ---

792 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
crystal in which it is embedded, is undoubtedly a gross oversimplifica-
tion. Its justification is twofold: first a rigorous theory of the Jahn-
Teller coupling of the paramagnetic ion to the rest of the lattice simply
does not exist at present ; secondly, as elsewhere in this book, the most
important features of the phenomenon are already determined by the
symmetry of the problem, which is built into the approximate treatment
to be given below.
We limit the discussion throughout to cubic symmetry. The changes
needed when a field of lesser symmetry still leaves an orbital degeneracy,
such as a trigonal field applied to a cubic F doublet, are straight-
3
forward. Furthermore, we shall see that if these fields are much weaker
than the cubic field, their effect is often appreciably quenched by the
dynamic Jahn-Teller effect itself.
21.2. The Born-Oppenheimer approximation and the
Jahn-Teller theorem
Let us make the simplifying assumption that for the electronic state
of the paramagnetic ion under consideration we may disregard the
influence of the positions (and motions) of all but its nearest neighbours
in the crystal. We can then treat the complex XY formed by the
n
paramagnetic ion X and its n nearest neighbours Y (n = 6 for octa-
hedral and 4 for tetrahedral coordination) as a single molecule and we
start by recalling the general method for finding its equilibrium
configuration. The Hamiltonian ^ of the molecule can be written
where the various terms of (21.1) are respectively the kinetic energy of
the electrons and of the nuclei, together with the Coulomb interactions
between the electrons, between electrons and nuclei, and between nuclei
(smaller magnetic interactions are disregarded at this stage of approxi-
mation). Let the symbol q represent the 3n coordinates of the n electrons
of the molecule and Q the 3^ coordinates of its N nuclei. Equation
(21.1) can then be rewritten as
where p and P are momenta conjugate to q and Q. An eigenfunction
®(9i Q) °f (21.la) satisfies the Schrodinger equation
These eigenfunctions are found by the following approximate

--- Page 808 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 793
procedure due to Born and Oppenheimer (1927). The nuclear coordinates
Q are given some fixed numerical values Q' (the nuclei are 'nailed down'),
and the electronic Hamiltonian
where Q' is a set of numerical parameters, is then diagonalized. Let
q)Q(q) be an eigenstate and U(Q') the corresponding eigenvalue of
f
(21.2) so that
This task is repeated for all values of Q' in order to determine the
function U(Qr). The complete wave-function of the molecule, the
solution of (21.1b), is then sought in the so-called Born-Oppenheimer
form
where *¥(Q) is the nuclear part of the molecular wave-function.
Introducing (21.4) into (21.Ib) and making use of (21.2) and (21.3), one
obtains the following equation for *¥(Q):
Equation (21.5) is only approximately correct: it is obtained by
making the assumption
and implies that the electronic wave-function <PQ(<I) is relatively insensi-
tive to small nuclear displacements. A general discussion of the validity
of this assumption, which relies on the smallness of the ratio of the
electronic to nuclear masses, is outside the scope of this book. It is
clear that it will in general become invalid in cases of degeneracy or near
degeneracy when two eigenvalues of (21.3), U(Q') and U^Q'),
t
corresponding to two eigenstates <?*„•(%) and 9?L(#) come very close to
each other, because the kinetic energy terms neglected in (21.5) may
appreciably mix these two states. This constitutes a failure of the Born-
Oppenheimer approximation.
The Born-Oppenheimer procedure can now be summarized as
follows. With the nuclei nailed down at positions Q' ', the electronic
eigenfunction (pQ>(<l) and the electronic energy U(Q') are found for all
values of Q'. One then forgets completely about the electrons and solves
a Schrodinger equation of motion for the nuclei, the inter -nuclear
potential energy being precisely the electronic energy U(Q) obtained
previously by solving (21.3).

--- Page 809 ---

794 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
To find the equilibrium shape of the molecule (or of the paramagnetic
complex XY , embedded in the crystal) one then seeks the minimum of
n
the potential energy U(Q), which requires a knowledge of the derivatives
dU/dQj. Their calculation is facilitated by a remark due to Feynman
(1939). From the relation
we find
The last term vanishes because (p (q) is normalized, so that
Q
the expectation value being taken over an eigenstate <PQ(<?) of (21.3).
What the relation (21.7) means is this: suppose that for a set Q of
0
values of Q the electronic wave-function <PQ (q) is either known or can
be guessed from, say, symmetry considerations. In order to determine
whether this set Q corresponds to a minimum of U(Q) it is not
0
necessary to calculate dU/dQj at Q0) that is U(Q) in the neighbourhood
of Q . Rather, it is enough to calculate the expectation value, over
0
VQ (?)> of the derivative BV/dQ^ of the Coulomb energy whose expres-
sion, Vee(q)+V0-s(q9Q)+Vyns(Q)9 is naturally known. Formula (21.7)
also follows directly from the well-known result of first -order perturba-
tion theory whereby the first-order change in the energy is equal to the
expectation value of the change in the potential, taken over the
unperturbed wave -function.
Once the set of values Q has been found which minimizes U(Q), the
0
latter is expanded as a quadratic form of the differences Qi—Q and
Qi
the vibrational motion of the nuclei around the equilibrium position Q
0
can be considered as harmonic. If one is not interested in nuclear
vibrations one may solve the electronic equation (21.3) by giving to the
nuclear coordinates Q' the experimental values as found, for instance,
from X-ray measurements of internuclear distances. This, however, is
only an approximation, as will appear later in more detail.
If the central ion of the complex is a diamagnetic ion already non-
degenerate when free, the minimum of U(Q) will often occur for a set
of values Q such that the complex has a high symmetry, such as cubic.
Q
If the nucleus of the diamagnetic ion X' has a spin / > J this symmetry
can be verified, for example, from the observation of its nuclear

--- Page 810 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 795
resonance and the absence of any quadrupole splitting. What happens
then if we replace the diamagnetic ion X' by a paramagnetic ion X
which, when free, possesses an orbital degeneracy in its ground state?
Let us nail down the nuclei at positions Q in the paramagnetic
0
complex XY such that it has the same symmetry as the equilibrium
n
position of the diamagnetic complex X'Y (the overall scale may be
n
different). The ground level F of the ion X in the environment created
by its neighbours T may then still have some degeneracy left (F , F ,
3 4
or F ). What the Jahn-Teller theorem says is that it is always possible,
5
by shifting some of the nuclei, to lower the energy of at least one of the
states that span the ground level.
In order to put the discussion on a quantitative basis some definitions
are required. Let us consider as an example the octahedral complex
XY where the coordinates of the various atoms (i = 1, . . . , 6) have in
Q
the cubic symmetry position Q the following values x™\ (a, 0, 0),
Q
(0, a, 0), (0, 0, a), (-a, 0, 0), (0, -a, 0), (0, 0, —a). Any distortion or
displacement of the complex is defined by the values of the 18 displace-
ments X^ = #„—#2*- Under symmetry operations of the cubic group the
quantities X£ transform into themselves, providing a representation of
the cubic group which is reducible. It is more convenient to introduce
the so-called normal coordinates Q linear combinations of the -3T*
J9
which transform according to irreducible representations of the cubic
group. These combinations are obtained by the standard methods of
group theory. Three linear combinations of the X^ correspond to
rotations without distortion of the octahedron XY as a whole. They
Q
are of no interest to us in so far as we disregard interactions between the
complex and the crystal wherein it is embedded. The fifteen remaining
combinations transform according to a representation F which can be
reduced as follows:
where the suffixes g and u mean even and odd. The indices a and b
mean that F is contained twice in F. As explained in § 14.6, only the
4u
even displacements are expected to change the potential energy of the
complex in first order.
The explicit expressions of the Q as functions of the X£ are given for
{
the even representations in Table 26. Similar expressions can be
written for Q to Q but we shall not require them. From now on when
7 15
we write the Coulomb energy as V(q, Q) and the potential energy as

--- Page 811 ---

796 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
U(Q), where Q stands for the set of normal coordinates defined above
(suitably modified for groups other than O ).
h
We now return to the ground manifold of the paramagnetic ion X
within the complex XT a manifold spanned by the wave-functions
n9
(p^(q) which obey the relations
We have made the assumption that this manifold is degenerate when
the complex has a symmetrical shape invariant through a group ^.
This occurs when all normal coordinates Q are set equal to Q? = 0.
{
Equation (21.9) then becomes
where we write for brevity \<pr (q)) = \r) and ^e (q) = «^.
Qo Qo
The functions \r) provide a basis for an irreducible representation F
of the group ^. If the normal coordinates are given small values Qj,
the potential V(q, Q) will change in first approximation by an amount
Since dV is clearly left unchanged by an operation of the group ^ acting
simultaneously on the nuclear coordinates Q and on the electronic
coordinates g, the electronic operators Vf(q, 0) must provide the same
irreducible representations F' of ^ as the Q According to the rules of
jf
first-order perturbation theory, the changes in the energy Z7(0) of the
degenerate manifold caused by the term (21.11) are given by the eigen-
values of the matrix
As shown in § 12.6 the degeneracy of the manifold F will be lifted
by the perturbation Vj belonging to a representation F' of & (different
from the unit representation) if the direct product F* x F x F' contains
the unit representation. The case where F' is the unit representation
corresponds to the totally symmetric (or breathing) mode, which
simply changes the scale of the complex without altering its shape.
The degenerate energy level of the complex is then shifted without
being split.
The proof of the Jahn-Teller theorem consists in a systematic check, for
all point-groups <&, that there always exists at least one representation
F', different from the unit representation, such that F* x F x F' contains
the unit representation (excluding the case of a linear complex and

--- Page 812 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 797
that of Kramers degeneracy). F is an irreducible representation of ^
with more than one dimension, and F' is one of the representations
spanned by the normal coordinates of the complex which is left in-
variant through operations of ^.
The sum of the energy displacements induced by T^ is equal to the
trace ]T (P\ ^ \P) which has been shown to vanish (eqn (12.40b)), (unless
j>
Vj belongs to the unit representation I\). It follows that for \Q\ ^ 0
and sufficiently small there will always be at least one electronic
energy level lower than the degenerate level for Q = 0.
We shall concern ourselves almost exclusively with cubic symmetry.
The situation is very different depending on whether the degenerate
multiplet is the doublet F or the triplet F or F and we shall deal with
3 4 5
them successively, starting with the doublet.
21.3. The magnetic properties of a 2E level
It has already been stated (§ 14.2) that the doublet F is non-
3
magnetic. This statement, which means that inside the manifold F a
3
vector operator V has vanishing matrix elements, is a consequence of
the reduction formula of the direct product (Table 2)
Let 6 and £ be the two wave-functions that span the doublet F and
3
transform respectively like (3z2 —r2) and \/ (3) (x2 —y2) under the operation
of the cubic group. Under a rotation R of 277/3 or jR2 of 477/3 around the
body diagonal [111] of the cube, these functions transform according
to the formulae (14.4) which we reproduce here for convenience:
The normal coordinates Q and $2 of Table 26 transform under
2
the operation of the cubic group in the same way as 0 and e, and for
this reason are often written as Q and Q .
Q e
Let X = X—X^ Y = Y — F , Z = Z — Z be the axial distortions
l 7 2 5 3 B
of an octahedral complex (XY ). If the totally symmetrical (or 'breath-
6
ing') coordinate Q = X+Y + Z is given the value zero, the quantities
±
X, Y, and Z are expressed by the following relations extracted from
Table 26:

--- Page 813 ---

798 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
If we define two new variables cp and p by the formulae
eqn (21.14) can be rewritten
We see that a cyclical permutation X —>• Y —> Z —> X can be described
by successive changes 277/8 in the angle 99, which can thus be given the
geometrical interpretation of a rotation through the angle 2?r/3 around
the body diagonal [111]. For a given value of p, (p = 0 corresponds,
according to (21.16), to an elongation of the octahedron along the
z-axis, (p = 277/3 along the #-axis, and <p = — 2?7/3 along the ?/-axis.
Values of cp = 77, 77+277/8, and 77—277/8 correspond to compressions of
the octahedron along the same axes.
If two representations F are spanned respectively by the two pairs
3
(0, e) and (6', e') the direct product F X F is spanned by the four
3 3
products 66', ee' 6e', e6''. The linear combinations of these which span
9
the irreducible representations, T F , F of the right hand of (21.12)
l9 2 3
are
The formulae (21.17) are easily obtained by standard methods of group
theory or, in view of their simplicity, by direct inspection. It is clear
from (21.15) and (21.17) that />2 = Ql+Ql is an invariant and that
cos 99 and sin 99 transform like 6 and e; cos 2cp = cos2<p—sin2^ and
sin 299 = 2 cos cp sin <p transform like —6 and e. The quantity
cos 89? = cos 299 cos 9?—sin 2<p sin 99
transforms like — (60f + ssr) and is thus an invariant belonging to the
unit representation I\, whereas sin 89? = sin 29? cos 9?+sin q> cos 2cp
transforms like e'd — 6'e and belongs to the unidimensional representa-
tion T (A ).
2 2
Inside the manifold F spanned by the functions |0) and |e) all
3
Hermitian operators can be expressed as a linear combination of the

--- Page 814 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 799
four Pauli matrices
A comparison of (21.18) with (21.17) shows that a arid cr transform
1 3
respectively as s and — 6 and for that reason, when they operate on the
substates |0) and \e) of a doublet F , they are usually written in the
3
literature as: a — U and cr = — U . Similarly cr, according to
± e 3 e 2
(21.17) and (21.18), belongs to the unidimensional representation F
2
and is usually written as cr = A .
2 2
An alternative proof of the fact that cr, cr cr transform like —8, s,
3 1? 2
and A , of which we shall make use very shortly, is as follows.
2
Consider the following Hermitian tensor operators
where L , L , L are the components of an orbital momentum in a D
x y z
state, L = 2, and P(LJL L) is the symmetrized product
y z
From their expressions (21.19) it is clear that the operators U', U'
e e
transform respectively like 6 and e of F and that A' belongs to the
3 2
representation F .
2
Let us consider the particular doublet F , which is obtained from the
3
splitting of a D term and, according to Table 4, is spanned by the two
functions
An elementary calculation of the matrix elements of the operators
(21.19) shows that inside this manifold the operators U', U' and A' are
e e9 2
represented by the matrices — <r, a and or, which shows that the
3 l9 2
latter do indeed transform like 0, e, and A . Being true for a particular
2
manifold F spanned by the functions (21.20), this result is clearly true
3
whatever the nature of the manifold.
Although the existence of a F doublet in a static crystal field is
3

--- Page 815 ---

800 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
not allowed by the Jahn-Teller theorem, it is interesting, and also very
useful as we shall see shortly, to derive the spin Hamiltonian and the
paramagnetic spectrum to be expected from a 2F ground level,
3
originating in the 2Z> term of a paramagnetic ion, split by a cubic field.
It turns out that our former treatment of the ions of type A with a non-
degenerate ground state \0} (in § 19.2) can be adapted with very little
change to the present situation provided it is understood that the
symbol \0) now means the twofold degenerate orbital ground manifold
F . An expectation value such as say (0\ L L +L L \0) now becomes
3 p q q p
an operator within this manifold represented by a 2 x 2 matrix, that is
by linear combination of the Pauli matrices — C7, U , A , and «/.
0 e 2
Let us consider, for instance, with this new interpretation where \0)
is the ground manifold r , the expression given by formula (19.19),
3
or, since
where <7(eqn (19.17)) is the operator — ]T' \n}(n\/(W -W ). The energy
n 0
n
difference W —W has the single value A = 10Dq equal to the distance
n 0
between the ground doublet F and the excited triplet F . We can thus
3 5
write G = — (1/A){1 — \0)(0\] where 1 is the unit operator (1 is the
unit operator inside the whole manifold D rather than inside the more
restricted manifold F where it is represented by the unit 2x2 matrix
3
</). Carrying this expression of C into (21.21) and taking into account
that (0\ Lp \0) = 0 for all p (because the F3 doublet is non-magnetic)
we obtain
or, since it is more convenient to deal with traceless tensors,
Because of the reduction formula (21.12) the only components of the

--- Page 816 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 801
tensor operator A that do not vanish are
which we can identify, using (21.19), with ?7 /A and ?7 /A and also
0 £
A = 2.//A. The Zeeman coupling given, according to (19.22) by the
0
formula Z = ^HJ)Sq(gsdpq — 2XAj>Q)) can now be written as
Z = /?(H.S)(jr y-2AA )-
B 0
which we can rewrite as
with, according to (21.24) and (21.25),
It should be noted that formula (21.26) is more general than (21.27).
Indeed, once we had established through eqns (21.17) and (21.18) the
transformation laws of the operators U and U eqn (21.26) could have
0 B9
been written a priori as the only invariant Zeeman spin Hamiltonian
for any 2F level. On the other hand, eqn (21.27) assumes explicitly that
3
the level 2F originates in the splitting by a cubic field of a 2Z> term.
3
Taking (21.26) as a starting point, the values (21.27) for g and g
± 2
could have been derived directly by correlating them to the values of
g\\(0) and g\\(e) which are the values of g\\ in tetragonal symmetry with
either 6 or e as the non-degenerate ground level. It is indeed sufficient
to take the expectation value of (21.26) either in the state 6 or s to see
that
g\\(6) and g\\(e) are given directly by the formulae (19.19) and (19.32)
for ions of type A.
This remark will be helpful in writing down the hyperfine coupling
with the nuclear spin. From in variance arguments this coupling is
52

--- Page 817 ---

802 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
necessarily of the form
where, as before, A and A can be correlated to A\\(6) and A\\(e)
l 2
obtained in tetragonal symmetry,
Using the formula (19.32) for the hyperfine coupling where f is given by
(17.46) we find, writing & for 2y fy?(r-3> = 20r ^ </-3) (see eqn
n n n
(19.10)),
For a 2D term
The next problem is to find the resonance spectrum associated with
the Zeeman Hamiltonian (21.26). Actually this problem has already
been solved earlier in connection with the Zeeman effect of the F
8
quadruplet. When a spin J is included the doublet F becomes the
3
fourfold level Z>* x F = F x F = F . The four states |0, +), |0, — >,
3 6 3 8
|fij +), |£> — ) that span F x F are linear combinations of the states
3 6
|m) = |f) l-i-}, |_ i} |— f) that span F and were introduced in § 14.4.
} ? 8
Actually the correspondence turns out to be very simple ; it is
To check the correspondence (21.32) we take again for 6 and e the kets
|0> and (l/v/2){|2) + |— 2)} used previously. Under a rotation of ?r/2
around the axis Oz the ket |f ) is multiplied by definition by e3i7r/4.
The ket s = (l/<v/2){|2) + |— 2}} is multiplied by ei7rand the ket |e, — )
by e3l7r/4. It is easy to check that it is the only such one among the four
kets \6, ±), |e, ±). The first equality (21.32) is thus established and
similarly for the others. The eigenvalues of the spin Hamiltonian (21.26)
(divided by {}H) are then given by the secular equation (18.30) where
from (21.26) and (21.32) the coefficients P and Q are the expectation
values,

--- Page 818 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 803
In practice we shall be concerned only with the case when \g\ < IgrJ,
2
that is P & —Q or |P+Q| < |P, Q\. The roots of the secular equation
(18.30) then take an approximate form that is rather simple. We shall
not write them down, however, for in the case when \g\ < |<7i| it is more
2
illuminating to write directly an approximate solution of (21.26).
Let |, 77, £ be the cosines of the direction OZ of the magnetic field.
The first term of (21.26) is g^HS and the second term becomes, in
z
first-order perturbation theory,
The eigenvalues of (21.26) are then clearly (with M = ±4)
There are two resonance frequencies,
and the four eigenstates are
where co is defined by
The spectrum is clearly anisotropic, and the two frequencies v and v
: z
become equal when the field is along a body diagonal of the cube where
the cubic invariant in curly brackets vanishes.
Whereas the assumption \g\ > \g\ is legitimate when g is of the
t 2 2
order (A/A), a similar assumption I^J > \A%\ is not warranted unless
the coefficient K, which represents the core polarization in (21.31),
happens to be large. When I^J > \A \ the eigenvalues of the spin
2
Hamiltonian, sum of (21.26) and (21.29), are given by

--- Page 819 ---

804 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
where m = I is the quantized projection of the nuclear spin along the
z
applied field H. The resonance frequencies v , observed in an electronic
m
spin transition |AJf | = 1 are given by
The reader may well ask what is the point of calculating the shape
of spectra such as (21.34a) or (21.37a) if the assumptions of cubic
symmetry under which they are derived are made invalid by the Jahn-
Teller theorem. The remarkable fact is that anisotropic spectra of this
form have actually been observed. Furthermore, as will be shown later,
their existence is by no means forbidden by the Jahn-Teller theorem
but rather is a striking manifestation of a dynamic Jahn-Teller effect.
21.4. The static Jahn-Teller effect in a *E state
Using Table 26, which describes the various irreducible repre-
sentations F' spanned by the normal coordinates, and the reduction
formula (21.12), we find that only the T^(E) mode of distortion (Q, Q)
e e
can lift the orbital degeneracy of a F doublet. From what has been
3
said about the transformation properties of the Pauli matrices a = U
± e
and cr = — U within the manifold F it is clear that in first order the
3 e 3
electron-nuclear coupling given by (21.11) is necessarily of the form
where F is a constant. To it we must add the potential energy K(Ql+Ql)
associated with the vibrations of the normal coordinates (Q Q). We
9t e
can write K = ^co2/2 where o> is the harmonic frequency associated with
the vibrational mode E and where in first approximation we can equate
the mass coefficient /* to the mass M of each of the nuclei Y of the
complex -XTg.
The resultant potential energy operator
can be rewritten as a function of the variables p and y introduced in
(21.15):
The two eigenfunctions of (21.39a) are

--- Page 820 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 805
and the two eigenvalues are
with the lower sign for y>_. It is clear that p = 0 is not a position of
stable equilibrium for the complex and that a continuum of positions of
minimum energy is obtained for /> = \V\jMo)2. The value of the
0
minimum energy is
The expression (21.41) for the potential energy suffers from a serious
drawback: its symmetry far exceeds that of the cubic group since it is
independent of y whereas, as we showed earlier, it need only be invariant
when <p is changed by 2?r/3. The picture can be made more realistic by
what one calls warping of the potential energy surface, that is by adding
higher-order terms either to the quasi-elastic second-order term
Ma)*p*l2 or to the first-order Jahn-Teller coupling (21.39). The first
term with cubic symmetry to be added to the potential energy will be
of the form F p3 cos 3<p since, as we showed in § 21.3, cos 3^? is a cubic
3
invariant. We can also add to the Jahn-Teller coupling a second-
order term which, in order to be cubically invariant, must necessarily
be of the form
since, as we also showed in § 21.3, cos 2<p transforms like —0, and
sin 2w like e. The electronic Hamiltonian becomes then
The eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian are
which exhibit cubic symmetry by their dependence on <p being solely

--- Page 821 ---

806 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
as cos 3<p. The expression (21.45) shows that the minima of the
potential energy no longer form a continuum but rather are obtained
for discrete values of cp. These values are either 99 = 0, 27T/3, 477/3
or 77/3, 77, 577/3, depending on the relative signs and magnitudes of
the coefficients V and F . For simplicity we shall from now on, unless
2 3
stated otherwise, take V = 0. This has in particular the advantage of
2
preserving for the eigenfunctions of (21.44) the simple form (21.40)
whilst leaving intact all the qualitative features of the problem. If
F < 0 the minima occur for 9? = 0, 277/3, 4?7/3 and correspond to an
3
elongation of the octahedron along one of its three fourfold axes. If
F > 0 the minima are obtained for a compression along the same axes.
3
Consider in particular a distortion along the z-axis, that is y = 0
or 77. The ground state is given by Table 21.1. The electronic wave-
functions that correspond to distortions along Ox or Oy can be obtained
TABLE 21.1
V V y Ground state
+
+ 77
-j- — 0
— +
77
— — 0
from these by the formulae (21.13), which are equivalent to a cyclic
permutation of the coordinates x, y, z in the wave-functions 6 and s. In a
simple-minded picture one is led to predict that since the three axes are
equivalent, one-third of the octahedra present in the crystal will be
distorted along each axis, and the observed paramagnetic spectrum
should be a superposition of three normal tetragonal spectra in equal
proportions. The parameters g\\ and g of these spectra are obtained by
L
taking the expectation value of the coefficient of 8 or 8 in eqn (21.26)
Z X
over the electronic wave-function of the appropriate ground state given
in Table 21.1. For the parameters A\\ and A one takes similarly the
L
expectation value of the coefficients of I 8 or IJ3 in eqn (21.29). The
Z Z X
results are given below (cf. Table 7.22):
where the sign ± in g± or A± is, according to Table 21.1, that of the

--- Page 822 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 807
product FF , and g g, A A are given by (21.27) and (21.31). Such a
3 l9 z l9 2
pattern is indeed observed in some copper salts at 20°K as discussed in
detail in § 7.16. Experimentally it turns out that for Cu2+, 3d9 it is the
upper sign that is needed in (21.47).
21.5. Dynamic features of the static Jahn-Teller effect
In the foregoing we have implicitly assumed that at each minimum
the nuclear parameters p and cp had fixed values, neglecting completely
the zero -point motion of the nuclei; this is certainly incorrect. Actually
for a distortion along 0z, assuming for the sake of definiteness that
F > 0, F < 0, the wave-function of the complex XY should be
3 B
written, if the Born-Oppenheimer approximation is valid, as
where the nuclear wave-function Y (p, (p) is localized in the neighbour-
z
hood of p = PQ, y> = 0. For the Born-Oppenheimer approximation to
be valid in the first place, we require that the distance between the two
electronic energy levels that correspond to the wave-functions ip_ and
y , which is of the order of 2 |F| p = 4Wj , be much larger than the
+ 0 T
nuclear zero -point energy Hco/2. This is what is meant by strong Jahn-
Teller coupling. Furthermore, for the nuclear wave-function T to be
z
strongly localized in the trough of the minimum corresponding to
cp = o, we require that the height J^ = |2F p3| of the barrier that
3
separates this minimum from the other two at <p = ±2?r/3 be much
greater than the zero -point energy Ka>'/2 that corresponds to small
oscillations of the coordinate <p.
The frequency co' is of the order of
To obtain an order of magnitude for Cu2+ surrounded by six water-
molecules, we take an admittedly crude estimate of Opik and Pryce
(1957) that leads to
W ?v 3000 cm-1, V ~ 600 cm-1,
JT 9
2a>
a) ~ 350 cm"1, and from (21.49), co' ^ —.
3
Our calculation of the parameters (21.46), (21.47) of the paramagnetic
spectra, using the wave-functions of Table 21.1, was tantamount to
assuming that the nuclear wave-function *Fz(p> #0 °f (21.48) had the
form of a ^-function d(y>). A more realistic calculation should take into

--- Page 823 ---

808 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
account the finite extension of XF (9?). Making use of the relations
Z
we find for the parameters g and A,
where
The point is that while at the precise position of the minimum, say
<p = 0, the electronic wave-function \p_ is exactly 0, because of the
finite spatial extent of*F(p, <p) it is also partly e, which gives a change
z
in the values of g and A (O'Brien 1964). As discussed in § 7.16, it may
also explain some features of the hyperfine structure on the ligands in
the spectrum of Ni+ in NaF.
The foregoing discussion has some very strong limitations. First, it
applies only to the ground state of the complex, whereas there are many
excited states connected with nuclear vibrations which may be
appreciably populated at the temperature of the experiment. Second,
by considering the complex XY as an isolated system and neglecting
6
the coupling with its surroundings in the crystal, one disregards the
possibility of fast relaxation transitions from one configuration to
another, which may drastically alter the observed patterns. Last,
and this is really the main point, the dynamic features of the problem,
caused by the existence of the kinetic nuclear energy, have far-reaching
consequencies of which the finite extension of the nuclear wave-function
in each trough, leading to the corrected formulae (21.51), is only one
minor aspect.
We pass now to the study of the dynamic Jahn-Teller effect, at
the end of which it will become clearer under what conditions a static
effect such as the one described in the present section can be observed.
21.6. The dynamic Jahn-Teller effect in a 2E state
General
In the last section we said that for a strong Jahn-Teller coupling,
that is when the distance, 4W , between the two electronic energy
JT
states ip and y_ was much greater than the nuclear zero-point energy
+

--- Page 824 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 809
fico, the Born-Oppenheimer approximation was valid and the wave-
function of the system could be written as a single product of an
electronic wave -function, say 0, and a nuclear wave-function, say T .
z
Actually a closer look shows that even in this case things are more
complicated and electronic and nuclear motions are closely inter-
twined. There are actually three potential minima with three wave-
functions O = 0*F , ® — R0*¥ , O = R26*F and the total
z Z x x F Y
energy of the complex XY is the same in all of these. This degeneracy,
Q
as will be discussed later in more detail, is lifted at least partially
because of the finite overlap between the nuclear functions *¥x> ^F» ^ z-
The 'good' zero order wave-functions will then be suitable linear
combinations of the three O. States described by such linear combina-
tions, where electronic and nuclear motions cannot be separated, are
called vibronic states.
We take up now a study of these states in the general case, that is
for an arbitrary strength of the Jahn-Teller coupling. The total vibronic
Hamiltonian ^ is obtained by adding to the expression (21.44) the
v
nuclear kinetic energy (l/2Jf)(P^ + P^). This Hamiltonian operates on the
two nuclear variables Q and Q and on two electronic variables that
9 s
are the amplitudes C and G of the two electronic wave-functions 0
0 s
and s which span the electronic doublet F . Under operations of the
3
cubic group, Q and Q on one hand, C and C on the other, transform
e s 0 s
according to F and the Hamiltonian J^ is invariant under a simul-
3 v
taneous transformation
where DT* is one of the 2x2 transformation matrices of F . 3t? is thus
3 v
invariant through a transformation of its four variables Qo,Q»C , G by
Q B
r xr = r +r +iv
3 3 3 2
The very important consequence of this fact is that all the vibronic
eigenstates of ^ are either doublets of symmetry F or singlets of
v 3
symmetry F or F . This result is quite general and would still be true
x 2
if even higher-order terms, either for the Jahn-Teller coupling or the
potential energy, were added to (21.44).
It is actually misleading to say that the Jahn-Teller effect lifts a
degeneracy due to a high symmetry, since the Jahn-Teller coupling
term itself has the same symmetry. What the Jahn-Teller coupling does
is to replace a purely electronic degeneracy by a vibronic degeneracy of
exactly the same symmetry. Consider in particular the ground vibronic

--- Page 825 ---

810 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
level of the complex XY . In the absence of Jahn-Teller coupling, the
6
nuclear motion is that of a two-dimensional harmonic oscillator and
its ground state *¥(Q) is non-degenerate. The overall degeneracy is then
0
that of an electronic doublet F spanned by the two Born-Oppenheimer
3
functions *F(Q)6 and *¥ (Q)e. A Jahn-Teller coupling will change the
0 0
ground level into a vibronic F doublet but a doublet it will remain.
3
We must now examine successively what must be the nature of the
paramagnetic spectrum if the vibronic state is (a) a doublet, (b) a
singlet, assuming in each case that the vibronic level under considera-
tion is sufficiently removed from other vibronic levels for their mixing
by the Zeeman Hamiltonian to be negligible. Finally, we shall have to
explain the existence of a static Jahn-Teller effect whose occurrence in
the form of three spectra of lower symmetry does not seem to fit at all
into our picture of vibronic singlets and doublets.
The vibronic doublet
A vibronic doublet is spanned by two wave-functions that we shall
call 0 and #. They contain both electronic and nuclear variables and
transform like 6 and e, when both electronic and nuclear variables
undergo a transformation of the cubic group. Following Ham (1968),
we define the operators U and C7 , which are represented by the
g0 g£
matrices — cr and a when 0 and ff are chosen as basis states and
3 l
therefore can be written as
Operators such as U and U , which were represented by the Pauli
0 e
matrices — cr and a when the purely electronic states 0 and e were
3 l
chosen as basic states, will have the following matrix elements inside
the manifold of the vibronic doublet:
where q is a number smaller than unity, whereas all the other matrix
elements of U and U vanish. This is a consequence of the Wigner-
0 e
Eckart theorem since (U U) have the same transformation properties
0) e
as (E/g0, t/g ). The unit operator «/ has naturally the same matrix
£
elements within the vibronic doublet as within a purely electronic
doublet. An electronic operator such as the Zeeman coupling (21.26),
which in the absence of the Jahn-Teller effect could be written as

--- Page 826 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 811
can now be written
where we repeat that, with our choice of 0 and $ as the basic vibronic
states, U and C7 are simply the Pauli matrices —0*3 and c^. Actually
ge gE
(21.54a) is not the most general operator acting inside the vibronic
doublet and should be complemented by a term G A proportional to the
2 2
third Pauli matrix A = <r. We define a coefficient p = i(®\ A \#)
2 2 2
and an operator A = i(|<?)(0| — |0}(<^|), and (21.54a) then becomes
g
It is worth noting that^, the proportionality coefficient for the operator
A , is different from that for U and U , because A belongs to a different
2 e e 2
representation of the cubic group. Since the Zeeman coupling (21.26)
does not contain the operator A , the resonance spectrum in the presence
2
of the Jahn-Teller coupling must have exactly the same form as that
calculated in § 21.3, provided that in the formulae (21.26) and (21.29)
and also in (21.34) and (21.37) the splitting factor g and the hyperfine
2
constant A (not to be confused with the operator A proportional
2 2
to 0*2) are replaced by qg and qA .
2 2
One of the crucial problems of the theory is naturally the calculation
of the coefficient q for each vibronic doublet. It is a difficult problem
that requires the knowledge of the eigenfunctions of a fairly complicated
Hamiltonian Jif.
v
If the Jahn-Teller coupling is weak (meaning thereby W^Ho} <^ 1)
it is legitimate to simplify the problem by neglecting the warping terms,
which can be expected to be small for values of p <—' | V\/Ma)2. One of
the undesirable features of this so-called linear approximation is the
introduction of a spurious degeneracy. When the warping terms are
neglected all states are doubly degenerate; not only the doublets F
3
but also the singlets belonging to the representations I\ and F which
2
coincide in pairs. This can be seen as follows. The linear vibronic
Hamiltonian J^^, which has the form
is invariant under the transformation
which is a consequence of the commutation relations of U and
e
U . It follows that if <D(#, Q) = 6y (Q , Q) + e*F (Q, Q.) is an
B a e e 6 e B e

--- Page 827 ---

812 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
eigenstate of (21.56), so is <E>(Q, Q ) = U 3>(Q , -Q ). It will shortly
0 B Q s
be shown explicitly (eqn (21.58a)) that & ^ O, thus demonstrating
the twofold degeneracy. When the warping terms are introduced as a
perturbation the singlets A and A separate, whereas the doublets F
: 2 3
naturally remain degenerate.
If we are interested in the ground doublet only, and if the first
excited singlet is sufficiently removed from it, this spurious degeneracy
is not very serious and the linear approximation is useful. To obtain the
form of the wave-functions that span the ground doublet we take a trial
function of the form *¥±(Q)y> , where the electronic functions y± are
±
given by (21.40). The vibronic Hamiltonian J^^ acting on this function
gives
where T is the kinetic energy operator
Since eqn (21.57) does not contain explicitly the variable <p it is
separable and we may seek a vibronic eigenfunction of the following
form:
Here the two unknown functions f (p) and g (p) obey the following
n n
system of coupled equations, derived from (21.57),
Since (21.59) has real coefficients the complex conjugate of (21.58)
is also a solution with the same energy. This corresponds to the two-
fold degeneracy of all eigenstates of 3tf^ alluded to earlier. Instead of
9
the two degenerate solutions (21.58) and (21.58a) it is often more
convenient to use their real and imaginary parts. Since the electronic
wave-functions \p of (2 1 .40) are functions of 99/2, in order for the vibronic
±
functions (21.58) and (21.58a) to be single- valued, the constant n must
be half -integer.

--- Page 828 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 813
For n = | + 3m or n = f+3m the doublets are bona fi ddoeu Fblets
3
and remain such in the presence of warping, whereas for n = f+ 3m
we have two states belonging to the unidimensional representations A
l
and A which are split by the warping. In particular, the wave-functions
2
©^ and <?£, which span the ground vibronic doublet and are proportional
to the real and imaginary part of (21.58), are given by
Here we have written them in a way that displays explicitly their
transformation character as 6 and e in accordance with eqn (21.17).
If the Jahn-Teller energy W is small compared to Ha), the first
JT
excited state for n = f will be approximately separated from the
ground doublet by one vibrational quantum Ha) which is much greater
than the Zeeman energy, and at helium or hydrogen temperatures it will
not be populated. The coefficients p and q which are unity in the
absence of Jahn-Teller coupling will be only slightly smaller than unity
for a weak coupling. Within the linear approximation they have been
computed numerically (Child and Longet-Higgins 1962) and their
variation is represented in Fig. 21.1. Figure 21.2 gives the distance
from the ground doublet to the first excited state.
FIG. 21.1. Plot of the coefficients p and q against TF /fta>, together with approximate
JT
analytical expressions for these variations.

--- Page 829 ---

814 THE JAHN-TELLEK EFFECT
FIG. 21.2. Plot of the singlet-doublet splitting Ax against Wjf/Ha).
When the Jahn-Teller effect becomes large the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation becomes valid, one of the components of the wave-
function (21.58), say g , vanishes and we may disregard the right-hand
n
side of eqn (21.59). The energy gap A between the ground doublet and
x
the first excited state then becomes approximately
Since p is localized in the neighbourhood of the energy minimum
~ \V\IMv\ we have </| l/p» |/> « </ | !//,« |/ ) « Jf^*/F2 and
Po f f 4 4
If we take the values suggested by Opik and Pryce (1957) for Cu2+ we
find A ^ 20 cm"1. Unfortunately the linear approximation loses much
x
of its significance when the Jahn-Teller effect becomes large. In
particular, the energy of the first excited state depends very critically
on the warping. A different approach, more suitable when the Jahn-
Teller coupling and the warping terms are large, will be outlined shortly.
In view of the difficulty of the problem in the general case it is
interesting to obtain the maximum of information from symmetry
arguments only. Elementary group-theoretical considerations based on
the relations (21.12) and (21.17) show that the most general expression

--- Page 830 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 815
for two wave-functions that span a vibronic doublet F is
3
Here 6 and e are two electronic wave-functions, whose coefficients a b are
functions of the nuclear variables Q and transform as follows: b(Q)
e
and b(Q) belong to F and transform like 0 and e; a (Q) belongs to F
s 3 ± x
and a (Q) to F . As a consequence the following orthogonality relations
2 2
are evident:
where the symbol { ) means integration over the variables Q. We see
that the wave-functions (21.60) obtained in the linear approximation
for the ground doublet are of this form with a (Q) = 0.
2
From the normalization and orthogonality of 0 and $ in (21.61) and
making use of (21.62) we find
For the coefficients p and q we get
The relations (21.64), which are based on symmetry considerations only,
are quite general and independent of the strength and the form of both
the Jahn-Teller coupling and the warping terms. From (21.63) and
(21.64) we get
For the ground doublet and in the linear approximation, since a = 0,
2
we have q = |(1+^), a result due to Ham (1968).
If the Jahn-Teller coupling is very strong the two electronic wave-
functions v>± which make it diagonal (and which have the form (21.40)
when this coupling is linear) differ in energy by a large amount, the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation is valid and for the ground doublet
only one of these, say ^_, multiplies both components of the doublet.
This means that in (21.61) the coefficients of 0 and s are in the same
ratio for 0 and $. Hence
or

--- Page 831 ---

816 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
When (21.66) is valid we get from (21.64) and (21.65)
The results (21.67) for a strong Jahn-Teller effect with warping have
been previously obtained by Ham (1968) for the ground doublet and
with the assumption that the Jahn-Teller coupling contains first-order
terms only.
The vibronic singlets
These states can be dealt with very quickly. For singlet states, which
belong to representations A± or A , it is clear that the expectation
2
values of U and U, which transform like 6 and e of F , vanish. The
Q s 3
Zeeman spin-Hamiltonian and the hyperfine coupling then have
necessarily the fully isotropic form
Spectra corresponding to such a Hamiltonian have actually been
observed. Indeed it was the first observation by Bleaney and Ingram
in 1950 of an isotropic spectrum for Cu2+ in copper fluosilicate, in-
explicable in the framework of static crystal-field theory, which led
Abragam and Pryce (1950) to postulate a dynamic Jahn-Teller effect
as a possible explanation. However, as we shall see in a later section,
fast relaxation may lead to a spectrum consistent with (21.68) even
when the state of the system is a vibronic doublet and also when
conditions are such that a static Jahn-Teller effect would be observable
in the absence of relaxation. Thus an isotropic spectrum does not
necessarily mean that the system is in a singlet state.
The effects of strain
The paramount importance of the effects of strain in connection with
the Jahn-Teller effect has been emphasized by Ham (1965, 1968). A
uniform strain is best defined by its six components belonging respec-
tively to
Inside a cubic manifold F the components e and e are the only ones
3 0 e
that split the energy level of the ion in first order. A trigonal strain e
xy
can affect it in second order only, via the spin-orbit coupling (Ham
1968).

--- Page 832 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 817
The first-order change in energy can be rewritten in operator form as
V (e U +eJ7 ), (21.69a)
ES 9 9 9
where V is a constant (the index E stands for E = F and S for
ES 3
strain). Consider a distortion of the complex XY described by the
n
normal coordinates Q and caused by a strain e. In order of magnitude
t
we shall have Q ~ eR where R is the nearest neighbour distance. We
t
are thus led to expect a relationship between the stress constant V
E8
and the Jahn-Teller coupling constant V of the form V ~ V /R. An
ES
elementary calculation based on the expressions of the Q given in
t
Table 26 leads to the following formulae (Ham 1968):
sixfold octahedral coordination,
eightfold cubic coordination,
fourfold tetrahedral coordination,
We see that ions with the largest Jahn-Teller effect will be the most
sensitive to strain. In the numerical example of Opik and Pryce for the
Cu2+ ion,
W = 3000 cm-1 V X 0-3 x 10~8,
JT
and if we take R — 2 X 10~8 cm for the distance to the nearest neighbour
we find
50000 cm-,
A strain as small as 10~5 would in this particular case split the orbital
doublet F by an amount of the order of a wave-number, and even
3
in the best crystals local random strains can be expected to influence
the paramagnetic spectrum considerably.
Inside a vibronic doublet, the strain-induced energy change (21.69a)
must naturally be multiplied by the same reduction factor q defined in
(21.53) as the anisotropy constants g and A of the Zeeman and
2 2
hyperfine Hamiltonian (21.26) and (21.29). The total Hamiltonian,
Zeeman plus hyperfine, plus strain, can then be written
53

--- Page 833 ---

818 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
To keep the problem simple we maintain the assumptions \g\ < |<7i|,
2
\A%\ < \Ai\, which enables us to rewrite (21.70) as
With respect to the magnitude of the strain we consider two extreme
cases
(a) Very small strains
These are defined by the inequality
In this case the correct eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian (21.71) are
still given by formulae (21.35) and (21.36), provided the vibronic
functions 0 and ^ replace the electronic functions 6 and e ; the random
strain affects the resonance frequencies and broadens the lines in
second order in the strain by an amount of the order of
The condition (21.72) may conceivably be fulfilled for certain hyperfine
lines and certain orientations but not for others (and never with the field
along a body diagonal). In view of the smallness of g^H (of the order
of 0-1 cm"1 in Cu2+ for a field of 10 kG) an exceptionally strain-free
crystal may be needed for (21.72) to be satisfied.
(b) Large strains
With the inequality (21.72) reversed, the correct wave-functions for
the Hamiltonian (21.71), different from those given by eqn (21.35), are
now
where

--- Page 834 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 819
The replacement in (21.71) of U and U by their expectation values
e e
within the states ® , respectively ±cos a and ±sin a, leads to the
a 5
following formulae for the spectrum corresponding to (21.71):
where cos co and sin co have been defined in eqn (21.36). Since the angle
a related to the random strain by (21.73a) can be assumed to take all
values between 0 and 2?r it would seem that each line of the spectrum
(21.74) should be broadened beyond recognition over a region
However, as pointed out by Ham (1969), each line of (21.74) so broad-
ened has a singularity in its spectral density for
|cos(o> — oc)| = 1.
If all values of the random variable a are equally probable the spectral
density is proportional to
where v is the sharp frequency that would obtain in the absence of
0
strain broadening. The quasi-continuous spectrum (21.74) exhibits
sharp peaks at the same frequencies as in the absence of strain, namely
We have already stated, when establishing formula (21.37), that the
assumption \A \ < A was often unwarranted. If we give up this
2 ±
assumption while keeping \g\ < \g±\ the formula (21.74) has to be
2
replaced by the following,
where we write for brevity |27?2 + ??2£2 + £2l2 = u, and

--- Page 835 ---

820 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
Here m is the projection of I along a direction whose cosines are given by
These formulae are very easy to establish if one notices that for
strong strain, U and U can be replaced in (21.70) by their expectation
e £
values over the functions (21.73), namely ±cos a and ±sin a. Strain
also plays an important role in the passage from the static to the
dynamic Jahn-Teller effect, a problem to be examined presently.
The tunnelling model and the transition from the dynamic to the static
Jahn-Teller effect
In the foregoing studies of the effects of perturbations such as
Zeeman and hyperfine couplings, and also strain, on the vibronic
ground doublet, we have consistently assumed that the relevant
Hamiltonians are very much smaller than the doublet-singlet distance
and that their off-diagonal doublet-singlet matrix elements could
therefore be disregarded. We saw, however, that even in the absence
of warping, an increasingly strong Jahn-Teller coupling had a tendency
to bring together the ground doublet and the first two excited
(spuriously degenerate) singlet levels, the separation A or 3F as we
x
shall call it henceforth, being, see (21.60a), approximately equal to
ho)(ha)l2W ). A numerical study (O'Brien 1964) has shown that the
JT
introduction of warping has two effects: first, it separates the singlets A±
and A i second, it brings the lower of the two very much nearer to
2
the ground doublet than predicted by the linear approximation.
We saw earlier (eqn (21.54a)) that any perturbation, such as caused
by magnetic coupling or strain, whose action on a purely electronic F
3
doublet was expressed by an operator
could be written within a vibronic doublet spanned by two vibronic
functions 0 and $ as 6r </+q(GU +G U ) and within a vibronic
0 e ge 0 90
singlet A or A as G^. If the distance 3F between the singlet and the
1 2
doublet is comparable to the interaction (21.54) we need the matrix
elements of U and U between the singlet and the doublet. They obey
e £

--- Page 836 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 821
the following relations, easily deduced using eqn (21.13):
all other singlet-doublet matrix elements of U and U being zero.
e e
We now set up the secular matrix relative to the perturbation (21.54),
which has a slightly different form depending on whether the singlet is
A or A . For A it is given by (21.78),
l 2 1
but if the excited singlet is A , rG and rG are replaced in (21.78)
2 d E
respectively by —r'G and r'G . Since the quantities G , G are usually
e e e £
smaller than one wave-number, in order for 3 F to be of the same order
of magnitude both the Jahn-Teller coupling and the warping must be
strong, an assumption we had made in the study of the static Jahn-
Teller effect. This provides a basis for the so-called tunnelling model
(Bersuker 1962).
Let us return to the static Jahn-Teller effect, assuming for the sake
of definiteness that V > 0, V < 0. We then found a potential minimum
3
for <p = 0 and we described the complete wave-function of the system
near that minimum by the Born-Oppenheimer product
The nuclear wave-function T (p, 99) is strongly localized in the
z
neighbourhood of p = p ^ \V\/Ma)2. A reasonable approximation for
Q
T (p, (p) would be a Gaussian function, the ground state of a two-
z
dimensional harmonic oscillator,
where a = (fL/Ma))^, a' = (H/Ma)')^. Here co is the frequency for radial
oscillation, which appears in the quadratic potential energy \Mco2p2
and co', given by eqn (21.49), is the frequency for azimuthal oscillation
inside the potential trough at cp = 0, produced by the warping.
Because of this strong localization of the nuclear wave-function one may
in a first approximation replace the electronic wave-function y(<p) by
z

--- Page 837 ---

822 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
^ (0). If one wishes to take into account the finite spread of the nuclear
z
wave-function (21.80), one can replace y>((p) in the neighbourhood
z
of (p = 0 by
which was used to obtain the corrected formulae (21.51) for g\\ and g .
±
From the wave-function
we can deduce two other wave-functions, <D and O , relative to the
X F
minima <p = ±277/3, by the condition that O , ® , O derive from
x F z
each other by the cyclical permutation, x -+ y -> z -> x,
A more accurate representation of in the neighbourhood of
cp = 27T/3, following (21.81), is
with a similar expression for <P .
F
The three wave-functions O^, ® , O , which correspond to the same
F z
energy, provide a reducible representation of the cubic group. The
combination
which is normalized if the small overlap between the functions is
neglected, is clearly invariant under the operations of the cubic group
and belongs to the representation A . The two combinations
±
belong obviously to F and transform like 0 and e. If we introduce the
3
overlap d = (O^ \ O ) between two functions O, eqns (21.83),(21.83a)
z

--- Page 838 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 823
are replaced by
It is sometimes stated (Bersuker 1962, Hochli 1967) that the over-
lap d = (Q | O ) can be represented as the product of the overlap
x z
y = OFjf | Y ) of the nuclear wave -functions and the overlap
z
(3#2 — r2 1 3z2— r2} = — J (an immediate consequence of the relations
(21.13)) of the electronic wave-functions. It should be remembered,
however, that for \p, for instance, the expression ^(277/3) = 3x2— r2,
x
and even the more accurate expression (21.82b), are only valid in the
neighbourhood of cp = 27T/3, and the same is true for the expression
(21.81) for y(<p) in the neighbourhood of y = 0. (Expressions such as
z
(21.81) could not possibly be valid for all values of <p since O as given
z
by (21. 79), (21. 80) would not be a single-valued function of Q , Q .) The
e e
main contribution to the overlap between the two functions Oj^ and O
F
comes from regions of 99 distant from the minima. This means that the
electronic scalar product (y>((p) \ y>(<p)) is an unknown function of q>
x z
and a formula such as 6 = — y/2 is unwarranted.
If we now assume that the product FF of Table 21.1 is positive, the
3
three wave -functions Oj^, O , O become
F z
where the nuclear wave-functions *F are centered around 99 = 77 and
<p = TT ±277/3. l contrast to eqn (21.83), the combination
n
belongs this time to the unidimensional representation A rather than
2
to A This can be checked by noticing that a rotation through ?r/2
v
around, say, Oz changes A as given by (21.86) into — A . The two
2 2
combinations,
belong again to F and transform like 6 and s (we have neglected in
3
(21.86) and (21.86a) the overlap d).

--- Page 839 ---

824 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
We have now, with eqns (21.83), (21.83a) or (21.86), (21.86a), con
structed approximate expressions for the vibronic wave-functions that
span the ground doublet and the first excited singlet, the latter being A
t
or A depending on the sign of VV . The three wave-functions <&, O ,
2 3 x F
<D are three degenerate eigenfunctions of an approximate Hamiltonian,
Z
the approximation being essentially that of an infinite barrier height
between two neighbouring potential minima. We can take into account
as a perturbation J^ the possibility of tunnelling through the barriers
1
between the various minima. We need not concern ourselves with the
actual form of this perturbation: the simple fact that it has cubic
symmetry insures automatically that A, 0, $ given by (21.83) etc. or
(21.86) etc. are the 'good' zero-order wave-functions and that the triply
degenerate level spanned by O^, O , O will be split into a singlet A
F z
and a doublet (0, <!>). This approximation should be good only when
the barrier is very high and the overlap 3F very small. We expect the
splitting to be positive by continuity, starting from no Jahn-Teller
coupling when we know that the doublet is lower. We shall not discuss
the approximate methods for calculating F, by the WKB approxima-
tion or otherwise (Bersuker 1962, Sturge 1967). This calculation, like
that of the overlap d, is sensitive to the rather uncertain shape of the
tails of the wave-functions Oj^, O , O in between the minima.
F z
Since in (21.83), (21.83a) or (21.86), (21.86a) we have explicit expres-
sions for the vibronic functions A, 0, <f, we can calculate the coeffi-
cients q, r, and rr (we have demonstrated in eqn (21.67) that p — 0 for
strong Jahn-Teller coupling). We can obtain q for instance from the
relation q = (ff\ U \ff) where ff is given by (21.83a). Taking into
e
account the expression (21.82b) for <& (and a similar one for <D ) we
x F
obtain q =\u, where
is the average value of cos 99 in the trough cp = 0. In this calculation
we have neglected the overlap between ^¥ and Y . If the approximate
x F
form (21.82a) is used for O and O in the calculation of the overlap
x F
this leads to a small correction to q, equal to 3y/4 (Hochli 1967).
Actually, as we mentioned earlier, we do not know the form of the
electronic wave-functions \p and ip in the regions where overlap is
x y
appreciable. While the correction to q due to overlap must indeed be of
the order of y, there is no particular reason to believe it to be 3y/4.
Disregarding this correction it is satisfactory to notice that the value

--- Page 840 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 825
of \u for q is in accordance with the general inequality, q < |,
derived in eqn (21.67). The reader may check that the same value is
obtained for q when the functions O are of the type (21.85) rather than
(21.82), (21.82a).
A similar calculation of the matrix elements (A-^\ U |<f)or (A\ U |0)
E z £
yields
In order to see what happens when the singlet -doublet splitting 3F
is smaller than the Hamiltonian (21.54), it is illuminating to transcribe
the matrix (21.78) for the representation <&, <D , O inverting the
x F z
equations (21.82), (21.82a) or (21.86), (21.86a). We obtain
where the upper sign corresponds to the situation (21.82), (21.82a) and
the lower to (21.85), and where we have used the relations (21.88).
Let us temporarily assume that G and G are much larger than F. It
Q e
is then apparent in (21.89) that we may disregard the small off-diagonal
matrix elements F and that O^, O , O become the good zero-order
F z
functions. They are precisely those we used for the static Jahn-Teller
effect. If G G , and G result from the Zeeman coupling (21.26) with
0) e e
we find, as expected for the static Jahn-Teller effect, in the state O ,
z
and similar expressions for <D and O where, in accordance with
X F
(21.51)

--- Page 841 ---

826 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
the upper sign corresponding to the case when O is denned by (21.82).
z
We have already alluded to the smallness of g$H. (~0-1 cm"1 for
Cu2+ in a field of 10 kG) which makes it unlikely that it will be larger
than the tunnelling splitting 3 P. There is, however, a second origin for
G and G , namely a strain-induced change in energy of the form
Q e
(21.69a) V (e U +e U ), whence 0 = V e , G = V e . From (21.89)
ES e 9 B B 9 ES e s ES E
and the definitions (21.69) of e and e , this gives for the state O a
e £ z
change in energy TS^^C^^— e^— e ) and similar expressions for
yy
These strain-induced energy changes may be much larger than g%f$H
and larger than P. We realize now the true origin of the static Jahn-
Teller effect, as explained by Ham (1968). When, because of a strong
Jahn-Teller coupling and a high warping barrier, the frequency 3F/S
for tunnelling between the three minima (which in the language of the
dynamic Jahn-Teller effect is the distance between the ground doublet
and the first excited singlet) becomes smaller than the strain energy,
the latter 'locks' the system in one of the three potential minima
corresponding to a static tetragonal distortion (with the possibility of
small zero-point motion near each minimum). If the strain splitting is
smaller than kT all three states O^, O , O will be equally populated
F z
but, even ifkT is very small, there will be an equal number of ions in the
crystal in each state because of the random character of the local strain.
The intermediate situation where F is neither large nor small
compared to g/3H has been discussed in the literature by means of
2
eqn (21.89) (Bersuker 1963, O'Brien 1964) before the importance of
strain had been fully realized. We do not reproduce these discussions
here since, especially for ions with strong Jahn-Teller coupling, the
effect of strain is likely to be predominant.
21.7. Motional narrowing of the Jahn-Teller spectrum
A survey of the various types of spectra
In the foregoing we saw that three types of spectra could be expected
from a 2E level undergoing a Jahn-Teller effect :
(a) a superposition of three anisotropic spectra of tetragonal sym-
metry with parameters given by (21.46), (21.47) or better (21.51),
characteristic of a static Jahn-Teller effect;
(b) a purely isotropic spectrum with isotropic (/-factor and hyperfine
structure constant, equal respectively to g and A characteristic of a
l l9
vibronic singlet;

--- Page 842 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 827
(c) an anisotropic spectrum described by parameters gr qg , A qA ,
1} 2 l} 2
characteristic of a vibronic doublet. Actually this last spectrum can be
subdivided into two types:
(cl) where the average local strain is larger than the anisotropic part
of the magnetic interactions
and where the resonance frequencies are given by eqn (21.74), and
(c2) where the inequality (21.91) is reversed and the spectrum is
given again by (21.74) but with the factor cos(co —a) missing in the
anisotropic part.
The occurrence of these various spectra is determined by the relative
magnitude of the following three quantities: the doublet-singlet
splitting 3F, the average strain V (el+e2)^ henceforth called for brevity
ES s
A, and the anisotropic magnetic coupling (g fiH-}-A ni), called for
s 2 2
brevity A .
w
If 3F> A, A , which will always occur for a weak or moderately
s m
strong Jahn-Teller coupling, the vibronic doublet, well separated from
the first excited singlet, should exhibit either a spectrum (cl) or (c2)
depending on the relative magnitude of A and A . The isotropic
s m
spectrum (b) of the vibronic singlet will be observable if &T/3F is
sufficiently large for the singlet to be appreciably populated.
If the Jahn-Teller coupling and the warping are very strong, 3F
becomes much smaller, while the strain splitting A is expected to be
s
relatively large as suggested by eqn (21.69b). It is likely that in this
case A > A , and the only question is the relative size of 3F and A.
s m s
If 3F^> A, a singlet spectrum (b), and a doublet spectrum (cl)
s
should be observed.
If 3F<A , a static Jahn-Teller spectrum of type (a) should be
S
observed as explained in the last section.
Motional narrowing
In our discussion we have hitherto considered the complex XY$ as an
'isolated system, disregarding its coupling with the other degrees of
freedom of the crystal in which the complex is embedded, such as
lattice vibrations. If this coupling is switched on, fast transitions may
occur between various states of the complex, with emission or absorp-
tion of one or more phonons resulting in an appreciable change in the
observed pattern. The main change to be expected if these transitions
are sufficiently fast is the transformation of the anisotropic spectra (a)

--- Page 843 ---

828 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
and (c) into an isotropic singlet-like spectrum (b). Thus the origin of
the appearance of such a spectrum when the temperature is raised is not
unambiguous: it may be due either to an increased population of an
excited singlet or to an increase in relaxation rate that turns an aniso-
tropic spectrum (a) or (c) into an isotropic spectrum (b) in ways now
to be described.
Let us start with a static spectrum (a) and call l/r the rate of change,
due to thermal relaxation, of the population of anyone of the three
distorted configurations described by the wave-functions <&, ® , <1>.
x F Z
The following relation is easily established from the rate equations:
I IT = 3P , where on the right-hand side PXY represents the ther-
XY
mally induced transition probability from a configuration O to another
x
configuration O . The total spread Ai> in the paramagnetic spectrum
F
due to anisotropy is given by
where we made use of (21.51). If r is sufficiently short to satisfy
the inequality Ar . r<l, then, according to the well-known theory
of motional narrowing, only the average frequency of the three spectra
will be observed, given by
which is identical with the spectrum of the singlet.
The reorientation from one configuration to another can occur
through several processes among which we single out for a brief
description, as in the theory of spin-lattice relaxation, the Orbach
process, the direct process, and the Raman process, outlined in Chapter
10.
In the Orbach process a real transition to an excited vibronic state
lying at a distance W above the ground state will have a probability of
0
the order of
where, as explained in Chapter 10, v is essentially the inverse lifetime
0
of the excited state and exp( — W lkT ) the relative probability of
Q 0
finding in the crystal an energetic phonon of frequency W \lfi at the
Q
temperature of the experiment.
At the temperatures too low for the Orbach process to be appreciable
the direct process corresponds to absorption or emission of a single
phonon of energy equal to the energy difference A induced by stress
XF

--- Page 844 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 829
between two distorted configurations 3> ani( O . We now consider
x F
this process.
As explained in § 21.6, the observability of a spectrum of type (a)
characteristic of a static Jahn-Teller effect implies the assumption
| F| < lAjg-y, A , k x\- The calculation of the corresponding relaxation
FZ z
time, treating phonons as time-dependent strains, is standard except
for one feature: only those phonons that have the symmetry properties
of the strain components e and e have non-vanishing matrix elements
e e
between various states of our system (unless higher-order terms involv-
ing spin-orbit coupling are brought in). On the other hand, the strain
Hamiltonian V (e U +eU ) does not have any off-diagonal matrix
ES e 9 s e
elements between the states O^, as can be seen from eqn (21.89).
Such matrix elements can only appear because the states O^ are not
exact eigenstates of the system, and because the off-diagonal matrix
elements F in (21.89) bring into, say <D , admixtures of order F/A of
Z
Oj£ and O . It follows that the transition probability P Y> instead of
F X
being proportional (as is usually the case) to the square of the energy
difference A (see chapter 10), is reduced by the square of the ad-
XF
mixture coefficient (F/A)2 and thus is independent of A.
Apart from these changes the transition rate due to the direct process
has the usual form (Ham 1969)
where p is the density of the crystal and V and V the transverse and
t l
longitudinal velocities of sound.
The Raman process, which has an unusual temperature-dependence
with a transition rate proportional to T3, is given by (Pirc, Zeks, and
Gosar 1966)
We consider also the transition from a spectrum of type (cl), a
vibronic doublet with stress energy greater than the magnetic anisot-
ropy but much smaller than the singlet-doublet splitting 3F, to an
isotropic singlet-like spectrum (b). The orbital eigenstates, given by
eqns (21.73), (21.73a), are

--- Page 845 ---

830 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
and are separated by an energy
The spread in frequency due to anisotropy is
In order to be wiped out by fast transitions between T and Y , the
a 6
relaxation rate 1/r must again be such that Ai>. r< 1.
The calculation is standard and yields for the direct process:
or, if
For the Raman process a temperature -dependence of the rate on the
fifth power is obtained (Ham 1968) :
All the transitions described so far are purely orbital with no spin
flip involved. Spin flips can occur because the orbital parts of states of
opposite spin belonging to different configurations are not strictly
orthogonal. This lack of orthogonality is connected with paramagnetic
anisotropy and leads to spin-lattice relaxation rates, l/r smaller than
1?
the previously calculated purely orbital transition rates by reduction
factors of the order of (g^/ffi)2 or (A^/g^H)2 as the case may be.
Even so, these rates may be much faster than those of ions in less
symmetrical environments which are not subject to the Jahn-Teller
effects. A detailed discussion of these and other spin-lattice relaxation
processes characteristic of Jahn-Teller 2E ions can be found elsewhere
(Ham 1969, Williams et al. 1969).
21.8. Comparison with experiment
The anisotropic spectra of type (a) which correspond to a static
Jahn-Teller effect, exhibited by the ion Cu2+, 3d9 in cubic or nearly
cubic environment, have already been discussed in § 7.16 and need not
be considered again here. The review article of Ham (1969), which has
provided the inspiration and the information for the writing of the
present chapter, contains a thorough discussion of the experimental

--- Page 846 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 831
evidence on the observation of the Jahn-Teller effect in EPR spectra
of 2E levels, to which the reader is referred. We shall be content to
examine briefly, as an illustration of the theory, the measurements of
Coffman on Cu2+, 3d9 in MgO (Coffman 1965, 1966, 1968) and Hochli
and Estle on Sc2+ in CaF and SrF (Hochli and Estle 1967, Hochli
2 2
1967).
An anisotropic spectrum of type (c), characteristic of a vibronic
doublet, was observed for Cu2+ in MgO at 1-2°K with the parameters
This value of q indicates a strong or moderately strong Jahn-Teller
effect. It is not quite clear whether this spectrum is the no-strain
spectrum (c2) or the strain broadened spectrum (cl) given by eqn
(21.74). Using for the residual strain at the Cu2+ site the same average
value ^10~4 as found elsewhere for Fe2+ in MgO, and for the strain
coefficient V the same value as that estimated for M3+ in A1 0 ,
ES 2 3
Ham finds a value of the order of 1 cm"1 for the strain splitting
A ^ 2gT^s(e0+e2)^, which is much greater than the anisotropy energy
s
A . Unless this estimate turns out to be grossly incorrect the spectrum
m
of Cu2+ in MgO observed by Coffman at 1-2°K should thus be of the
strain-broadened type (cl). At 77°K this spectrum is replaced by an
isotropic singlet spectrum (b), which is interpreted as a vibronic doublet
spectrum (cl) narrowed by fast-relaxation transitions between the
orbital states (21.73).
The resonance spectrum of Sc2+, 3d1 in CaF and SrF provides an
2 2
interesting example of a vibronic doublet spectrum (c) that corresponds
to a rather weak Jahn-Teller effect. It should be noted that although
Sc2+ has one unpaired electron, rather than a hole as in Cu2+, 3d9, the
electronic ground multiplet is still a doublet F because in CaF the
3 2
coordination is eightfold instead of sixfold as in MgO. Since the spin-
orbit coupling is now positive, g should be smaller than g and g
± s 2
should be negative. From the values, g^ = 1-973, qg = —0-022, one
2
extracts for q the value q = qgj(g^—g^) = 0-75; according to the
inequality (21.67) this precludes a strong Jahn-Teller effect and leads
for WjIHco to an estimate (Ham 1968) of the order of 0-25. (In SrF the
T 2
value of q is 0-71 and the estimate for W /fla) is 0-34.) For such weak
JT
couplings the linear theory based on the eqns (21.59) should be adequate.
The assumption that here again the spectrum is of the strain-broadened
type is supported by the fact that a stress of up to 250 kg/cm2, applied

--- Page 847 ---

832 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
by Hochli to his sample, did not induce any observable change in the
spectrum. This is to be expected if large random local strains exist
already in the crystal.
When the temperature is raised to a few degrees K the (c) spectrum
is replaced by an isotropic singlet-like spectrum. This spectrum was
interpreted by Hochli as due to the increased population of the first
excited singlet, and the singlet-doublet splitting was estimated from
the temperature dependence of the intensity as 10 cm"1 for Sc2+ in
CaF and 8 cm"1 in SrF . This is clearly incompatible with the assump-
2 2
tion, made necessary by a coefficient q ~ 0-75, of a weak Jahn-Teller
effect since the singlet-doublet distance is then of the order of Hco ~ 200
or 300 cm"1. Ham therefore interprets the isotropic spectrum of Sc2+
as due to the same motional narrowing of the low temperature spectrum
as for Cu2+ in MgO.
21.9. The Jahn-Teller effect in a triplet state
The problem of the Jahn-Teller effect in orbital triplets F or F
4 5
differs from that of the orbital doublet in several respects that are all
in some way connected with the reduction formula, which replaces eqn
(21.12) applicable to F ,
3
Already in the absence of Jahn-Teller coupling this relation has
important consequences for the ions with a degenerate triplet as ground
state, classified as ions of type E in § 19.3. For convenience, we sum-
marize here some of the results.
The first far-reaching consequence of eqn (21.100) arises from the
presence on its right-hand side of F , a tridimensional representation
4
whose components transform like those of a vector. This means that, in
contrast to F , the components of an orbital momentum will have
3
non-vanishing components inside the triplets F or F . We have shown
4 5
in § 14.2 that it is convenient, using the Wigner-Eckart theorem, to
introduce a pseudo-angular momentum whose components inside the
manifold F or F have the same matrix elements as those of an orbital
4 5
momentum L = I within a ^-state. This is summed up by the relation
<L> = of, (21.101)
where the coefficient a depends on the detailed structure of the orbital
triplet F or F and the symbol ( ) means projection inside the triplet
4 5
manifold. In particular, a has the value — 1 for a F triplet originating
5
in a J9-term, a = +£ if F comes from an F-term, and a = — f for the
5

--- Page 848 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 833
triplet F originating in an J^-term. As basis states spanning F or F
4 4 5
one can use either the eigenstates |±1), |0) of l = ±1, 0 or real
z
wave-functions \p , y , y related to the former by
x Y z
The existence of a finite orbital momentum (L) = al entails also a
finite spin-orbit coupling
A(L).S = od(l.S). (21.103)
If (in contrast to our treatment of F ) we neglect second-order effects
3
arising from the matrix elements of A(L . S) to the excited cubic
multiplets, the total spin S and the pseudo-momentum 1 combine to
yield the multiplets /, where / takes all the values from \S —1| to
8 + 1. The spectroscopic splitting factor of the ion in a / multiplet is
given by the Lande formula
In (21.104) g = &g , where g is the true orbital gyromagnetic factor
l L L
that may be smaller than unity because of covalency as explained in
§ 20.5.
The presence of F and F on the right-hand side of (21.100) means
5 3
that the two even vibrational modes of Table 26 can both be
coupled to the electronic states of the degenerate triplet with two
coupling constants which we denote by V and V (E and T being
E T 2
alternative names for F and F ).
3 5
Our problem is to find, inside the degenerate triplet manifold,
electronic operators transforming respectively like components of F
3
and F , thus taking the part played by U and U for the degenerate
5 Q E
doublet. These operators can be easily formed using the components of
the pseudo-momentum 1. For F they are
3
54

--- Page 849 ---

834 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
and for F
5
It is easily checked, by writing them in the representation y , y> , y ,
x Y z
where they are diagonal (rather than in the representation |±1), |0)),
that the operators $ and S commute with each other. (Naturally
Q t
this is not a general property of tensor operators of the form (21.105) as
we know very well from the example of the doublet where the non-
commuting operators U and U were, by eqn (21.19), of the form
e e
(21.105), with L = 2 rather than 1.) This makes the study of the Jahn-
Teller coupling with the mode F much simpler than that with the mode
3
F whose operators (21.105a) do not commute with each other. In the
5
representation y y , yj these operators are given by the following
X) Y z
matrices:
with obvious changes for T and T .
2Y 2Z
The vibronic Hamiltonian can be written as J#* = J^^ + J^^,
v
where
We shall see in the next section that if the F mode only is coupled
3
to the triplet (V = 0) the problem has an exact and rather simple
T
solution. On the other hand, if the coupling is to the mode F or to both,
5
only qualitative statements can be made.
Before we discuss these two couplings we must make some assump-
tions about the magnitude of the spin-orbit coupling. As usual we shall
consider the two cases when this coupling is either much stronger or

--- Page 850 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 835
much weaker than the Jahn-Teller coupling, shirking the complicated
intermediate situation. It has been shown (Opik and Pryce 1957, Van
Vleck 1960) that a spin-orbit coupling appreciably stronger than the
Jahn-Teller coupling may quench the latter to a large extent. This can
be seen as follows: consider a level / resulting from the spin-orbit
coupling, represented as ocA(l . S). If |ocA| > V , V we may disregard
E T
off-diagonal matrix elements of the Jahn-Teller coupling between two
different / multiplets and keep only those inside the multiplet J? under
consideration. Inside this multiplet the five operators (21.105), (21.105a)
can be expressed by the Wigner-Eckart theorem as similar combina-
tions of / ^ / v / z multiplied by a constant a which is the same for all
five tensor components :
Here the constant a can be computed either by means of the Racah
6j- symbol (eqn (16.29)) or by a direct calculation. If the ground /
multiplet is / = J, the five operators (21.105; 21.105a) obviously
vanish. This is to be expected, since otherwise the Jahn-Teller coupling
would have been able to lift a Kramers-degeneracy which it cannot
possibly do, being a time-even operator.
For values of fl higher than \ the coefficient a often turns out to be
small. Thus, for instance, for Fe2+,3d6 in MgO, where the ground orbital
triplet is F(5Z>), the ground / multiplet is also a triplet / = I.
5
A direct calculation of the expectation value of (i){3P —1(1 + 1)} in the
state / = / = 1 yields aV> whence a = iV- The effective Jahn-
z
Teller coupling is reduced in the ratio TO and the Jahn-Teller energy in
the ratio 1/100.
In the following sections we shall make the opposite assumption of
a weak spin-orbit coupling, introduced as a perturbation once the
Jahn-Teller coupling has been included, which implies that the spin-
orbit coupling is also smaller than the vibrational quantum Ha).
21.10. The Jahn-Teller effect in an orbital triplet with
F coupling
3
The vibronic wave-functions
The eigenfunctions of the vibronic Hamiltonian 3?^ (eqn (21.107))
are Born-Oppenheimer products of the form

--- Page 851 ---

836 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
where yx, y>Y, Vz are ^^e electronic wave-functions that span the
electronic triplet and *F *F , T three nuclear functions of Q and
X) Y z Q
QE. Applying $F® to Vz^z> we ^u^ f°r ^z the equation
where use has been made of the form (21.106) of d> and S \ (21.109) is
e &
the equation of a two-dimensional harmonic oscillator in the plane
(Qe> Q&) centred on the point
or in polar coordinates p = V lju,a)2, <p = 0, the point at which the
Q E
potential energy in (21.109) is a minimum and has the Jahn-Teller value,
W = F|t/2^co2. Because of cubic symmetry the two other functions
JT
*F and *F must be similar oscillator functions but centred around the
X F
points p = p y = ±27r/3, which are the points
Q)
in accordance with the form of S and <? given by (21.106). If, as is
Q e
customary in the theory of the static Jahn-Teller effect, one neglects
the nulclear motion, the three points in space
represent the stable equilibrium positions of the distorted complex with
electronic functions y , y , ^z- At each of these points, say (Qj, Q%),
x Y
the energy of the two other states y>, y *s greater by the amount
x Y
3TF = 3FI/2//C02.
JT
The potential energy surfaces relative to the three functions y) ,
x
y>Y> VZ are three paraboloids shown in Fig. (21.3), which result from
each other by a rotation of 2?r/3. This situation resembles to some extent
the tunnelling model described in § 21.6 with the three potential
minima depressed by the Jahn-Teller energy W and the three wave-
JT
functions (21.82, 21.82a) or (21.85). There is, however, an important
difference: those three functions O were not orthogonal and their
degeneracy was only approximate, due to the closeness of a singlet with
a wave-function A to the doublet E spanned by two wave-functions 0
and $ . A, ©, and <£ were the 'good' wave-functions, linear combinations

--- Page 852 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 837
FIG. 21.3. Potential energy surfaces for a triplet with a F Jahn-Teller coupling.
3
of O , O , O , and the doublet and the singlet were split apart by an
x F z
amount 3F when proper account was taken of the lack of orthogonality
of 0^, <D , O .
F z
In the present situation 3> , O , O are exactly orthogonal because
x F z
their electronic parts y) , y > Vz are exactly orthogonal, and they span
x Y
a bona fide triplet. It was already a degenerate triplet F or F before
4 5
the Jahn-Teller coupling was switched on (the ground vibrational
function is then the non-degenerate ground state of a two-dimensional
harmonic oscillator and the overall degeneracy is that of the electronic
triplet), and must stay a triplet of the same nature, F or F when
4 5)
the Jahn-Teller coupling is included.
The eigenstates of 3tf* (eqn (21.107)) can be written
i stands for X, Y, Z in this formula; Ql, Q\ are the equilibrium positions
e
of the harmonic oscillators given by (21.110, 21.110a), n , n are integer
e e
quantum numbers, and F (Q), F (Q) the usual quantum states of
n e n e
one-dimensional harmonic oscillators. The energy of a state (21.111) is

--- Page 853 ---

838 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
Here excited levels have a high and partly spurious degeneracy due to
the linear character of the Hamiltonian 3?^ (21.107). We did not find it
necessary to introduce into 3?^ higher-order warping terms, as we
were forced to in the study of the electronic doublet, whose effect
among other things was to split the spurious degeneracy of the singlets
A A . In the present case, from the relation (see Table 2)
l9 2
using the same reasoning as in § 21.6, we see that the energy levels of
the most general vibronic Hamiltonian, describing a F Jahn-Teller
3
coupling with an electronic triplet F or r , are triplets F and F , the
4 5 4 5
ground level having the same symmetry as in the absence of Jahn
Teller coupling.
First-order effects
Armed with the wave-functions (21.111) we can compute the matrix
elements of the various electronic operators of interest for paramagnetic
resonance, first and foremost being those of the orbital momentum 1.
From the form 3) = y?¥ , where n stands for (n , 7i), of the vibronic
in in e e
functions we see that for any electronic operator O diagonal in the
d
representation i/} we have
i
Such operators are not affected by Jahn-Teller coupling. On the other
hand, for an operator O with off-diagonal matrix elements, such as the
od
orbital momentum, we get
in which
where the scalar products (F \ F , ) can be computed exactly from the
inQ jnQ
known wave-functions of the harmonic oscillator (Ham 1965). In the
ground triplet the relation (21.114) takes the form

--- Page 854 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 839
This relation (21.116) means that in the ground triplet the orbital
momentum, which in the representation y> has off-diagonal matrix
f
elements only, is quenched by a factor exp( — 3WJ /27&co).
T
In the same way as we introduced for the vibronic doublet vibronic
operators U , U (eqn (21.52)), we introduce here an operator l using
g9 ge g
the condition (® J l [O^) = (y\| 1 |^). Within the ground triplet we
tV g
can replace 1 by
It is easy to see that all electronic tensor components, with off-diagonal
matrix elements only, which transform like F , that is as \ , l , l ; or
4 x y z
like F , that is as T , T , T \ will have the same reduction factors.
5 2X 2Y 2Z
On the other hand, tensor components that transform like § and <^
Q e
are diagonal and unaffected by Jahn-Teller coupling. Following Ham
(1969), we transcribe these results as
Equation (21.117) shows in particular that a small static distortion of
the cubic field will be partially quenched if it is trigonal (transforming
as T ), but unaffected if it is tetragonal (transforming as E).
2
The same reduction factor K(T^) = /<r applies naturally to the spin-
1
orbit coupling A(L . S) = ocA(l . S), which now becomes in first order
/CjaA(l . S). We can still apply the method developed for ions of type B
ff
in the absence of a Jahn-Teller effect and couple the vibronic operator
\ to S to obtain the multiplets / , but the separation ah/ between
g
two multiplets / and / — \ is also reduced by the factor /c.
x
Second-order terms and the transition to the static effect
Obviously this procedure can only be valid as long as the reduced
spin-orbit coupling /caA(l . S) remains much larger than either the
1 ff
magnetic or strain perturbations whose expectation values we wish to
calculate inside the multiple t Jf . There is another limitation, which is
the following: a/cA(l . S) represents only the first-order effect of the
1 ff
spin-orbit coupling inside the vibronic ground triplet. Second-order
terms due to this coupling are small in a static crystal field because
of the large energy denominators which are the cubic splittings. In the
presence of Jahn-Teller coupling, however, matrix elements to excited
vibronic states, such as (O | od(l . S) |O,- ), which is equal to
i0 n

--- Page 855 ---

840 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
(y| od(l . S) lw)0^o | *Fj ), do not vanish for i ^j, and because the
t n
energy denominators nhco are much smaller than the cubic splittings,
second-order terms may become appreciable especially in view of the
quenching of the first-order terms. From symmetry arguments these
second-order terms can be expressed as follows:
The coefficients k± and k can be computed exactly (Ham 1965).
2
If we write x — 3T^ /^co, the coefficients k^x) and k (x) are given by
T 2
where
The coefficients k± and k must naturally vanish in the absence of Jahn-
2
Teller coupling, in accordance with (21.119). For x relatively small,
when the second-order spin-orbit term ^ff^ is much smaller than the
first-order term 3?^ = aAe-a!/2(l . S), its only effect is to violate the
a
Lande interval rule between the multiplets / and to split those for
which / ^ 2.
For very strong Jahn-Teller coupling Wj^/Hco -> oo the orbital
momentum and the spin-orbit coupling are quenched completely in
first order by the reduction factor exp — (3Wj /2Ha>). The second-order
T
term (21.118) has the asymptotic form
In the ground state O , (21.120) has the expectation value
zo
This is the value predicted by static crystal-field theory for an ion of
type A in the non-degenerate electronic state yj at the bottom
z
(QQ > Q%) of the paraboloid Z, separated at that point by 3J^ from the
T
paraboloids X and Y where the electronic wave-functions are \p and
x
yy This is exactly what one expects from a static Jahn-Teller effect.
The Zeeman energy Z is expressed by the operator

--- Page 856 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 841
If second-order terms are negligible Z can be rewritten as
Z<« = 0*^(1, . H)+flfc/J(S . H). (21.122a)
The formula (21.104) can still be used for the gyromagnetic factor
g(/) provided g = <zg is replaced by Kg = <*.K$ , where K^ = K^)
l L 1 l L
in eqn (21.117). In second order, cross terms between the Zeeman
Hamiltonian and the spin-orbit coupling yield an expression Z(z) very
similar to (21.118),
where
For a very strong Jahn-Teller effect when x -> oo
In the state O = ^T' > ^<2) has a limiting expectation value
zo zo
Again, this is what the theory of the static Jahn-Teller effect would
predict.
This study of the orbital triplet coupled to the F vibration mode
3
can be summed up as follows. For moderate Jahn-Teller coupling,
formally the system behaves very much as if the Jahn-Teller effect did
not exist except for a reduction in some parameters such as the spin-
orbit coupling, the orbital splitting factor, the trigonal distortion,
and an increase in second-order terms such as (21.118). For a very
strong Jahn-Teller coupling, the naive theory of the static Jahn- Teller
effect is valid, with orbital Zeeman energy and spin-orbit energy
completely quenched in first order, and given in second order by the
usual formulae for non-degenerate ions A, the excitation energy being
3Wj , which at a point of stable equilibrium is the distance to the upper
T
sheets of the potential energy surfaces.
21.11. The Jahn-Teller effect in an orbital triplet with
T coupling
5
We have already mentioned the fact that this problem is made
difficult because the coupling operators T , T , T in the vibronic
2X 2Y 2Z

--- Page 857 ---

842 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
Hamiltonian 3?^ (eqn (21.107a)) do not commute. It is easiest to
approach from the limit of a very strong, nearly static, Jahn-Teller
effect, when the tunnelling model can be used. We begin therefore by
neglecting the nuclear kinetic energy and look for the points in Q space
where the potential energy is a minimum, using the method of Opik
and Pryce (1957). With the small change in notation, Q -* Q ,
4 x
Qs -* QY> QG ~~* Qz> (an(i similarly for P , P , P ), we can rewrite the
4 5 6
vibronic Hamiltonian (21.107a) as
where the nuclear kinetic energy is
the Jahn-Teller coupling operator is
and the quasi-elastic potential energy is
Let \p = axy}x~^aYy)YJt~az'Vz be an eigenstate of V with the eigen-
value s'(Q), such that
where |a) is the set of amplitudes (a , a , a ). The points in Q space
x Y z
where the potential energy U(Q) = U (Q) + e'(Q) is a minimum are
0
given by
If we replace T , T , T by their matrix expression (21.106), eqns
2X 2Y 2Z
(21.126) become
in which
and

--- Page 858 ---

IN PABAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 843
Similarly eqns (21.127) become
Carrying (21.127a) into (21.126a) and making use of (21.126b) and
(21.126c) we find the following results:
The outcome of eqns (21.127) is that there are four equivalent
equilibrium positions in Q space, that is four equivalent distortions of
the paramagnetic complex. The electronic wave-functions at these
four points are given by
where m , m , m are ±1 and v = 1,2, 3, 4. (A change of sign of all the
x Y z
m naturally does not change the electronic state.) The equilibrium
positions in Q space are given by
The Jahn-Teller energy at each point, namely the depression with
respect to the energy of the undistorted complex, is
We have tacitly assumed that the condition (21.127) that is necessary
for the positions (21.129) to be minima of energy in the Q space was
also a sufficient condition. This has been checked by Opik and Pryce
(1957) who have also shown that when F and F couplings are both
3 5
present, the only relative minima are still those obtained when the two
couplings are considered separately, a point which is by no means
trivial. The position of the absolute minimum is determined by
comparing the two Jahn-Teller energies,

--- Page 859 ---

844 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
The naive description of the static Jahn-Teller effect leads to the
assumption that the system would be locked preferentially in the
distortion that corresponds to the lowest minimum or minima, ignoring
the higher ones. We know that because of the dynamic effects tunnelling
will occur and the system will not sit in the lowest minima, unless
helped by some external cause such as strain. The combined effects of
F and F coupling simply cannot be predicted quantitatively on the
3 5
basis of the existing theories.
Returning to F coupling, we associate with each electronic function
5
y>v(mx>mY>mz) a nuclear function T (Q—Q) localized around the
V v
minimum Q and define four vibronic functions, O = yj¥ . The index
v v v
v is associated with the values m , m , m as follows:
x Y z
v = 1, 2, 3, 4-* (1, 1, 1), (-1, -1, 1), (1, -1, -1), (-1, 1, -I)-
Having started with an orbital triplet in cubic symmetry we are faced
here with an unexpected fourfold degeneracy. The situation is very
similar to that described in § 21.6 where, starting with an orbital
doublet, we had a threefold degeneracy. The answer is similar. Our
present quadruplet, spanned by the functions O , is not a true quadru-
v
plet but results from the merging of a singlet and a triplet, spanned by
wave-functions which are 'good' linear combinations of the O . The
v
wave-function for the singlet is obviously
<D = (2A)-1(0 + 0 + (D3 + (D), (21.131)
S 1 2 4
where A is a number of the order of unity that takes into account the
small overlap of the O . For the triplet the proper wave-functions are
v
We can use the explicit expressions (21.132) to calculate the limiting
values of the quenching factors /c(2\) = *(!), K(T) and K(E). Let us
2
consider first the purely imaginary matrix element
If we use the expressions (21.132) for Q and O we find
x F
Notice that the diagonal terms (O | l |O ) vanish since the O are real
v z V v
functions and l is Hermitian and purely imaginary. As the strength of
g

--- Page 860 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 845
the Jahn-Teller coupling increases, the overlap between the localized
functions O goes to zero and so does K(T^). In the same way we find
v
which also goes to zero with increasing Jahn-Teller coupling in contrast
to what happened when this coupling was of the P type and K(E) was
3
equal to unity. Finally,
As the Jahn-Teller coupling increases, the limiting value of K(T) is f.
2
This difference of behaviour between the $ and T tensors can be
2
understood in simple terms (Ham 1965). A strain along the [100] axis,
which is of the & type, cannot distinguish between the four distorted
configurations that are equivalent with respect to that direction and
causes no splitting, whilst a [HI] strain of the T type does distinguish
2
between the four configurations.
The three quenching factors have been computed numerically by
Caner and Englman (1966). Their variation with the strength of the
Jahn-Teller coupling is shown in Fig. (21.4), together with the approxi-
mate expressions proposed by Ham (1965) as an extrapolation of a
FIG. 21.4. Variation of the reduction factors K(T^}, K(T), K(E] against k, where
2
k2 = f(WjT/ftco). The broken curves are the approximate expressions (21.136) (Ham
1965).

--- Page 861 ---

846 THE JAHN-TELLER EFFECT
perturbation calculation of Moffitt and Thorson (1957). These are
21.12. Comparison with experiment
The reader is again referred for a more detailed discussion of the
experimental evidence to the review article by Ham (1969). There are
several instances of anisotropic spectra in environments of apparently
cubic symmetry which could be interpreted as due to a static Jahn-
Teller distortion. A rather convincing example is that of V2+ in CaF
2
(Hochli 1966; Zaripov, Kropotov, Lipanova, and Stepanov 1967).
Since V2+ has the same charge as Ca2+, no charge compensation is
expected and, in the absence of Jahn-Teller effect, the symmetry of the
crystal potential should be cubic. Spectra having trigonal symmetry are
observed, pointing, it would seem, to a predominant F coupling.
5
Several remarkable examples of a dynamic Jahn-Teller effect are
provided by the spectra of impurities belonging to the iron group, which
occupy interstitial positions in silicon or substitutional positions in
MgO and CaO (Ham 1965). They are summarized in Table 21.2 (Ham
1965).
For the ions 3d6, 5T in the absence of orbital quenching the
2
splitting factor g should be given by (21.104) where jp = 1, S = 2, and
a = — 1. This gives gg = g = l'5g + Q-5g , where g is the true
l s L L
orbital gyromagnetic factor, possibly slightly reduced by covalency.
A value g & 3-5 is thus expected. It is clear from the values given in
l
the table for Mn+ and Cr° that there is a drastic reduction of the orbital
momentum. On the other hand, in Fe2+: MgO there is only a small
quenching of the orbital momentum of the order of 0-8 which can be
attributed to covalent bonding. This absence of Jahn-Teller quenching
TABLE 21.2

--- Page 862 ---

IN PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE 847
can arise from the stabilizing effect of the spin-orbit coupling as ex-
plained in § 21.9. In Fe2+: CaO, however, the experimental value g = 3-30
requires a reduction of the orbital momentum by a factor 0-60. One
has the choice between greater covalency or stronger Jahn-Teller
coupling than in Fe2+:MgO. The former is unlikely since Mossbauer
measurements of the isomer shift in the compounds would indicate less
covalency for Fe2+ in CaO than in MgO (Chappert, Frankel, and Blum
1967). The greater orbital quenching would thus imply a stronger
Jahn-Teller coupling in CaO than in MgO.
For the 3d7, % ions, eqn (21.104) with 8 = I, / = £, a = -f
predicts for a static field, g, = (%)g+g & V3 ^ 4-33 in the absence
s L
of all quenching. In fact the quenching factor is almost zero for Mn°: Si
and 0-2 for Fe+:Si. It would appear that in these ions the spin-orbit
coupling is probably smaller than the Jahn-Teller coupling and thus un-
able to stabilize it. The opposite situation must clearly prevail for
Co2+:MgO, where the (/-factor is almost exactly that of the crystal-field
theory, and to a lesser extent for Fe+:MgO.
We refer the reader to the article by Ham (1969) for the discussion
of a recent explanation by the Jahn-Teller effect of the puzzling
spectrum of Ti3+ in A1 0 (see also the end of § 7.8).
2 3

--- Page 863 ---

APPENDIX A
THERMAL AND MAGNETIC PROPERTIES
OF A PARAMAGNETIC SUBSTANCE
ALTHOUGH we have not been concerned in this book with the bulk
properties (thermal and magnetic) of paramagnetic substances, it may
be convenient to the reader to have a summary of the relations between
these quantities and the parameters of the spin Hamiltonian. We give
first the fundamental relations, from statistical mechanics and thermo-
dynamics, from which the entropy and magnetization can be calculated
generally, and then proceed to a number of useful formulae that are
valid in a high-temperature approximation.
For a system with a set of energy levels W^ the magnetic and thermal
properties are calculated from the partition function
by means of the thermodynamic potential
which is connected with the partition function Z by the relation
in which we have assumed that we are dealing with a gram mole of
substance. From the second law of thermodynamics,
we have
whence
and
The entropy and magnetization are therefore related to the partition
function by
and

--- Page 864 ---

APPENDIX A—THERMAL AND MAGNETIC PROPERTIES 849
which of course satisfy the thermodynamic relation
that follows from the fact that d(? is a perfect differential.
If the energy levels W are known, the thermodynamic and magnetic
t
properties can be calculated from these formulae. For example, we can
find how the internal energy U varies with the field H, since we have
from the second law of thermodynamics (A.4) and eqn (A. 10),
For an ideal paramagnet, which we define as one in which the only
interaction energy is the Zeeman energy,
the energy levels vary directly as H and the partition function is just a
function of (H/T). So also are quantities such as S, M, and if we write
M = f(H/T) we find in this case that
showing that the internal energy U is a function only of T and not of
H. It follows that the same is true of the specific heat at constant
magnetization, CM = (dU/dT)M, for our 'ideal' paramagnetic. For
many purposes we need to know the specific heat at constant field,
which is related to C , from eqn (A.4), by
M
At high temperatures our ideal paramagnet obeys Curie's law
from which we find
We shall find that a similar relation holds in the high-temperature
approximation for paramagnetic substances that are not 'ideal' in the
sense in which we have defined it.
55

--- Page 865 ---

850 APPENDIX A—THERMAL AND MAGNETIC PROPERTIES
High-temperature approximation
When we are mainly concerned with a region of temperature in which
the differences in the energy levels W are small compared with kT, we
{
may use a power series in inverse powers of T. For the partition function
Z, expansion of the exponentials gives
in which m is the total number of levels W and the coefficient
t
where ((W/k)p) is the average value of the pih powers of the levels
measured in °K. The series expansion for In Z is then
where
From our thermodynamic formulae we now obtain
and
Considerable simplification of these formulae is obtained if the origin of
energy is chosen to make (W) = 0, in which case the leading terms in
the expansions for G and M become
In these formulae G is the specific heat at constant field G since we
H
assume H to be constant in evaluating quantities such as (Wn).

--- Page 866 ---

OF A PARAMAGNETIC SUBSTANCE 851
System of non-interacting ions
We now relate the susceptibility and specific heat to the spin
Hamiltonian for a system of non-interacting ions, by which we mean
ions subjected to ligand fields but which do not interact with other
paramagnetic ions, i.e. we neglect spin-spin interaction. The effect of
the ligand field on the magnetic properties and on hyperfine structure is
expressed in the spin Hamiltonian
This is not the most general type of spin Hamiltonian but is the one
encountered in most cases of interest. The principal axes of the various
'tensor' interactions are all the same, and coincide with the (x, y, z)
axes. Electronic multipole terms of higher than the second degree have
been omitted; so has any 'pseudo-nuclear' Zeeman interaction. To
satisfy the condition (W) = 0, we impose the conditions
For the other terms, (W) = 0 because components of $, / occur equally
often with positive and negative signs.
The advantage of the high-temperature expansions (A. 25) and (A.26)
is that we do not have to evaluate the energy levels but can use the
theorem of the invariance of the spur of a matrix. Thus to find the
value of (W2) we square the Hamiltonian and pick out only the diagonal
terms; on summing these over all possible values, many of the sums
vanish because positive and negative values occur with equal proba-
+s
bility. For example ^S = 0. This makes the algebra quite manageable
z
-s
for the lowest powers such as (W2) and (W3}. Again, in evaluating the
susceptibility we can obviously neglect all terms that do not involve H.
We begin by neglecting the hyperfine terms, and assuming that H is
in an arbitrary direction, whose direction cosines are (I, m, n) with
respect to the (x, y, z) axes. The first term in the susceptibility involves
(TF2), which is found to be

--- Page 867 ---

852 APPENDIX A—THERMAL AND MAGNETIC PROPERTIES
Hence on writing
we find for the first term in the susceptibility
which is just the usual expression for Curie's law. The additional terms
in D make no contribution in this approximation because they are
independent of H. A similar argument applies to the hyperfine terms
except for the nuclear Zeeman interaction, so that their presence only
adds to the T~l term in the susceptibility an additional amount
which can almost invariably be neglected in comparison with (A.32),
being smaller by a factor of order (/3//3)2 & 10~6.
n
On continuing the calculation to find the term in T~2 in the suscepti-
bility we obtain as the only contribution
apart from a similar term of order P(P which we can neglect for most
n
purposes. Thus the effect of the hyperfine terms vanishes for practical
purposes both in the T~* and T~2 terms in the susceptibility.
Since D + D + D = 0, the term in T~2 given in (A.34) will change
x y z
sign with direction. A further result is that if g is isotropic, i.e. if
g = g = g the susceptibility of a powder sample will contain no
x y zy
term in T~2 because the mean value of (l2g2D+m2g2D+n2g2D)
c x j y z z
becomes just
In giving the formulae for the specific heat we shall restrict ourselves
to terms in T~2, which for the Hamiltonian (A.27) are

--- Page 868 ---

OF A PARAMAGNETIC SUBSTANCE 853
This specific heat is that measured at constant field C , and we can
H
find the specific heat at constant magnetization G' using eqn (A. 15).
M
From eqns (A.32), (A.33) we have
which just corresponds to the first and last terms (A. 35), (A. 39). It
follows that C is just equal to the sum of the three middle terms
M
(A.36), (A. 37), (A. 38). Thus in this approximation the substance
behaves like an 'ideal' paramagnet, since by (A.32), (A.33) M is just a
function of (HIT), and the internal energy U and its derivative
C = (dU/dT) are independent of H, just as in eqn (A.13). This is not
M M
necessarily true of terms of higher order (T~3, etc.) in the specific heat,
since it is obvious already for eqn (A. 34) that the magnetization is no
longer simply a function of (H/T).
Effect of spin-spin interaction
We assume that the spin-spin interaction is of the form (S- . / ^ . S,-)
t
and that the principal axes of the tensor ^ coincide with those of the
tj
g-tensor. If an external field is applied along the z-axis (one of the
principal axes), the Hamiltonian for a set of interacting spins is similar
to eqn (9.46), viz.
To find the leading term in the effect of the spin-spin interaction on the
susceptibility we need the contributions to (W2), (W3) which contain
H2. From (A.41) we find
in which the first term is just that given by (A. 29) taking H along the
z-axis. The second term does not contain H2, so that the term in T~l in
the susceptibility is not altered by the spin-spin interaction. The
relevant term in H2 contained in <TF3) gives a term in T~2 for the
susceptibility along the z-axis amounting to
and analogous terms along a?, y are found by a simple change of sub-
scripts. We make the following comments on this result.

--- Page 869 ---

854 APPENDIX A—THERMAL AND MAGNETIC PROPERTIES
(a) As far as terms in T~2 are concerned, the result is the same as that
given by the molecular field approximation. For, if we write
we have
so that the term in T~2 in the susceptibility along the z-axis is
In the molecular field approximation we are replacing
by
This is equivalent to a term g f$S (XM), so that
iz iz z
and
which is just our previous result (A.43).
(b) The summation ]T (/ ^u *s n°t necessarily convergent; for dipolar
z
interaction the shape of the sample is involved, since the 'demagnetiz-
ing field' is included.
(c) If g is isotropic (and not otherwise), then for a powder only the
isotropic part of the spin-spin interaction contributes to the term in
I7-2, since (cf. eqns (9.46)-(9.48)) we have
(d) The term in T~2 from spin-spin interaction is similar in form to
that due to an electronic quadrupole splitting D 8^ + DS^ + D S2 , which
X y Z Z
along the z-axis gives, from eqn (A.34),
The two terms are additive, so that for S > 1 we cannot use the T~2
term to determine uniquely either contribution except in special

--- Page 870 ---

OF A PARAMAGNETIC SUBSTANCE 855
circumstances such as cubic symmetry, for which D vanishes, or if g is
isotropic, when for a powder only the isotropic spin-spin parameter
/U contributes to the term in T~2.
The contribution to the specific heat of order T~2 comes immediately
from (W2), and we find the extra term to be
which is additive to the other terms in (A.35)-(A.39). We can separate
the contributions from isotropic and anisotropic exchange, since
but we cannot separate the two contributions from anisotropic exchange
and dipolar interaction, since they are similar in form.
The specific heat contribution from spin-spin interaction can be
assigned to a mean square internal field (fff) by writing it in the form
which is similar to (A. 35). Clearly
and, using the Curie constant c = Ng2/32S(S + l)/3k, we have
The factor J which appears in the second term of (A.42) and subsequent
terms in the specific heat arises because spin-spin interaction represents
mutual energy, which must not be counted twice in the summations.
More elaborate calculations and further formulae can be found in
Van Vleck (1937), with a correction in Joseph and Van Vleck (1960),
and Daniels (1953).

--- Page 871 ---

APPENDIX B
SOME GENERAL TABLES
TABLE 1
Character table for the twenty-four proper rotations of the
cubic group 0
Representation Classes
E (3)<7 2 (6)C74 (6)^1 (6)0,
i 1
1 1 1
i 1
1 -1 -1
2 2 0 0 -1
3 — 1 1 -1 0
3 -1 -1 1 0
TABLE 2
Decomposition into irreducible representations of the double direct products
I\. X F,. of the cubic group 0. For the diagonal products F x F the super-
t t
script S or A indicates whether a representation belongs to the symmetrical
or antisymmetrical product
TABLE 3
Irreducible representations of the
cubic group 0 for integral values of
J from Oto 10
J Irreducible representations

--- Page 872 ---

APPENDIX B—SOME GENERAL TABLES 857
TABLE 4
States corresponding to the decomposition of the
cubic representation DJforJ = 1 to 4 inclusive. The
constant a is the proportionality coefficient between
J and the fictitious momentum 1, i.e. J = al

--- Page 873 ---

858 APPENDIX B —SOME GENERAL TABLES
TABLE 5
States for the cubic representations F and F contained in
4 5
J = 2 and J = 3, taking a threefold axis of the cube as
axis of quantization. They differ from those given in Figs.
7.4 and 7.6, being equivalent to those derived from a spin
Hamiltonian 0^—20^(2)01 instead of 0*+20y'(2)0\:
either representation is valid (though care must be exercised
in taking the correct set of states for each spin Hamil-
tonian), since they differ only by a rotation of the x, y
axes about the z-axis through an angle TT
TABLE 6
Character table for the extra representations of the double cubic group 0+.
The characters for the representations T to F are the same as those given
l 5
in Table I
Representation Classes
E R <7 2 C' 2 <? 3 RC* c* -RC 4
r T 6, , E E " ' 2 -2 0 0 j I V2 -V2
r 7 , uf 2 -2 0 0 1 -1 -V2 \/2
8 4 -4 0 0 -1 1 0 0
TABLE 7
Irreducible representations of the double cubic
qrouj) 0+ for half-inteqral values of J from
to

--- Page 874 ---

TABLE 8
Decomposition into irreducible representations of the direct products for the double cubic group 0+. The superscripts
S and A refer to symmetrical and antisymmetrical products

--- Page 875 ---

860 APPENDIX B —SOME GENERAL TABLES
TABLE 9
Zero-order wave-functions or states corresponding to the irreducible
representations of the double cubic group 0+, for the half-integral values of
J that occur as the ground states of paramagnetic ions

--- Page 876 ---

APPENDIX B —SOME GENERAL TABLES 861
TABLE 10
Character table for the representations F* of the
tetragonal group
(2)c;
Representation E l\ (2)C (2)c;
4
i
I 1 1 1 -i
I 1 1 -1 —i
1 1 -1 1 i
1 1 — 1 — 1
2 -2 0 0 0
TABLE 11
Character table for the representations F-f of the
trigonal group
E c* c;
1 1 1
1 1 .
2 - 2 0
TABLE 12
Irreducible representations of the trigonal group
/or integral values of J from 0 to 6
TABLE 13
Character table for the extra representations F^ of
the double trigonal group
* « c ^o o; ^o;
s 3
ri 1 — 1 -1 1 i — i
it 1 — 1 — 1 1 — i i
Fg 2 2 1 -1 0 0

--- Page 877 ---

862 APPENDIX B —SOME GENERAL TABLES
TABLE 14
Irreducible representations T% of the double trigonal group
for half-integral values of J for J = \ to --£-. Note that
for values o/J > f we have: DJ = J9J-3 + rf +Tf+21^
TABLE 15
Some homogeneous polynomials PI of even degree which occur
frequently in electron paramagnetic resonance, together with the
relations between the coefficients Aqk in eqn (16.10) and the co-23
efficients BI in eqn (16.1)
po = 3z2-r2 P\=x*-y*
PJ = 35z4-30r2z2 + 3r4 P\ = (Iz2—r2)(x*-y2)
Pl=xz(x*-3y*) Pj = a;«-6a;V+y4
PJ = 231z6-315r2z4 + 105r4z2-5r6 Pi = (Hz2-3r2)(z2-32/2)a;z
PJ = (Hz2-r2)(x4-6a;V+2/4) PJ = x6-15zy-fl5z22/4-2/6

--- Page 878 ---

APPENDIX B —SOME GENERAL TABLES 863
TABLE 16
Equivalent operators for the polynomials in Table 15. The notation
{A, B}$ is used as a shorthand for (^)(AB-\-BA). Thus
01 = UJ,(Ji+J3)} denotes O* = i{J (JI+/i) + (</i+</3)J }
z 2
'oi = 3J2-j(j+i)
k = 2 o\ = i(J2 +Ja_)
+
'01 = 35Jj-30J(J + l)J2-f 25J2_6J(J + 1)+3J2(J + 1)2
0\ = H(7J 2-J(J4-l)-5)(J2,-fJl)}
k = 4 z s
oi = H^.(^+«/l)}
s
PI = J(Jt+Ji)
'OJ - 231J«-315J(J4-l)J*4-735JJ + 105J2(J +1 )2J^-525J(J + 1)Jz +
+ 294J2-5J3(J + 1)3 + 40J2(J + 1)2-60J(J + 1)
k = 6 01 = i{(llJ^-3J(J + l)J z -59JJ(Ji+Jl)} s
OJ = j{(iijJ_j(j + i)_38)(Jl+Ji)}
8
.OJ = J(Jl+Ji)

--- Page 879 ---

TABLE 17
Matrix elements of the operators 0% in Table 16. The numbers in column F are multiplying factors common to all
elements in a row. Bows where all matrix elements are zero have been omitted. Further matrix elements for O^1, O^1,
O^1, and O^5 are listed by Buclcmaster (1962)
Matrix elements of
OJ = 3J;-J(J + 1)
J P[[
J> = ±i ±1 ±f ±1 ±* ±¥ ±¥ ±¥
f 3 — i 1
f
2 — 4 -1 5
7 3 -5 -3 1 7
2
9 6 -4 -3 -1 2 6
2
V- 1 -35 -29 -17 1 25 55
¥
6 -8 -7 -5 -2 2 7 13
¥ 3 -21 -19 -15 -9 -1 9 21 35
J F
J, = 0 ±1 ±2 ±3 ±4 ±5 ±6 ±±77 ±8
1 1 2 1
2 3 2 -1 2
3 3 -4 -3 0 5
4 1 -20 -17 -8 7 28
5 3 -10 -9 -6 -1 6 15
6 3 — 14 -13 -10 —5 2 11 22
7 1 -56 -53 -44 -29 -8 19 52 91
8 3 — 24 -23 -20 -15 -8 1 12 26 40

--- Page 880 ---

Matrix elements of
01 = 35J*-30J(J + 1)J* + 25J*-6J(J + 1) + 3J2(J + 1)2
J F
J,= ±* ±f ±t ±* ±1 ±¥ ±¥ ±¥
t 60 2 -3 1
t 60 9 -3 -13 7
1 84 18 3 -17 -22 18
¥ 120 28 12 -13 -33 -27 33
¥ 60 108 63 -13 -92 -132 -77 143
¥ 60 189 129 23 -101 -201 -221 -91 273
J F
J.= 0 ±1 ±2 ±3 ±4 ±5 ±6 ±1 ±8
2 12 6 —4 1
3 60 6 1 — 7 3
4 60 18 9 -11 -21 14
5 420 6 4 — 1 -6 -6 6
6 60 84 64 11 -54 -96 -66 99
7 12 756 621 251 -249 -704 -869 -4239 1001
8 420 36 31 17 -3 -24 -39 -39 -13 52

--- Page 881 ---

TABLE 17 (continued)
Matrix elements of
01 = 231J5-315J(J + l)Jj + 735J* + 105J2(J-f-l)2J^-525J(J + l)^ +
+ 294J2,-5J3(J + l)3+40J2(J-{-l)2-60J(J + l)
J ff
J.= ±v
±4 ±f ±f ±1 ±t ±¥ ±¥
\
1260 -5 9 -5 1
f
5040 -8 6 10 -11 3
V 7560 -20 4 25 11 -31 11
¥ 2160 -200 -25 185 227 -11 -319 143
¥ 13860 -75 -25 45 87 59 -39 -117 65
j F
jx= 0 ±1 ±2 ±3 ±4 ±5 ±6 ±7 ±8
3 180 -20 15 -6 1
4 1260 -20 1 22 -17 4
5 2520 -40 -12 36 29 -48 15
6 7560 -40 -20 22 43 8 -55 22
7 3780 -200 -125 50 197 176 —55 -286 143
8 13860 -120 -85 2 93 128 65 -78 -169 104

--- Page 882 ---

Matrix elements of
05 = J(JJ+Ji)
j <±1||T1> <±2| |0> <±3||±1> <±4||±2> <±5||±3> <±6||±4> <±7||±5> <±8||±6>
i 1
2 3 V6
3 6 A/30 V15
4 10 3V10 3V7 2V7
5 15 V210 2V42 6^3 3V5
6 21 2V 105 6V10 3V30 V165 V66
7 28 6^21 15V3 5V22 6VH 3V26 A/91
8 36 6V35 v'1155 3VHO 2^195 A/546 3V35 2^30
<±fl|Ti> <±f| ±i> <±l||±f> <±f||±l> <±V-||±!> <±¥||d=f> <±¥||d=¥>
I3 2 V3
I 3V2 Vio
¥ 7 2V15 3Vgg A/21
I 5V6 3V14 2^21 6
I1 2 J I , 3V35 2V70 6V6 3V15 V^5
14V3 6V15 15V2 A/330 3^22 A/78
¥
¥ 12-V/7 3V105 5V33 2V165 6V13 A/273 A/105
Matrix elementsof
0! = J[{7J2 -J(J4-l)-5}(J^+Jl) + (J^+^){7J 2-J(J-M)-5}]
z z
J jP <±l||=fl> <±2| |0> <±3||±1> <±4||±2> <±5||±3> <±6||±4> <±7||±5> <+8||±6>
2 3 -4 V6
3 3 -20 -V30 6V15
4 3 -60 -iiv/io 10V7 30V7
5 21 -20 -V210 0 10V3 12V5
6 3 -280 -22V105 -24^10 23V30 24V165 45 A/66
7 3 -504 -94V21 -130V3 15V22 116VH 121V26 66V91
8 7 -360 -54V35 -6VH55 -SA/HO 12V195 15 V546 78V35 78V30
<±tll±t>
J ^ <±fl|=Fi> <±i||±*> <±t||±t> <±¥-||±*> <d=¥||±l> <±¥||±¥>
I~52~ 3 -5V2 3V10
6 -4V15 V5 5V21
* I 21 -5V6 -Vi^ 2V21 18
I ¥ I • 12 -8V35 -3V70 5V6 13V15 9V55
3 -210V3 -62V15 -15V2 13A/330 95V22 55V78
¥
i£ 6 -120V7 -23^105 -15V33 8V165 80V13 25 V273 39^105
2

--- Page 883 ---

TABLE 17 (continued)
Matrix elements of
0\ = i[{33J*-18J2j(J + l)-123Jl+J2(J + l)2 + 10J(J + l) + 102}(J|+Jl)
+ (j2+Jl){33J*-18J2J(J + l)-123Ji+J2(J + l)2 + 10J(J + l) + 102}]
z
J F <±1||=F1> <±2| |0> <±3| |±1> <d=4| |±2> <±5||±3> <±6| ±4> <±7||±5> <±8||±6>
3 24 15 -2V30 A/15
4 30 84 0 -36V7 24V7
5 120 84 2V210 -11V42 -42V3 42 V5
6 72 420 22V105 -63V10 -84V30 -14V165 70V66
7 1080 70 10V21 -7V3 -14V22 -21VH 0 iiV^i
8 264 630 78V35 VH55 -42VHO -49V195 -20V546 39V 35 182V30
J F <±i||=Fi> <±f||±J> <±l||±f> <±f||±l> <±¥||±!> <±¥ll±f> <±¥||±¥>
1 24 7-v/lS -21V5 5V21
1 240 7V6 -3V14 -5V21 21
¥ 216 12V35 -V?o -35V6 -14V15 14V55
¥ 720 35V3 3V15 -36V2 -4V330 -3V22 11V78
V 1320 30V? 3V 105 -7V33 -7V165 -21^13 V273 13V105

--- Page 884 ---

Matrix elements of
o' = HW+JD+tJi+Jiy.}
t
jjj ff 2\\-1> ,3\\0> ,.sds ,.sd. ,6\\3. ,.7\\4> 5995/>\
3 1
3 3 1010 3V5
4 3 5V2 3V35 5V14
5 3 5V? 6V35 10V21 7V30
6 3 7V10 6V105 50V3 7V165 9V55
7 3 14V6 15V42 25V33 35V22 9V286 11V91
8 3 6V70 3V2310 25V77 7V1430 9V910 11V455 26V35
J J1 <ll|-i> <*| li> <f 1 If) <¥| If) <¥l 11) <¥l If)
I 3 Vio
7 3 4V5 2V35
2
¥ 9 3 5V14 8V14 6V21
V- 12V5 V14 V42 3V6 V33
¥ 3 14V15 40V6 15V66 16V55 5V286
¥ 6 4V105 5V231 30VH 4VV15 10V91 3V455
Note thatfor these matrix elements <— M \ —M') = - (M | M').

--- Page 885 ---

TABLE 17 (continued)
Matrix elements of
oj = tt(iij;-3j^(j+i)-5»j,)(j».+Ji)+(j{+Ji)(iij;-3j lljj((jj++ii))--66»»jj..))]]
ll
J J7
<2||-1> <3| |0> <4| |1> <6| |2> <6| |3> <7| |4> <8||5>
3 18 -3V10 2-v/5
4 90 — 7\/2 -2V35 4V14
5 180 -6V7 -5V35 -V21 7V30
6 36 -63V10 -43V105 -175V3 14V165 84^55
7 90 -70V6 -64V42 -70V33 -21V22 21^286 66^91
8 198 — 18V70 -8V2310 -50V77 -7^1430 3V910 22^455 104V35
J F <f||-i> <*l li> / \ 9 2 . | | A 2/ \ <¥l If) <¥| |t> <¥| |l>
I 36 — 7V5 2V35
f 360 -2V14 -V14 2V21
¥ 36V5 -27V14 -16V42 7V6 28V33
¥ 360 — 14V15 -29V6 -4^66 6V55 6V286
¥ 1980 -2V105 -2V231 -7-v/H 0 3V91 2V455
Note that for these matrix elements (-M \ —M'} = —{M \ M').

--- Page 886 ---

Matrix elements of
oi = i(J«+Ji)
J f <±3| |=fl> <±3| |=fl> <±4| |0> <±5||±1> <±6||±2> <±7||±3> <±8||±4>
2 12 1
3 12 5 V15
4 12 15 5V7 V70
5 12 35 5V42 3V70 V210
6 12 70 21V10 15V14 5V66 3V55
7 12 126 70V3 5V462 15V33 5V143 V1001
8 12 210 6VH55 15V154 5V1001 V15015 5V273 2V455
J F <±*||Tf> <±l||Ti> <±M±t> <±¥ll±f> <±V||±f> <±¥||±i>
t 12 V5
1 12 5V3 V35
I 12V7 5V3 5V2 3V2
¥• 12V2 35 3V105 5V21 V165
V^ 12 42 V5 35 V6 15V22 15VH V715
¥ 12 42V 15 10V231 15V77 5V429 V5005 V1365

--- Page 887 ---

TABLE 17 (continued)
Matrix elements of
0\ = i{(H^2-^(^ + l)-38)(J*+J_) + (J 4+Jl)(llJ2_J(J l)_38)}
+ +
J ^ <2||-2> <±3||T1> <±4| |0> <±6||±1> <±6||±2> <±7||±3> <±8||±4>
3 60 -6 V15
4 180 -14 -V7 2V70
5 60 -168 -13V42 12V70 15V210
6 180 -168 -35V10 8V14 21V66 28V55
7 60 -1260 -546V3 -6V462 147V33 126V143 45^1001
8 660 -252 -6VH55 -6V154 3V1001 2V15015 19V273 12^455
J F <±f||=Ff> (illlTi) <±t||±i> <d=¥M±f> <±¥||±*> <±¥M±*>
2 7. 60 -7V3 3V35
. f 60V7 -16V3 6^2 30V2
¥ 180V2 -63 -V105 13V21 7V165
1 360 -56V5 -21V6 13V22 46VH 6V715
¥ ^ 660 -42V15 -6V231 3-V/77 7V429 3V5005 5V1365
Matrix elements of
oi = Wl+J*.}
J F <3| |-3> <±4||T2> <±5||=F1> <±6| |0> <±7||±1> <±8||±2>
3 360 1
4 360 7 2^7
5 360 28 14V3 V210
6 360 84 14V30 7^66 2V231
7 360 210 42-V/22 28V33 2^(21X143) V(21X143)
8 360 462 42VHO 12V(13X77) 14V(3X143) 7V(13X55) 2^(14X143)
J F <±1||TI> <±f| |Tf> <±¥MTi> <±¥M±i> <±¥ll±f>
I 360 Vi
9 2 360 14 2V21
1 2 1 360 28V3 7^30 V462
¥ 720 21V10 7^66 7V33 V429
is 2 . 360VH 42 V5 84 4V273 7V39 V(35xl3)

--- Page 888 ---

APPENDIX B—SOME GENERAL TABLES 873
TABLE 18
Values of a, ft, y for a single electron
TABLE 19
Values of (L\\ a \\L), (L\\ /? \\L)for the ground states of
the 3d group. General formulae for a ground state
obeying Hund's rules are (the upper sign is required for
a shell less than half full, and the lower sign for a
shell more than half full)

--- Page 889 ---

TABLE 20
Multiplicative factors for 4f ions

--- Page 890 ---



--- Page 891 ---

876 APPENDIX B —SOME GENERAL TABLES
TABLE 21
Values of the coefficie ntsm, n
defined by eqns (19.47) for orbital
triplet states, calculated from the
wave-functions of Table 4
Orbital triplet m n
TABLE 22
Values of g for 'isolated' F and F Kramers
6 7
doublets for various rare-earth ions, in cubic
symmetry

--- Page 892 ---

APPENDIX B —SOME GENERAL TABLES 877
TABLE 23
Combinations of central ion orbitals and ligand orbitals for the XY
6
complex. Geometrical illustrations are given in Figs. 7.17 and 7.18
Central Ligand cr-orbitals Ligand
Representations orbitals (s or p) vr-orbitals
TABLE 24
Molecular orbital combinations of symmetry t and e for the
2g g
XY complex, where X is an ion of a d-electron transition
B
group
where: d| ^ £ transform like yz, zx, xy;
dee transform like 3z2 — r2, V(3)(^2—2/2);
t
and

--- Page 893 ---

878 APPENDIX B—SOME GENERAL TABLES
TABLE 25
Lowest terms for the iron group.
For 3dn electrons with n > 5 the free-ion terms are the same as for 3d1Q~n;
the sequence in energy of the cubic terms is reversed (for instance for 3d1
the ground cubic term is4 T1)
Free ion Lowest free ion terms Lowest cubic terms Strong field
configuration of maximum spin of maximum spin configurations
3d1 2D 2T
Z ^2
r*F P^i («)2, «e
3d2 2 2
ISP ^e
L3^2 2
r*F 4 4 T ^ 2 (* 2 )3
3d3 L4P 2
(
(
«
tt.
)
*
2e
.
,
.
^e2
4^ 2 2
3d4 5£> 5
5
,E
T
7
2 (
(
*
^ 2
2
)
)
3
2
e
e2
3d5 •S 6^i (^
2
)3e2
TABLE 26
Normal coordinates in the octahedral complex X F
6
which transform according to even representations
ofOhh
h
r {Q = {(x -x ) + (F -r ) + (z -^ )}/v6
lg 1 1 4 2 5 3 6
JQ = {(*i-*4)-(r -r )}/2
2 2 5
.r
3g \Q3 = {2(Z3-Z6)-(X1-X,)~(Y2-Y5)}IV12
(Q = {(Z -Z ) + (Y,-Y,)}l2
i 2 5
r ^5 = {(x -^ )+(z -z )}/2
5g 3 6 1 4
U = {(^i-^4) + (^ -^5)}/2
6 2

--- Page 894 ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABE, H. and SHIMADA, J. (1953) Phys. Rev. 90, 316.
(1957) J. phys. Soc. Japan 12, 1255.
ABRAGAM, A. (1950) Phys. Rev. 79, 534.
(1955) Phys. Rev. 98, 1729.
(1961) The principles of nuclear magnetism. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
and BORGHINI, M. (1964) Prog, in Low Temp. Phys. 4, 384.
HOROWITZ, J. and PRYCE, M. H. L. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 230, 169.
and PROCTOR, W. G. (1958) C.r. hebd. Seanc. Acad. Sci., Paris 246,
2253
and PRYCE, M. H. L. (1949) Nature, Lond. 163, 992.
(1950) Proc. phys. Soc. A 63, 409.
(1951a) Proc. R. Soc. A 205, 135.
(19516) Proc. R. Soc. A 206, 164.
(1951c) Proc. R. Soc. A 206, 173.
ABRAHAM, M. M., FINCH, C. B., and CLARK, G. W. (1968) Phys. Rev. 168, 933.
JUDD, B. R. and WICKMAN, H. H. (1963) Phys. Rev. 130, 611.
KEDZIE, R. W. and JEFFRIES, C. D. (1960) Phys. Rev. 117, 1070.
WEEKS, R. A., CLARK, G. W., and FINCH, C. B. (1965) Phys. Rev. 137, A 138.
(1966) Phys. Rev. 148, 350.
ALBERTSON, W. (1937) Phys. Rev. 52, 644.
ALLEN, S. J. (1968) Phys. Rev. 166, 530.
ANDERSON, P. W. (1951) Phys. Rev. 82, 342.
(1959) Phys. Rev. 115, 2.
(1963) Adv. solid St. Phys. 14, 99.
and WEISS, P. R. (1953) Rev. mod. Phys. 25, 269.
ARMSTRONG, L. and MARRUS, R. (1966) Phys. Rev. 144, 994.
AXE, J. D. and BURNS, G. (1966) Phys. Rev. 152, 331.
and DIEKE, G. H. (1962) J. chem. Phys. 37, 2364.
STAPLETON, H. J. and JEFFRIES, C. D. (1961) Phys. Rev. 121, 1630.
AYANT, Y. and BELORIZKY, ]5. (1964) C.r. hebd. Seanc. Acad. Sci., Paris 259,
3748.
and ROSSET, J. (1962) J. Phys. Radium, Paris 23, 201.
AZARBAYEJANI, G. H. and MERLO, A. L. (1965) Phys. Rev. 137, A 489.
BAGGULEY, D. M. S. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 228, 549.
and GRIFFITHS, J. H. E. (1948) Nature, Lond. 162, 538.
(1950) Proc. R. Soc. A 201, 366.
and VELLA-COLLEIRO, G. (1969) J. Phys. C (Proc. phys. Soc.) 2, 2310.
BAKER, J. M. (1964a) Phys. Rev. 136, A 1341.
(19646) Phys. Rev. 136, A 1633.
BIRGENEAU, R. J., HUTCHINGS, M. T., and RILEY, J. D. (1968) Phys. Rev.
Lett. 21, 620.
BLAKE, W. B. J. and COPLAND, G. M. (1969) Proc. R. Soc. A 309, 119.
and BLEANEY, B. (1958) Proc. R. Soc. A 245, 156.
and BOWERS, K. D. (1956) Proc. phys. Soc. B 69, 1205.

--- Page 895 ---

880 BIBLIOGRAPHY
BAKER, J. M., CHAD WICK, J. R., GABTON, G., and HUBBELL, J. P. (1965) Proc.
R. Soc. A 286, 352.
COPLAND, G. M. and WANKLYN, B. M. (1969) J. Phys. C (Proc. phys. Soc.)
2, 862.
and FOBD, N. C. (1964) Phys. Rev. 136, A 1692.
HAYES, W. and JONES, D. A. (1959) Proc. phys. Soc. 73, 942.
and O'BBiEN, M. C. M. (1960) Proc. R. Soc. A 254, 273.
and HUBBELL, J. P. (1963) Proc. phys. Soc. 82, 742.
and MAU, A. E. (1967) Can. J. Phys. 45, 403.
and RUBINS, R. S. (1961) Proc. phys. Soc. 78, 1353.
and WILLIAMS, F. I. B. (1961) Proc. phys. Soc. 78, 1340.
(1962) Proc. R. Soc. A 267, 283.
BABNES, R. G., MOSSBAUEB, R. L., KANKELEIT, E., and POINDEXTEB, J. M.
(1964) Phys. Rev. 136, A 175.
BELOBIZKY, E., AYANT, Y., DESCAMPS, D., and MEBLE D'AUBIGNE, Y. (1966)
J. Phys. Radium, Paris 27, 313.
BENZIE, R. J. and COOKE, A. H. (1950) Proc. phys. Soc. A 63, 201.
and WHITLEY, S. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 232, 277.
BEBSUKEB, I. B. (1962) Zh. eksp. teor. Fiz. 43, 1315; Soviet Phys. JETP 16,
933.
(1963) Zh. eksp. teor. Fiz. 44, 1239; Soviet Phys. JETP 17, 836.
BESSENT, R. G. and HAYES, W. (1965) Proc. R. Soc. A 285, 430.
and HODBY, J. W. (1967) Proc. R. Soc. A 297, 376.
BETHE, H. (1929) Annln. Phys. 3, 133.
BIEBIG, R. W. and WEBEB, M. J. (1963) Phys. Rev. 132, 164.
and WABSHAW, S. I. (1964) Phys. Rev. 134, A 1504.
BIBGENEAU, R. J. (1967a) Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 160.
(19676) Can. J. Phys. 45, 3761.
HUTCHINGS, M. T., BAKEB, J. M., and RILEY, J. D. (1969) J. Appl. Phys.
40, 1070.
BLEANEY, B. (1950) Proc. R. Soc. A 204, 203.
(1951a) Proc. phys. Soc. A 64, 315.
(19516) Phil. Mag. 42, 441.
(1955) Discuss. Faraday Soc. No. 19, p. 112.
(1959a) Proc. phys. Soc. 73, 937.
(19596) Proc. phys. Soc. 73, 939.
(I960) Proc. phys. Soc. 75, 621.
(1961) Proc. phys. Soc. 77, 113.
(1964a) Proc. R. Soc. A 277, 289.
(19646) Proceedings of The Third Quantum Electronics Conference. Dunod,
Paris.
(1967) lLa structure hyperfine magnetique des atonies et des molecules', p. 13.
Colloques Internationaux du C.N.R.S., Paris.
BOGLE, G. S., COOKE, A. H., DUFFUS, H. J., O'BBIEN, M. C. M., and
STEVENS, K. W. H. (1955) Proc. phys. Soc. A 68, 57.
and BOWEBS, K. D. (1952a) Phil. Mag. 43, 372.
(19526) Proc. R. Soc. A 214, 451.
and INGBAM, D. J. E. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 228, 147.
and PBYCE, M. H. L. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 228, 166.
and TBENAM, R. S. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 228, 157.
DANIELS, J. M., GBACE, M. A., HALBAN, H., KUBTI, N., ROBINSON, F. N.
H., and SIMON, F. E. (1954) Proc. R. Soc. A 221, 170.

--- Page 896 ---

BIBLIOGKAPHY 881
BLEANEY, B., ELLIOTT, R. J., and SCOVIL, H. E. D. (1951) Proc. phys. Soc. A 64,
933.
HAYES, W. and LLEWELLYN, P. M. (1957) Nature, Lond. 179, 140.
HUTCHISON, C. A., LLEWELLYN, P. M., and POPE, D. F. D. (1956) Proc. phys.
Soc. B69, 1167.
and INGRAM, D. J. E. (1950) Proc. phys. Soc. A 63, 408.
(1951a) Proc. R. Soc. A 205, 336.
(19516) Proc. E. Soc. A 208, 143.
LLEWELLYN, P. M. and JONES, D. A. (1956) Proc. phys. Soc. B 69, 858.
PRYCE, M. H. L., and HALL, G. R. (1954a) Phil. Mag. 45, 991.
(19546) Phil Mag. 45, 992.
and O'BRIEN, M. C. M. (1956) Proc. phys. Soc. B 69, 1216.
and OWEN, J. (1965) Physical properties of diamond (Ed. R. Berman),
p. 274. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
PENROSE, R. P. and PLUMPTON, B. I. (1949) Proc. R. Soc. A 198, 406.
and RUBINS, R. S. (1961) Proc. phys. Soc. 77, 103.
and SCOVIL, H. E. D. (1950) Proc. phys. Soc. A 63, 1369.
and TRENAM, R. S. (1954) Proc. R. Soc. A 223, 15.
and TRENAM, R. S. (1954) Proc. R. Soc. A 223, 1.
BLOCK, F. (1946) Phys. Rev. 70, 460.
BLOEMBERGEN, N. (1956) Phys. Rev. 104, 324.
PURCELL, E. M. and POUND, R. V. (1948) Phys. Rev. 73, 679.
BLOK, J. and SHIRLEY, D. A. (1966) Phys. Rev. 143, 278.
BLUMBERG, W. E., EISINGER, J., and GESCHWIND, S. (1963) Phys. Rev. 130
900.
BLUME, M., FREEMAN, A. J., and WATSON, R. E. (1964) Phys. Rev. 134, A 320.
and ORBACH, R. (1961) Phys. Rev. 127, 1587.
and WATSON, R. E. (1962) Proc. R. Soc. A 270, 127.
(1963) Proc. R. Soc. A 271, £65.
BORDARIER, Y., JUDD, B. R., and KLAPISCH, M. (1966) Proc. R. Soc. A 289, 81.
BORN, M. and OPPENHEIMER, R. (1927) Annln. Phys. 84, 457.
BOWERS, K. D. and OWEN, J. (1955) Rep. Prog. Phys. 18, 305.
BRANDON, R. W., GERKIN, R. E., and HUTCHISON, C. A. (1962) J. chem. Phys. 37,
447.
BREEN, D. P., KRUPKA, D. C., and WILLIAMS, F. I. B. (1969) Phys. Rev. 179, 241.
BREIT, G. (1929) Phys. Rev. 34, 553.
BROCHARD, J. and HELLWEGE, K. H. (1953) Z. Phys. 135, 620.
BROWER, K. L. and STAPLETON, H. J. (1967) J. chem. Phys. 46, 888.
BRYA, W. J. and WAGNER, P. E. (1965) Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 431.
(1967) Phys. Rev. 157, 400.
BUCKMASTER, H. A. (1962) Can. J. Phys. 40, 1670.
BURNS, G. (1962) Phys. Rev. 128, 2121.
CANER, M. and ENGLMAN, R. (1966) J. chem. Phys. 44, 4054.
CARNALL, W. T. and WYBOURNE, B. G. (1964) J. chem. Phys. 40, 3428.
CASTNER, T., NEWELL, G. S., HOLTON, W. C., and SLIGHTER, C. P. (1960) J. chem.
Phys. 32, 668.
CAVENETT, B. C. (1964) Proc. phys. Soc. 84, 1.
CHAKRAVARTY, A. S. (19C9) Proc. phys. Soc. 74, 711.
CHANG, TE-TSE (1964) Phys. Rev. 136, A 1413.
CHAPPERT, J., FRANKEL, R. B., and BLUM, N. A. (1967) Physics Lett.25 A, 149.
CHILD, M. S. and LONGUET-HIGGINS, H. C. (1962) Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A254,259.
57

--- Page 897 ---

882 BIBLIOGRAPHY
COFFMAN, R. E. (1965) Physics Lett. 19, 475.
(1966) Physics Lett. 21, 381.
(1968) J. chem. Phys. 48, 609.
LYLE, D. L., and MATTISON, D. R. (1968) J. phys. Chem., Ithaca 72, 1392.
CONDON, E. U. and SHOBTLEY, G. H. (1935) Theory of atomic spectra. Cambridge
University Press.
CONWAY, J. G. (1964) J. chem. Phys. 40, 2504.
and WYBOURNE, B. G. (1963) Phys. Rev. 130, 2325.
COOK, R. J. and WHIFFEN, D. H. (1964) Proc. phys. Soc. 84, 845.
(1965) J. chem. Phys. 43, 2908.
COOKE, A. H. (1950) Rep. Prog. Phys. 13, 276.
and DUFFUS, H. J. (1955) Proc. phys. Soc. 68, 32.
EDMONDS, D. T., McKiM, F. R., and WOLF, W. P. (1959) Proc. R. Soc.
A 252, 246.
LAZENBY, R., McKiM, F. R., OWEN, J., and WOLF, W. P. (1959) Proc. R.
Soc. A 250, 97.
CROSSWHITE, H. M. and DIEKE, G. H. (1961) J. chem. Phys. 35, 1535.
CULVAHOUSE, J. W. (1962) J. chem. Phys. 36, 2720.
SCHINKE, D. P. and FOSTER, D. L. (1967) Phys. Rev. Lett. 18, 117.
DABBS, J. W. T., ROBERTS, L. D., and PARKER, G. W. (1958) Proceedings of the
Kamerlingh Onnes Low Temperature Conference, Physica, '$ Grav., S 69.
DANIELS, J. M. (1953) Proc. phys. Soc. A 66, 673.
GRACE, M. A. and ROBINSON, F. N. H. (1951) Nature, Lond. 168, 780.
9
DAVIES, E. R. and HURRELL, J. P. (1968) J. Sci. lust. (J. Phys. E), 1, 847.
DAVIES, J. J., SMITH, S. R. P., and WERTZ, J. E. (1969) Phys. Rev. 178, 608.
DAWSON, J. K. (1952) Nucleonics 10, Sept. 39.
DELBECQ, C. J., HAYES, W., O'BRIEN, M. C. M., and YUSTER, P. H. (1963) Proc.
R. Soc. A 271, 243.
DESCAMPS, D. and MERLE D'AUBIGNE, Y. (1964) Physics Lett. 8, 5.
DEVINE, S. D. (1967) J. chem. Phys. 47, 1844.
DE WIT, M. and REINBERG, A. R. (1967) Phys. Rev. 163, 261.
DIEKE, G. H. and HEROTJX, L. (1956) Phys. Rev. 103, 1227.
and PANDEY, B. (1964) J. chem. Phys. 41, 1952.
DIETZ, R. E., KAMIMTJRA, H., STURGE, M. D., and YARIV, A. (1963) Phys. Rev.
132, 1559.
DIRAC, P. A. M. (1930) The principles of quantum mechanics. Oxford University
Press.
DORAIN, P. B., HUTCHISON, C. A., and WONG, E. (1957) Phys. Rev. 105, 1307.
and WHEELER, R. G. (1966) J. chem. Phys. 45, 1172.
DREISCH, T. and TROMMER, W. (1937) Z. phys. Chem. B37, 37.
DUNN, T. M. (1961) Trans. Faraday Soc. 57, 1441.
DYER, G. L. and WOONTON, G. A. (1967) Can. J. Phys. 45, 2975.
DZYALOSHINSKY, I. (1958) Physics Chem. Solids 4, 241.
EDELSTEIN, N. and EASLEY, W. (1968) J. chem. Phys. 48, 2110.
EDMONDS, A. R. (1957) Angular momentum in quantum mechanics. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.
EDMONDS, D. T. (1963) Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 129.
EISENSTEIN, J. C. (1963a) J. chem. Phys. 39, 2128.
(19636) J. chem. Phys. 39, 2134.

--- Page 898 ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 883
EISENSTEIN, J. C. and PBYCE, M. H. L. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 229, 20.
(1956) Proc. R. Soc. A 238, 31.
(1960) Proc. R. Soc. A 255, 181.
EISINGEB, J. and FEHEB, G. (1958) Phys. Rev. 109, 1172.
ELLIOTT, R. J. (1953) Phys. Rev. 89, 659.
(1957) Proc. phys. Soc. B 70, 119.
and STEVENS, K. W. H. (1952) Proc. R. Soc. A 215, 437.
(1953o) Proc. R. Soc. A 218, 553.
(19536) Proc. R. Soc. A 219, 387.
and THORPE, M. F. (1968) J. appl. Phys. 39, 802.
ELLIS, M. M. and NEWMAN, D. J. (1966) Physics Lett. 21, 508.
EBATH, E. E. (1961) J. chem. Phys. 34, 1985.
EBB, E., MOTCHANE, J. L., and UEBEBSFELD, J. (1958) C.r. hebd. Seanc. Acad.
Sci., Paris 246, 2121, 3050.
ESTLE, T. L., WALTEBS, G. K., and DE WIT, M. (1963) Symposium on para-
magnetic resonance vol. 1, p. 144. Academic Press, New York.
EVANS, L., SANDABS, P. G. H., and WOODGATE, G. K. (1965) Proc. R. Soc. A 289,
114.
EVANS, R. C. (1964) An introduction to crystal chemistry. Cambridge University
Press.
FANO, U. and RACAH, G. (1958) Irreducible tensorial sets, Academic Press, N.Y.
FAUGHNAN, B. W. and STBANDBEBG, M. W. P. (1961) Physics. Chem. Solids 19,
155.
FAUST, J., MABBUS, R., and NIEBENBEBG, W. A. (1965) Physics Lett. 16, 71.
FEHEB, E. R. (1964) Phys. Rev. 136, A 145.
FEHEB, G. (19.r6a) Phys. Rev. 103, 500.
(19, 66) Phys. Rev. 103, 834.
(1959) Phys. Rev. 114, 1219.
and GEBE, E. A. (1956) Phys. Rev. 103, 501.
(19,,9) Phys. Rev. 114, 1245.
FELDMAN, D. W., CASTLE, J. G., and WAGNEB, G. R. (1966) Phys. Rev. 145, 237.
FEBMI, E. and SEGBE, E. (1933a) Z. Phys. 82, 729.
(19336) Memorie R. Accad. Ital. 4, 131.
FEYNMAN, R. P. (1939) Phys. Rev. 56, 340.
FIDONE, I. and STEVENS, K. W. H. (19:9) Proc. phys. Soc. 73, 116.
FINN, C. B. P., OBBACH, R., and WOLF, W. P. (1961) Proc. phys. Soc. 77, 261.
FITZWATEB, D. R. and RUNDLE, R. E. (19^,9) Z. Kristallogr. Kristallgeom. 112,
362.
FLETCHER, J. R. and STEVEXS, K. W. H. (1969) J. Phys. C (Proc. phys. Soc.)
2, 444.
FOEX, G., KABANTASSIS, T., and PEBAKIS, N. (1953) C.r. hebd. Seanc. Acad. Sci.,
Paris 237, 982.
FBEEMAN, A. J. and WATSON, R. E. (1962) Phys. Rev. 127, 2058.
(1964) Phys. Rev. 133, A 1571.
(1965) Magnetism, Vol. II A (Eds. G. T. Rado and H. Suhl), p. 167.
Academic Press.
FBIEDEBICH, A., HELLWEGE, K. H., and LAMMEBMAN, H. (1960) Z. Phys. 159,
524.
FBY, D. J. I. and LLEWELLYN, P. M. (1962) Proc. R. Soc. A 266, 84.
FTJLLEB, G. H. and COHEN, V. W. (1965) Nuclear moments (Appendix 1 to
Nuclear Data Sheets).

--- Page 899 ---

884 BIBLIOGRAPHY
GABRIEL, J. R., JOHNSTON, D. F., and POWELL, M. J. D. (1961) Proc. R. Soc.
A 264, 503.
GESCHWIND, S. (1959) Phys. Rev. Lett.3, 207.
(1967) Hyperfine interactions, p. 225. Academic Press.
and REMEIKA, J. P. (1961) Phys. Rev. 122, 757.
(1962) J. appl. Phys. Suppl. to vol. 33, 370.
GHATIKAR, M. N., RAYCHAUDHURI, A. K., and RAY, D. K. (1965) Proc. phys. Soc.
86, 1239.
GILL, J. C. (1963) Proc. phys. Soc. 82, 1066.
and ELLIOTT, R. J. (1961) Advances in quantum electronics, (Ed. J. R.
Singer), p. 399. Columbia University Press.
GIORDMAINE J. A. and NASH, F. R. (1965) Phys. Rev. 138, A 1510.
GORTER, C. J. (1947) Paramagnetic relaxation. Elsevier.
(1948) Physica, '« Grav. 14, 504.
and VAN VLECK, J. H. (1947) Phys. Rev. 72, 1128.
GBAMBEBG, G. (1960) Z. Phys. 159, 125.
GREENSLADE, D. J. and STEVENS, K. W. H. (1967) Proc. phys. Soc. 91, 627.
GRIFFITH, J. S. (1961) The theory o/ transition-metal ions. Cambridge University
Press.
GRIFFITHS, J. H. E., O'BRIEN, M. C. M., OWEN, J., and WARD, I. M. (1955)
Quoted by Bowers, K. D. and Owen, J., Rep. Prog. Phys. 18, 304.
and OWEN, J. (1952a) Proc. R. Soc. A 213, 459.
(19526) Proc. phys. Soc. A 65, 951.
(1954) Proc. R. Soc. A 226, 96.
PARK, J. G., and PARTRIDGE, M. F. (1959) Proc. R. Soc. A 250, 84.
and WARD, I. M. (1953) Proc. R. Soc. A 219, 526.
GRUBER, J. B. (1963) J. chem. Phys. 38, 946.
COCHRAN, W. R., CONWAY, J. G. and NICOL, A. T. (1966) J. chem. Phys.
45, 1423.
and SATTEN, R. A. (1963) J. chem. Phys. 39, 1455.
HAHN, E. L. (1950) Phys. Rev. 80, 580.
HALFORD, D. (1962) Phys. Eev. 127, 1940.
HALL, J. L. and SCHUMACHER, R. T. (1962) Phys. Rev. 127, 1892.
HALL, T. P. P., HAYES, W., STEVENSON, R. W. H., and WILKENS, J. (1963)
J. chem. Phys. 38, 1977.
HAM, F. S. (1961) Phys. Rev. Lett. 7, 242.
(1965) Phys. Rev. A 138, 1727.
(1967) Phys. Rev. 160, 328.
(1968) Phys. Rev. 166, 307.
(1969) John-Teller effects in electron paramagnetic resonance spectra, Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York.
LTJDWIG, G. W., WATKINS, G. D., and WOODBURY, H. H. (1960) Phys.
Rev. Lett. 5, 468.
SCHWARZ, W. M. and O'BRIEN, M. C. M. (1969) Phys. Rev. 185, 548.
HANAUER, S. H., DABBS, J. W. T., ROBERTS, L. D., and PARKER, G. W. (1961)
Phys. Rev. 124, 1512.
HARGREAVES, W. A. (1967) Phys. Rev. 156, 331.
HARRIS, E. A. and OWEN, J. (1963) Phys. Rev. Lett. 11, 9.
(1965) Proc. R. Soc. A 289, 122.
and YNGVESSON, K. S. (1966) Physics Lett. 21, 252.

--- Page 900 ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 885
HARRIS, E. A. and YNGVESSON. K. S. (1968) J. Phys. C (Proc. phys. Soc.) 1, 990,
1011.
HARVEY, J. S. M. (1965) Proc. E. Soc. A 285, 581.
HAUSMANN, A. and SCHREIBER, P. (1969) Solid St. Communs. 7, 631.
HAYES, W. and TWIDELL, J. W. (1961) J. chem. Phys. 35, 1521.
(1963) Proc. phys. Soc. 82, 330.
and WILKENS, J. (1964) Proc. E. Soc. A 281, 340.
HEITLER, W. and TELLER, E. (1936) Proc. R. Soc. A 155, 629.
HELLWEGE, A. M. and HELLWEGE, K. H. (1951) Z. Phys. 130, 549.
(1953) Z. Phys. 135, 92.
HELLWEGE, K. H., ORLICH, E., and SCHAACK, G. (1965) Phys. Kondens. Materie,
4, 196.
HENDERSON, A. J. and ROGERS, R. N. (1966) Phys. Rev. 152, 218.
HILL, J. C. and WHEELER, R. G. (1966) Phys. Rev. 152, 482.
HOCHLI, U. T. (1966) Bull. Am. phys. Soc. 11, 203.
(1967) Phys. Rev. 162, 262.
and ESTLE, T. L. (1967) Phys. Rev. Lett. 18, 128.
MULLER, K. A., and WYSLING, P. (1965) Physics Lett. 15, 5.
HODGES, J. A., SERWAY, R. A., and MARSHALL, S. A. (1966) Phys. Rev. 151, 196.
HOLTON, W. C., SCHNEIDER, J., and ESTLE, T. L. (1964) Phys. Rev. 133, A 1638.
HORAK, J. B. and NOLLE, A. W. (1967) Phys. Rev. 153, 372.
HOSKINS, R. H. and SOFFER, B. H. (1964) Phys. Rev. 133 A, 490.
HUANG, CHAO-YUAN (1965) Phys. Rev. 139, A 241.
HtiFNER, S. (1962) Z. Phys. 169, 417.
HURRELL, J. P. (1965) Br. J. appl. Phys. 16, 755.
HUTCHINGS, M. T. (1964) Solid St. Phys. 16, 227.
and RAY, D. K. (1963) Proc. phys. Soc. 81, 663.
HUTCHISON, C. A. and CANDELA, G. A. (1957) J. chem. Phys. 27, 707.
JUDD, B. R. and POPE, D. F. D. (1957) Proc. phys. Soc. B 70, 514.
and LEWIS, W. B. (1954) Phys. Rev. 95, 1096.
LLEWELLYN, P. M., WONG, E., and DORAIN, P. (1956) Phys. Rev. 102, 292.
and MANGUM, B. W. (1958) J. chem. Phys. 29, 952.
TSANG, T. and WEINSTOCK, B. (1962) J. chem. Phys. 37, 555.
and WEINSTOCK, B. (1960) J. chem. Phys. 32, 56.
and WONG, E. (1958) J. chem. Phys. 29, 754.
IBERS, J. A. and SWALEN, J. D. (1962) Phys. Rev. 127, 1914.
INGRAM, D. J. E. (1949) Proc. phys. Soc. A 62, 664.
INOUE, M. (1963) Phys. Rev. Lett. 11, 196.
ISHIGURO, E., KAMBE, K., and Usui, T. (1951) Physica, 's Grav. 17, 310.
JACOBSEN, E. H. and STEVENS, K. W. H. (1963) Phys. Rev. 129, 2036.
JAHN, H. A. and TELLER, E. (1937) Proc. R. Soc. A 161, 220.
JEFFRIES, C. D. (1957) Phys. Rev. 106, 164.
(1960) Phys. Rev. 117, 1056.
(1963) Dynamic nuclear orientation. Wiley, New York.
JOHNSTON, D. R., SATTEN, R. A., SCHREIBER, C. L., and WONG, E. Y. (1966)
J. chem. Phys. 44, 3141.
JONES, D. A., BAKER, J. M., and POPE, D. F. D. (1959) Proc. phys. Soc. 74, 249.
JORGENSEN, C. K. (1962) Absorption spectra and chemical bonding in complexes.
Pergamon Press, Oxford.
JOSEPH, R. I. and VAN VLECK, J. H. (1960) J. chem. Phys. 32, 1573.

--- Page 901 ---

886 BIBLIOGRAPHY
JOYCE, R. R. and RICHARDS, P. L. (1969) Phys. Rev. 179, 375.
JUDD, B. R. (1955) Proc. E. Soc. A 232, 458.
(1957a) Proc. R. Soc. A 241, 122.
(19576) Proc. R. Soc. A 241, 414.
(1959a) Proc. R. Soc. A 251, 134.
(19596) Molec. Phys. 2, 407.
(1959c) Proc. R. Soc. A 250, 110.
(1963a) Proc. phys. Soc. 82, 874.
(19636) Operator techniques in atomic spectroscopy. McGraw-Hill, New York.
and LINDGREN, I. (1961) Phys. Rev. 122, 1802.
LOVEJOY, C. A. and SHIRLEY, D. A. (1962) Phys. Rev. 128, 1733.
and WONG, E. (1958) J. chem. Phys. 28, 1097.
KAMBE, K. and Usui, T. (1952) Prog, theor. Phys., OsakaS, 302.
KAMIMURA, H. (1956) J. phys. Soc. Japan 11, 1171.
KOIDE, S., SEKIYAMA, H. and SUGANO, S. (1960) J. phys. Soc. Japan 15,
1264.
KARPLUS, R. and SCHWINGEB, J. (1948) Phys. Rev. 73, 1020.
KASK, N. E., KORNIENKO, L. S., MANDEL'SHTAM, T. S., and PROKHOROV, A. M.
(1964) Fizika tverd. Tela 5, 2306; Soviet Phys. solid St. 5, 1677.
KETELAAB, J. A. A. (1937) Physica, 's Grav. 4, 619.
KIEL, A. and MIMS, W. B. (1967) Phys. Rev. 161, 386.
KINGSLEY, J. D. and AVEN, M. (1967) Phys. Rev. 155, 235.
Kiss, Z. J. (1962) Phys. Rev. 127, 718.
(1965) Phys. Rev. 137, A 1749.
ANDERSON, C. H. and ORBACH, R. (1965) Phys. Rev. 137, A 1761.
KITTEL, C. and ABRAHAMS, E. (1953) Phys. Rev. 90, 238.
KOKOSZKA, G. F., ALLEN, H. C., and GORDON, G. (1965) J. chem. Phys. 42,
3693.
KONYUKHOV, V. K., PASHININ, P. P., and PROKHOROV, A. M. (1962) Fizika tverd.
Tela 4, 246; Soviet Phys. solid St. 4, 175.
KOSTER, G. F. and STATZ, H. (1959) Phys. Rev. 113, 445.
KOTANI, M. (1949) J. phys. Soc. Japan 4, 293.
(1960) Prog, theor. Phys., Osaka Suppl. No. 14, p. 1.
KRONIG, R. DE L. (1939) Physica, 's Grav. 6, 33.
and BOUWKAMP, C. J. (1939) Physica, *s Grav. 6, 290.
KYI, RU-TAO (1962) Phys. Rev. 128, 151.
LACROIX, R. (1957) Helv. phys. Acta 30, 374.
HOCHLI, U. and MULLER, K. A. (1964) Helv. phys. Acta 37, 627.
LAMBE, J., LAURANCE, N., MC!RVINE, E. C., and TERHUNE, R. W. (1961) Phys.
Rev. 122, 1161.
LARSON, G. H. and JEFFRIES, C. D. (1966a) Phys. Rev. 141, 461.
(19666) Phys. Rev. 145, 311.
LAURANCE, N. and LAMBE, J. (1963) Phys. Rev. 132, 1029.
LEA, K. R., LEASK, M. J. M., and WOLF, W. P. (1962) Physics Chem. Solids 23,
1381.
LEASK, M. J. M., ORBACH, R., POWELL, M. J. D., and WOLF, W. P. (1963) Proc.
R.Soc. A 272, 371.
LEVY, P. M. (1964) Phys. Rev. 135, A 155.
(1968) Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 1366.
LEWIS, H. R. and SABISKY, E. S. (1963) Phys. Rev. 130, 1370.

--- Page 902 ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 887
LINDGBEN, I. (1962) NucL Phys. 32, 151.
LINES, M. E. (1963) Proc. E. Soc. A 271, 105.
LOCHEB, P. R. and GESCHWIND, S. (1963) Phys. Eev. Lett. 11, 333.
(1965) Phys. Rev. 139, A 991.
Low, W. (1956) Phys. Rev. 101, 1827.
(1958) Phys. Rev. 109, 265.
(1960) Paramagnetic resonance in solids. Academic Press, New York.
(1967) Physics Lett. 24A, 46.
and LLEWELLYN, P. M. (1958) Phys. Rev. 110, 842.
and ROSENBEBGEB, U. (1959) Phys. Rev. 116, 621.
and RUBINS, R. S. (1963a) Symposium on paramagnetic resonance, Vol. 1,
p. 79. Academic Press, New York.
(19636) Phys. Rev. 131, 2527.
and SHALTIEL (1958) Physics Chem. Solids 6, 315.
and Suss, J. T. (1963) Physics Lett. 7, 310.
(1965) Phys. Rev. Lett. 15, 519.
and WEGEB, M. (1960) Phys. Rev. 118, 1119.
LUDWIG, G. W. and HAM, F. S. (1962) Phys. Rev. Lett. 8, 210.
and WOODBUBY, H. H. (1961) Phys. Rev. Lett. 7, 240.
MACFABLANE, R. M., WONG, J. Y., and STUBGE, M. D. (1968) Phys. Rev. 166,
250.
McCLUBE, D. S. (1959) Solid St. Phys., 9, 399.
(1962) J. chem. Phys. 36, 2757.
McCoNNELL, H. M. (1956) J. chem. Phys. 25, 709.
MCDONALD, P. F. (1969) Phys. Rev. 177, 447.
McGABVEY, B. R. (1956) J. phys. Chem., Ithaca 60, 71.
MCLAUGHLAN, S. D. (1966) Phys. Rev. 150, 119.
McLELLAN, A. G. (1961) J. chem. Phys. 34, 1350.
McMAHON, D. H. (1964) Phys. Rev. 134, A 128.
and SILSBEE, R. H. (1964) Phys. Rev. 135, A 91.
MCMILLAN, M. and OPECHOWSKI, W. (1960) Can. J. Phys. 38, 1168.
(1961) Can. J. Phys. 39, 1369.
MANENKOV, A. A. and PBOKHOBOV, A. M. (1955) Zh. eksp. teor. Fiz. 28, 762;
Soviet Phys. JETP 1, 611.
(1962) Zh. eksp. teor. Fiz. 42, 1371; Soviet Phys. JETP 15, 951.
MABGOLIS, J. S. (1961) J. Chem. Phys. 35, 1367.
MABSHALL, F. G. and RAMPTON, V. W. (1968) J. Phys. C (Proc. phys. Soc.) 1,
594.
MARSHALL, S. A., KIKUCHI, T. T., and REINBEBG, A. R. (1962) Phys. Rev. 125,
453.
MARSHALL, W. (1963) Symposium on paramagnetic resonance, Vol. 1, p. 347.
Academic Press, New York.
and STUABT, R. (1961) Phys. Rev. 123, 2048.
MEHBA, A. and VENKATESWABLU, P. (1967) Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 145.
MEBGEBIAN, D., HABBOP, I. H., STOMBLEB, M. P., and KBIKOBIAN, K. C. (1967)
Phys. Rev. 153, 349.
STOMBLEB, M. P. and HABBOP, I. H. (1965) Bull. Am. phys. Soc. 10, 1109.
MEBBITT, F. R., GUGGENHEIM, H., and GABBETT, C. G. B. (1966) Phys. Rev.
145, 188.
MESSIAH, A. (1961) Quantum mechanics. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
MIKKELSON, R. C. and STAPLETON, H. J. (1965) Phys. Rev. 140, A 1968.

--- Page 903 ---

888 BIBLIOGRAPHY
MIMS, W. B., DEVLIN, G. E., GESCHWINP, S., and JACCABINO, V. (1967) Physics
Lett. 24 A, 481.
MIYATA, N. and ABGYLE, B. E. (1967) Phys. Rev. 157, 448.
MOFFITT, W. and THOBSON, W. (1957) Phys. Rev. 108, 1251.
MOBIGAKI, K. (1964a) J. phys. Soc. Japan 19, 187.
(19646) J. phys. Soc. Japan 19, 2064.
MOBIYA, T. (1960) Phys. Rev. 120, 91.
MOSEB, C. M. (1967) Hyperfine interactions, p. 95. Academic Press.
MUELLEB, K. A. (1968) Phys. Rev. 171, 350.
MULLEB, W., STEUDEL, A., and WALTHEB, H. (1965) Z. Phys. 183, 303.
MUBPHY, J. (1966) Phys. Rev. 145, 241.
NAIMAN, C. S. (1961) J. chem. Phys. 35, 323.
NELSON, E. D., WONG, J. Y., and SCHAWLOW, A. L. (1967) Phys. Rev. 156, 298.
O'BBIEN, M. C. M. (1964) Proc. R. Soc. A 281, 323.
O'CONNOB, J. R. and CHEN, J. H. (1964) Applied Phys. Lett. 5, 100.
OFELT, G. S. (1963) J. chem. Phys. 38, 2171.
OLSCHEWSKI, L. and OTTEN, E. W. (1967) Z. Phys. 200, 224.
ONO, K., KOIDE, S., SEKIYAMA, H., and ABE, H. (1954) Phys. Rev. 96, 38.
and OHTSUKA, M. (1958) J. phys. Soc. Japan 13, 206.
OPECHOWSKI, W. (1940) Physica, 's Grav. 7, 552.
OPIK, U. and PBYCE, M. H. L. (1957) Proc. R. Soc. A 238, 425.
OBBACH, R. (1961a,6) Proc. R. Soc. A 264, 458, 485.
and TACHIKI, M. (1967) Phys. Rev. 158, 524.
OBTON, J. W. (1959) Rep. Prog. Phys. 22, 204.
AUZINS, P., GBIFFITHS, J. H. E., and WEBTZ, J. E. (1961) Proc. phys. Soc.
78, 554.
and WEBTZ, J. E. (1960a) Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 128.
(19606) Phys. Rev. 119, 1691.
OVEBHAUSEB, A. W. (1953) Phys. Rev. 89, 689; 92, 411.
OVEBMEYEB, J. and GAMBINO, R. J. (1964) Physics Lett. 9, 108.
OWEN, J. (1955) Proc. R. Soc. A 227, 183.
(1961) J. appl. Phys. Suppl. 32, 213 S.
and STEVENS, K. W. H. (1953) Nature, Lond. 171, 836.
and THOBNLEY, J. H. M. (1966) Rep. Prog. Phys. 29, 675.
and WABD, I. M. (1956) Phys. Rev. 102, 591.
PAKE, G. E. and PUBCELL, E. M. (1948) Phys. Rev. 74, 1184.
PENBOSE, R. P. (1949) Nature, Lond. 163, 992.
and STEVENS, K. W. H. (1950) Proc. phys. Soc. A 63, 29.
PETEBSON, R. L. (1965) Phys. Rev. 137, A 1444.
(1967) Phys. Rev. 159, 227.
PICHANICK, F. M., SANDABS, P. G. H., and WOODGATE, G. K. (1960) Proc. R. Soc.
A 257, 277.
PIKSIS, A. H., DIEKE, G. H., and CBOSSWHITE, H. M. (1967) J. chem. Phys. 47,
5083.
PIPKIN, F. M. and CULVAHOUSE, J. W. (1957) Phys. Rev. 106, 1102.
PIBC, R., ZEKS, B., and GOSAB, P. (1966) Physics Chem. Solids 27, 1219.
POBTIS, A. M. (1953) Phys. Rev. 91, 1071.
POUND, R. V. (1949) Phys. Rev. 76, 1410.
POWELL, M. J. D., GABBIEL, J. R., and JOHNSTON, D. F. (1960) Phys. Rev. Lett.
5, 145.

--- Page 904 ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 889
POWELL, M. J. D. and ORBACH, R. (1961) Proc. phys. Soc. 78, 753.
PRYCE, M. H. L. (1948) Nature, Lond. 162, 539.
(1949) Nature, Lond. 164, 117.
(1950) Phys. Rev. 80, 1107.
(1959) Phys. Rev. Lett. 3, 375.
and RUNCIMAN, W. A. (1958) Discuss. Faraday. Soc. 26, 34.
and STEVENS, K. W. H. (1950) Proc. phys. Soc. A 63, 36.
RABI, I. I. (1937) Phys. Rev. 51, 652.
RAMSEY, N. F. and SCHWINGER, J. (1954) Rev. mod. Phys. 26, 167.
RAHN, R. O. and DORAIN, P. B. (1964) J. chem. Phys. 41, 3249.
RAJNAK, K. and KRUPKE, W. F. (1967) J. chem. Phys. 46, 3532.
(19'68) J. chem. Phys. 48, 3343.
RANON, U. and HYDE, J. S. (1966) Phys. Rev. 141, 259.
and Low, W. (1963) Phys. Rev. 132, 1609.
RAUBENHEIMER, L. J., BOESMAN, E., and STAPLETON, H. J. (1965) Phys. Rev.
137, A 1449.
RAY, TUHINA (1964) Proc. R. Soc. A 277, 76.
RIMMER, D. E. and JOHNSTON, D. F. (1966) Proc. phys. Soc. 89, 943, 953.
RODBELL, D. S., JACOBS, I. S., OWEN, J., and HARRIS, E. A. (1963) Phys. Rev.
Lett. 11, 10.
ROGERS, R. N., CARBONI, F., and RICHARDS, P. M. (1967) Phys. Rev. Lett. 19,
1016.
ROSE, M. E. (1949) Phys. Rev. 75, 213.
ROTENBERG, M., BIVINS, R., METROPOLIS, N., and WOOTEN, J. K. (1959) The
%j- and 6j-symbols, Technology Press, Cambridge, Mass.
RUBY, R. H., BENOIT, H., and JEFFRIES, C. D. (1962) Phys. Rev. 127, 51.
SABISKY, E. S. (1964) J. chem. Phys. 41, 892.
and ANDERSON, C. H. (1966) Phys. Rev. 148, 194.
SANDS, R. H. (1955) Phys. Rev. 99, 1222.
SANDARS, P. G. H. and BECK, J. (1966) Proc. R. Soc. A 289, 97.
and WOODGATE, G. K. (1960) Proc. R. Soc. A 257, 269.
SATTEN, R. A., SCHREIBER, C. L., and WONG, E. Y. (1965) J. chem. Phys. 42, 162.
SAUZADE, M., PONTNAU, J., LESAS, P., and SILHOUETTE, D. (1966) Physics Lett. 19,
617.
SCHMIDT, J. and SOLOMON, I. (1966) J. appl. Phys. 37, 3719.
SCHNEIDER, J., DISCHLER, B., and RAUBER, A. (1967) Solid St. Communs. 5, 603.
and RAUBER, A. (1966) Physics Lett. 21, 380.
SCOTT P. L. and JEFFRIES, C. D. (1962) Phys. Rev. 127, 32.
SEABORG, G. T. (1949) Nucleonics 5, Nov. 16.
SEARL, J. W., SMITH, R. C., and WYARD, S. J. (1961) Proc. phys. Soc. A 78, 1174.
SHALTIEL, D. and Low, W. (1961) Phys. Rev. 124, 1062.
DE SHAZER, L. G. and DIEKE, G. H. (1963) J. chem. Phys. 38, 2190.
SHIREN, N. S. (1962) Phys. Rev. 128, 2103.
(1966) Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 958.
(1967) Proc. Int. Conf. on Magnetic Resonance and Relaxation (Ljubljana,
1966) North-Holland, Amsterdam, p. 213.
SHULMAN, R. G. and JACCARINO, V. (19C6) Phys. Rev. 103, 1126.
and KNOX, K. (1960) Phys. Rev. 119, 94.
and SUGANO, S. (1963) Phys. Rev. 130, 506.
SHUSKUS, A. J. (1962) Phys. Rev. 127, 2022.

--- Page 905 ---

890 BIBLIOGRAPHY
SIEGERT, A. (1937) Physica, 's Grav. 4, 138.
SIERRO, J. (1967) Physics Chem. Solids 28, 417
SIMANEK, E., SROTJBEK, Z., ^DANSKY, K., KACZER, J., and NOVAK, L. (1966)
Solid St. Phys. 14, 333.
SIMON, F. E. (1939) Gomptes Rendus du Congres sur le Magnetisme Strasbourg,
Vol. 3, p. 1.
SLACK, G. A., HAM, F. S., and CHRENKO, R. M. (1966) Phys. Rev. 152, 376.
ROBERTS, S., and HAM, F. S. (1967) Phys. Rev. 155, 170.
SMITH, D. and THORNLEY, J. H. M. (1966) Proc. phys. Soc. 89, 779.
SMITH, K. F. and UNSWORTH, P. J. (1965) Proc. phys. Soc. 86, 1249.
SMITH, S. R. P., DRAVNIEKS, F. and WERTZ, J. E. (1969) Phys. Rev. 178, 471.
SPALDING, I. J. (1963) Proc. phys. Soc. 81, 156.
SROUBEK, Z. and ^DANSKY, K. (1966) J. chem. Phys. 44, 3078.
STAPLETON, H. J., JEFFRIES, C. D., and SHIRLEY, D. A. (1961) Phys. Rev. 124,
1455.
STERNHEIMER, R. M. (1951) Phys. Rev. 84, 244.
(1966) Phys. Rev. 146, 140.
BLUME, M. and PEIERLS, R. F. (1968) Phys. Rev. 173, 376.
STEVENS, K. W. H. (1952a) Proc. phys. Soc. 65, 209.
(19526) Proc. R. Soc. A 214, 237.
(1953a) Proc. R. Soc. A 219, 542.
(19536) Rev. mod. Phys. 25, 166.
(1962) Proc. phys. Soc. A 65, 1952.
(1967) Rep. Prog. Phys. 30, 189.
STONEHAM, A. M. (1966) Proc. phys. Soc. 89, 909.
STURGE, M. D. (1967) Solid St. Phys. 20, 91.
SUGANO, S. (1960) Prog, theor. Phys., Osaka Suppl. No. 14, p. 66.
and PETER, M. (1961) Phys. Rev. 122, 381.
and SHULMAN, R. G. (1963) Phys. Rev. 130, 517.
and TANABE, Y. (1958) J. phys. Soc. Japan 13, 880.
SUGIHARA, K. (1959) J. phys. Soc. Japan 14, 1231.
SVARE, I. and SEIDEL, G. (1964) Phys. Rev. 134, A 172.
TANABE, Y. (1960) Prog, theor. Phys., Osaka Suppl. No. 14, p. 17.
and SUGANO, S. (1954) J. phys. Soc. Japan 9, 753, 766.
THOMAS, K. S., SINGH, S., and DIEKE, G. H. (1963) J. chem. Phys. 38, 2180.
THORNLEY, J. H. M. (1963) Phys. Rev. 132, 1492.
(1968) J. Phys. C (Proc. phys. Soc.) 1, 1024.
WINDSOR, C. G. and OWEN, J. (1965) Proc. R. Soc. A 284, 252.
TINKHAM, M. (1956a,6) Proc. R. Soc. A 236, 535, 549.
(1964) Group theory and quantum mechanics, McGraw-Hill.
TINSLEY, B. M. (1963) J. chem. Phys. 39, 3503.
TITLE, R. S., SOROKIN, P. P., STEVENSON, M. J., PETTIT, G. D., SCARDEFIELD,
J. E., and LANKARD, J. R. (1962) Phys. Rev. 128, 62.
TRAMMELL, G. T., ZELDES, H., and LIVINGSTONE, R. (1958) Phys. Rev. 110,
630.
TREES, R. E. (1951) Phys. Rev. 82, 683.
TRENAM, R. S. (1953) Proc. phys. Soc. A 66, 118.
TUCKER, E. B. (1966) Phys. Rev. 143, 264.
VAN DEN HANDEL, J. and SIEGERT, A. (1937) Physica, 's Grav. 4, 871.
VAN NIEKERK, J. N. and SCHOENING, F. R. L. (1953) Acta crystallogr. 6, 227.

--- Page 906 ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 891
VAN VLECK, J. H. (1932) Electric and magnetic susceptibilities. Oxford University
Press.
(1935) J. chem. Phys. 3, 807.
(1937) J. chem. Phys. 5, 320.
(1939) J. chem. Phys. 7, 72.
(1940) Phys. Rev. 57, 426.
(1941a) Phys. Rev. 59, 724.
(19416) Phys. Rev. 59, 730.
(1948) Phys. Rev. 74, 1168.
(1957) Nuovo dm. Suppl. No. 3, 6, 993.
(I960) Physica, \s Grav. 26, 544.
and WEISSKOPF, V. F. (1945) Rev. mod. Phys. 17, 227.
VAN WIERINGEN, J. S. (1955) Discuss Faraday Soc. 19, 118.
WALKER, M. B. (1968) Can. J. Phys. 46, 1347.
WALLER, I. (1932) Z. Phys. 79, 370.
WALSH, W. M. (1958) Bull. Am. phys. Soc. 3, 178.
and BLOEMBERGEN, N. (1957) Phys. Rev. 107, 904.
WATANABE, H. (1957) Prog, theor. Phys., Osaka 18, 405.
(1964) Physics Chem. Solids, 25, 1471.
WATSON, R. E. and BLUME, M. (1965) Phys. Rev. 139, A 1209.
and FREEMAN, A. J. (1967a) Hyperfinv interactions, p. 53, Academic Press.
(19676) Phys. Rev. 156, 251.
WEAKLIEM, H. A. and Kiss, Z. J. (1967) Phys. Rev. 157, 277.
WEIL, J. A. and ANDERSON, J. H. (1961) J. chem. Phys. 35, 1410.
WERTZ, J. E. and AUZINS, P. (1957) Phys. Rev. 106, 484.
WETSEL, G. C. and DONOHO, P. L. (1965) Phys. Rev. 139, A 334.
WHIFFIN, P. A. C. and ORTON, J. W. (1965) Br. J. appl. Phys. 16, 567.
WICKERSHEIM, K. A. and WHITE, R. L. (1962) Phys. Rev. Lett. 8, 483
WICKMAN, H. H., TROZZOLO, A. M., WILLIAMS, H. J., HULL, G. W., and MERRITT,
F. R. (1967) Phys. Rev. 155, 563.
WIELINGA, R. F., BLOTE, H. W. J., ROEST, J. A., and HUISKAMP, W. J. (1967)
Physica, 's Grav. 34, 223.
WIGNER, E. P. (1959) Group theory. Academic Press, New York.
WILKENS, J., DE GRAAG, D. P., and HELLE, J. N. (1965) Physics Lett. 19,
178.
WILLIAMS, F. I. B. (1967) Proc. phys. Soc. 91, 111.
KRUPKA, D. C. and BREEN, D. P. (1969) Phys. Rev. 179, 255.
WOLF, W. P. and BIRGENEAU, R. J. (1968) Phys. Rev. 166, 376.
WONG, J. Y. (1968) Phys. Rev. 168, 337.
• BERGGREN, M. J. and SCHAWLOW, A. L. (1968) J. chem. Phys. 49, 835.
WONG, E. Y. and RICHMAN, I. (1961) J. chem. Phys. 34, 1182.
WOOD D. L. and KAISER, W. (1962) Phys. Rev. 126, 2079.
WOODBTJRY, H. H. and LUDWIG, G. W. (1961) Phys. Rev. 124, 1083.
WOODGATE, G. K. (1966) Proc. R. Soc. A 293, 117.
WOONTON, G. A. and DYER, G. L. (1967) Can. J. Phys. 45, 2265.
Wu, C. S., AMBLER, E., HAYWARD, R. W., HOPPES, D. D., and HUDSON, R. P.
(1957) Phys. Rev. 105, 1413.
WYBOURNE, B. G. (1964) J. chem. Phys. 40, 1456.
(1965) Spectroscopic properties of rare earths. Interscience Publishers (John
Wiley), New York.
(1966) Phys. Rev. 148, 317.

--- Page 907 ---

892 BIBLIOGRAPHY
YABIV, A. (1962) Phys. Eev. 128, 1588.
ZALKIN, A., FORRESTER, J. D., and TEMPLETON, D. H. (1963) J. chem. Phys. 39,
2881.
and TEMPLETON, D. H. (1964) J. chem. Phys. 40, 501.
ZARIPOV, M. M., KROPOTOV, V. S., LIVANOVA, L. D., and STEPANOV, V. G. (1967)
Fizika tverd. Tela 9, 209; Soviet Phys. solid St. 9, 992.
ZAVOISKY, E. (1945) Fiz. Zh. 9, 211, 245.
ZVEREV, G. M., KORNIENKO, L. S., PROKHOROV, A. M., and SMIRNOV, A. I. (1962)
Fizika tverd. Tela 4, 392; Soviet Phys. solid St. 4, 284.
and PROKHOROV, A. M. (1960) Zh. eksp. teor. Fiz. 38, 449; Soviet Phys.
JETP 11, 330.
(1961) Zh. eksp. teor. Fiz. 40, 1016; Soviet Phys. JETP 13, 714.

--- Page 908 ---

AUTHOR INDEX
Abe, H., 434, 506-7 Blum, N. A., 847
Abragam, A., 80 ; 84, 87, 248, 427, 446, Blumberg, W. E., 391, 451-3
457-8, 461, 465, 528, 684, 697, 701, 791, Blume, M., 283-4, 305, 391, 399, 474-5.
816 560, 565, 593, 679
Abraham, M. M., 82, 331, 333, 349, 352 Boesman, E., 354, 358
Abrahams, E., 531 Bogle, G. S., 424
Albertson, W., 283 Bohr, N., 346
Allen, H. C., 506, 508 Bordarier, Y., 254
Allen, S. J., 502 Borghini, M., 87
Ambler, E., 77 Born, M., 793
Anderson, C. H., 329, 333-4 Bouwkamp, C. J., 144, 146, 437
Anderson, J. H., 198 Bowers, K. D., 186, 279, 322, 455, 457-9
5
Anderson, P. W., 495, 528, 531 479-80, 482, 50o-9
Argyle, B. E., 337 Brandon, R. W., 153
Armstrong, L., 354 Breen, D. P., 459, 463, 465, 830
Auzins, P., 208, 432, 453-5, 466, 487 Breit, G., 678
Aven, M., 331-2 Brochard, J., 324
Axe, J. D., 305, 328, 334, 347, 354 Brower, K. L., 318
Ayant, Y., 331-3, 722, 725 Brya, W. J., 70, 580-1
Azarbayejani, G. H., 489-90 Buckmaster, H. A., 628, 864
Burns, G., 304-5, 328, 334, 399
Bagguley, D. M. S., 58, 98, 305, 312, 514
Baker, J. M., 140, 199, 228, 252-3, 260, Candela, G. A., 355
263, 269, 271, 279, 313, 317, 319, 333-8, Caner, M., 845
340-1, 343-5, 479-80, 482, 501-2, 514, Carboni, F., 528
529, 560, 711, 738 Carnall, W. T., 347, 350
Barnes, R. G., 303 Castle, J. G., 573
Beck, J., 253, 684, 710-1 Castner, T., 203
Belorizky, E., 331-2, 722, 725 Cavenett, B. C., 191
Benoit, H., 322, 569, 579 Chadwick, J. R., 335-6, 340-1
Benzie, R. J., 57 Chakravarty, A. S., 427-8
Berggren, M. J., 425 Chang, Tse-Tse, 479
Bersuker, I. B., 791, 821, 823-4, 826 Chappert, J., 847
Bessent, R. G., 40, 228, 262-3, 269, 271, Chen, J. H., 489
333-4 Child, M. S., 791, 813
Bethe, H., 595, 638 Chrenko, R. M., 468, 470
Bierig, R. W., 328-9, 572 Clark, G. W., 331, 333, 352
Birgeneau, R. J., 304, 312, 501-2, 628 Cochran, W. R., 347, 350
Bivins, R., 623 Coffman, R. E., 466, 791, 831
Blake, W. B. J., 333-4, 344-5 Cohen, V. W., 416
Bleaney, B., 30, 40, 56-7, 75, 77, 140, 158, Condon, E. TL, 593
163, 169, 172, 176, 186-7, 190-1, 201, Conway, J. G., 282-3, 347-8, 350
204-5, 218, 258-9, 279, 298-300, 305, Cook, R. J., 226
313, 317, 319, 327, 330, 334, 339, 346, Cooke, A. H., 57, 317, 424, 480, 532, 545,
348-50, 360, 363, 424, 437, 455, 457-9,
566
476, 479-82, 485, 501, 506-9, 518, 523, Copland, G. M., 333-4, 340, 344-5
525, 535-6, 719, 726, 738, 791, 816 Crosswhite, H. M., 305
Bloch, F., 109-10, 115 Culvahouse, J. W., 84, 451, 736
Bloembergen, N., 73, 119, 451
Blok, J., 303 Dabbs, J. W. T., 360
Blote, H. W. J., 470 Daniels, J. M., 76-7, 855

--- Page 909 ---

894 AUTHOR INDEX
Davies, E. R., 228 Foster, D. L., 736
Davies, J. J., 432 Frankel, R. B., 847
Dawson, J. K., 346 Freeman, A. J., 276, 283-4, 299, 304-5,
de Graag, D. P., 488 328, 399, 411, 413, 415, 449, 453, 474-5,
de Haas, W. J., 16 478, 480, 687, 704, 706, 709
Delbecq, C. J., 40, 488 Friederich, A., 321, 324
Descamps, D., 331-2, 728 Fry, D. J. I., 270, 447
de Shazer, L. G., 305 Fuller, G. H., 416
Devine, S. D., 279
Devlin, G. E., 441 Gabriel, J. R., 441-2
de Wit, M., 470-1 Gambino, R. J., 337
Dieke, G. H., 305, 324 Garrett, C. G. B., 328
Dietz, R. E., 468, 471 Garton, G., 335-6, 340-1
Dirac, P. A. M., 495, 584, 587 Gere, E. A , 83, 239-42
Dischler, B., 469 Gerkin, R. E., 153
Donoho, P. L., 351 Geschwind, S., 162, 265-9, 338-9, 391,
Dorain, P. B., 349, 480 413, 434, 441, 451-4, 484, 487
Dravnieks, F., 208 Ghatikar, M. N., 303
Dreisch, T., 457 Gill, J. C., 318
Duffus, H. J., 424, 480 Giordmaine, J. A., 576
Dunn, T. M., 399, 474-5 Gordon, G., 506, 508
Dyer, G. L., 434, 441 Gorter, C. J., 75, 77, 124, 527, 545, 566, 573
Dzyaloshinsky, I., 495 Gosar, P., 829
Grace, M. A., 76-7
Easley, W., 351-3 Gramberg, G., 317
Edelstein, N., 351-3 Greenslade, D. J., 481
Edmonds, A. R., 615, 617 Griffith, J. S., 392, 658
Edmonds, D. T., 259, 302, 316-7 Griffiths, J. H. E., 50, 58, 365, 451, 453-5,
Eisenstein, J. C., 305, 348, 355-60, 362-3 466, 482, 484-7, 498, 514 531-2
Eisinger, J., 239, 391, 451-3 Gruber, J. B., 304, 347, 350
Elliott, R. J., 287-8, 290, 303, 310, 316,. Guggenheim, H., 328
360, 501-2, 525, 535-6, 694
Ellis, M. M., 305 Hahn, E. L., 114
Englman, R., 845 Halban, H., 77
Erath, E. E., 304 Halford, D., 226, 255-9, 314-5
Erb, E., 84 Hall, G. R., 348, 360, 363
Estle, T. L., 469-70, 831 Hall, J. L., 40
Evans, L., 252-4, 711-2 Hall, T. P. P., 445
Evans, R. C., 276, 347 Ham, F. S. 445-6, 468, 470, 664, 791, 810,
815-7, 819, 826, 829, 830-2, 838-^40,
Fano, U., 615, 658 845-7
Faughnan, B. W., 577 Hanauer, S. H., 360
Faust, J., 364 Hargreaves, W. A., 351
Feher, E. R., 208 Harris, E. A., 532, 635, 552, 561
Feher, G., 40, 83, 87, 90, 218, 221, 223, Harrop, I. H., 329-30
234, 236, 238-242, 707 Hartree, D. R., 590
Feldman, D. W., 573 Harvey, J. S. M., 164, 411, 711
Fermi, E., 696, 698 Hausmann, A., 471
Feynman, R. P., 794 Hayes, W., 40, 199, 228, 262-3, 269, 271,
Fidone, I., 441 279, 333-4, 445, 464-5, 488-90
Finch, C. B., 331, 333, 352 Hayward, R. W., 77
Finn, C. B. P., 68, 323, 560 Heisenberg, W., 495
Fitzwater, D. R., 277 Heitler, W., 557
Fletcher, J. R., 436 Helle, J. N., 488
Fock, V., 590 Hellwege, A. M., 324
Foex, G., 507 Hellwege, K. H., 305, 310-1, 321, 324
Ford, N. C., 560 Henderson, A. J., 528
Forrester, J. D., 278-80 Heroux, L., 324

--- Page 910 ---

AUTHOR INDEX 895
Hill, J. C., 304 Kiss, Z. J., 328-9, 332, 334
Hochli, U. T., 469, 487, 791, 823-4, 831-2, Kittel, C., 531
846 Klapisch, M., 254
Hodby, J. W., 40 Knox, K., 780
Hodges, J. A., 487 Koide, S., 434, 476, 478-9, 481
Holton, W. C., 203, 469 Kokoszka, G. F., 506, 508
Hoppes, D. D., 77 Konyukhov, V. K., 333
Horak, J. B., 572 Kornienko, L. S., 331, 425
Horowitz, J., 697, 701 Koster, G. F., 343, 722
Hoskins, R. H., 429 Kotani, M., 476
Huang, Chao-Yuan, 572-3 Krikorian, K. C., 330
Hudson, R. P., 77 Kronig, R. de L., 65, 144, 146, 437, 557
Hiifner, S., 304, 317 Kropotov, V. S., 846
Huiskamp, W. J., 470 Krupka, D. C., 459, 463, 465, 830
Hull, G. W., 389 Krupke, W. F., 305
Hurrell, J. P., 228, 260, 263, 271, 335-7, Kurti, N., 77
340-1 Kyi, Ru-Tao, 479
Hutchings, M. T., 305, 501-2, 670
Hutchison, C. A., 15, 153, 277, 287, 307, Lacroix, R., 149-50, 337, 487
313, 315, 339, 347-9, 355, 358, 364 Lambe, J., 273, 432
Hyde, J. S., 262-3 Lammerman, H., 321, 324
Lankard, J. R., 351
Ibers, J. A., 201 Larson, G. H., 67, 304, 325, 560, 567, 570-1
Ingram, D. J. E., 158, 163, 172, 176, 187, Laurance, N., 273, 432
458, 518, 816 Lazenby, R., 532
Inoue, M., 312, 330, 334 Lea, K. R., 327-9, 332, 351, 719-20, 728
Ishiguro, E., 529 Leask, M. J. M., 321, 323, 327-9, 332, 351,
719-20, 728
Jaccarino, V., 365, 441 Lesas, P., 429
Jacobs, I. S., 535 Levy, P. M., 502
Jacobsen, E. H., 575 Lewis, H. R., 167, 228, 331-2
Jahn, H. A., 371, 403, 790-1 Lewis, W. B., 348, 364
Jeffries, C. D., 67, 69, 81-2, 87, 248, 304, Liehr, A. D., 791
315, 322, 324-5, 347, 354, 558, 560, 567, Lmdgren, I., 282, 284, 299-300, 335
569-71, 579 Lines, M. E., 532
Johnston, D. F., 434, 441-2 Livanova, L. D., 846
Johnston, D. R., 347 Livingstone, R., 199
Jones, D. A., 338, 350 Llewellyn, P. M., 270, 279, 348-50, 360,
Jorgensen, C. K., 476 363, 447, 479
Joseph, R. L., 855 Locher, P. R., 265-9, 441, 452-4
Joyce, R. R., 425-6, 429 Longuet-Higgens, H. C., 791, 813
Judd, B. R., 254, 256, 279, 282-4, 299-300 Lovejoy, C. A., 316
304-5, 314-6, 320-5, 335, 339, 349, Low, W., 149-50, 207, 329, 331-6, 432,
498, 532, 615 444, 453, 479, 487
Ludwig, G. W., 198, 470, 664
Kaczer, J., 487 Lyle, D. L., 466
Kaiser, W., 283
Kambe, K., 529 MacFarlane, R. M., 426
Kamimura, H., 468, 471, 476, 478-9, 481 Mandel'shtam, T. S., 425
Kankeleit, E., 303 Manenkov, A. A., 560
Karantissis, T., 607 Mangum, B. W., 39
Karplus, R., 124 Margolis, J. S., 305
Kask, N. E., 425 Marrus, R., 354, 364
Kedzie, R. W., 82 Marshall, F. G., 436
Ketelaar, J. A. A., 277 Marshall, S. A., 452, 487
Kiel, A., 115, 665, 568 Marshall, W. C., 395, 702, 781-3
Kikuchi, T. T., 452 Mattison, D. R., 466
Kingsley, J. D., 331-2 Mau, A. E., 502

--- Page 911 ---

896 AUTHOR INDEX
McClure, D. S., 378, 389, 390-1 Owen, J., 40, 49-50, 322, 365, 392, 394-5,
McConnelL H. M., 466, 536 400, 451, 476, 479, 482, 484-6, 498, 531-
McDonald, P. F., 351 2, 534-5, 768, 775, 777, 781, 784, 787-9
McGarvey, B. R., 466, 536
Mclrvine, E. C., 273 Pake, G. E., 271
McKim, F. R., 317, 532 Pandey, B., 305
McLaughlan, S. D., 351 Park, J. G., 498, 531
McLellan, A. G., 323 Parker, G. W., 360
McMahon, D. H., 208, 502 Partridge, M. F., 498, 531
McMillan, M., 529, 540 Pashinin, P. P., 333
Mehra, A., 442 Pauli, W., 586
Mergerian, D., 329-30 Peierls, R. F., 305
Merle D'Aubigne, Y., 331-2, 728 Penrose, R. P., 56-7, 365, 451, 457, 680
Merlo, A. L., 489-90 Perakis, N., 507
Merritt, F. R., 328, 389 Peter, M., 395, 433
Messiah, A., 615 Peterson, R. L., 583
Metropolis, N., 623 Pettit, G. D., 351
Mikkelson, R. C., 305, 551 Pichanick, F. M., 253
Minis, W. B., 115, 441, 565, 568 Piksis, A. H., 305
Miyata, N., 337 Pipkin, F. M., 84
Moffitt, W., 791, 846 Pirc, R., 829
Morigaki, K., 470 Plumpton, B. I., 56-7
Moriya, T., 495 Poindexter, J. M., 303
Moser, C. M., 706 Pontnau, J., 429
Mossbauer, R. L., 303, 445 Pope, D. F. D., 338-9
Motchane, J. L., 84 Portis, A. M., 123
Miiller, K. A. 487, 736 Pound, R. V., 75, 78, 119
;
Miiller, W., 254 Powell, M. J. D., 304, 318, 321, 323, 441-2
Murphy, J., 573 Proctor, W. G., 84
Prokhorov, A. M., 331, 333, 425, 429-30,
Naiman, C. S., 476 560
Nash, F. R., 575 Pryce, M. H. L., 170, 348, 355-60, 362-3,
Nelson, E. D., 425 391, 427, 430, 446-7, 455, 457-8, 461-2,
Newell, G. S., 203 465, 514, 529, 678-9, 684, 697, 701, 791,
Newman, D. J., 305 807, 814, 816-7, 835, 842-3
Nicol, A. T., 347, 350 Purcell, E. M., 119, 271
Nierenberg, W. A., 364
Nolle, A. W., 572 Rabi, I. L, 98, 100-1
Novak, L., 487 Racah, G., 383, 615, 623, 658, 675, 677
Rahn, R. O., 480
O'Brien, M. C. M., 40, 169, 199, 424, 446, Rajnak, K., 305
460, 464 476, 481-2, 485, 488, 791, 808, Rampton, V. W., 436
?
820, 826 Ramsey, N. F., 101
O'Connor, J. R., 489 Ranon, U., 262-3, 331
Ofelt, G. S., 283 Raubenheimer, L. J., 354, 359
Ohtsuka, M., 514 Rauber, A., 469
Olschewski, L., 344-5 Ray, D. K., 303, 305
Ono, K., 434, 514 Ray, Tuhina, 343
Opachowski, W., 529, 540, 634 Raychaudhuri, A. K., 303
Opik, U., 462, 791, 807, 814, 817, 835, 842-3 Reinberg, A. R., 452, 471
Opp3nheimer, R., 793 Remeika, J. P., 338-9, 484, 487
Orbach, R., 65-8, 304, 318, 321, 323, 329, Richards, P. L., 425-6, 429
445, 502, 557, 560, 565 Richards, P. M., 528
Orlich, E., 305, 310-1 Richman, I., 304
Orton, J. W., 208, 322, 453-5, 466, 487 Riley, J. D., 501-2
Otten, E. W., 344-5 Rimmer, D. E., 434
Overhauser, A. W., 87 Roberts, L. D., 360
Overmeyer, J., 337 Roberts, S., 470

--- Page 912 ---

AUTHOR INDEX 897
Robinson, F. N. H., 76-7 Smith, K. F., 258-9
Rodbell, D. S., 535 Smith, R. C., 201
Roest, J. A., 470 Smith, S. R. P., 208, 432
Rogers, R. N., 528 Soffer, B. H., 429
Rose, M. E. 75, 77 Solomon, I., 130
r
Rosenberger, U., 335 Sorokin, P. P., 351
Rosset, J., 722, 725 Spalding, I. J., 259
Rotenberg, M., 623 Sroubek, Z., 487, 574
Rubins, R. S., 187, 190-1, 204-5, 279, 329, Stapleton, H. J., 305, 315, 318, 322, 347,
332-5 354, 359, 551
Ruby, R. H., 322, 569, 579 Statz, H., 343, 722
Runciman, W. A., 391, 430 Stepanov, V. G., 846
Rundle, R. E., 277 Sternheimer, R. M., 302, 305, 687, 702, 707-8
Steudel, A., 254
Sabisky, E. S., 167, 228, 329, 331-4
Stevens, K. W. H., 50, 287-8, 290, 303,
Sandars, P. G. H... 252-4, 684, 710-2
310, 424, 436, 441, 451, 481, 484, 495,
Sands, R. H., 201-2
501, 529, 541, 575. 628, 677, 694
Satten, R. A., 304, 347, 355
Stevenson, M. J., 351
Sauzade, M., 429
Stevenson, R. W. H., 445
Scardefield, J. E., 351
Stombler, M. P., 329-30
Schaak, G., 305, 310-1
Stoneham, A. M., 208
Schawlow, A. L., 425
Strandberg, M. W. P., 577
Schinke, D. P., 736
Stuart, R., 395, 783
Schmidt, J., 130
Sturge, M. D., 426, 468, 471, 824
Schneider, J., 469
Sugano, S., 383-90, 394-5, 397, 432-3,
Schoening, F. R. L., 506
476, 478-9, 481, 767-8
Schreiber, C. L., 347, 355
Sugihara, K., 501
Schreiber, P., 471
Suss, J. T., 453, 487
Schumacher, R. T., 40
Svare, I., 538-40
Schwarz, W. M., 446
Swalen, J. D., 201
Schwinger, J., 101. 124
Scott, P. L., 69, 324, 558
Tachiki, M., 502
Scovil, H. E. D., 30, 140, 218, 339, 525,
Tanabe, V., 383-90, 394, 432, 476
535-6
Teller, E., 371, 403, 557, 790-1
Seaborg, G. T., 346
Templeton, D. H., 278-80
Searl, J. W., 201
Terhune, R. W., 273
Segre, E., 696. 698
Thomas, K. S., 305
Seidel, G. S., 538-40
Thornley, J. H. M., 49, 323, 392, 394-5,
Sekiyama, H., 434, 476, 478-9, 481
400, 476, 483, 486, 628, 768, 775, 777,
Serway, R. A., 487
781, 784, 787, 789
Shaltiel, D., 207, 335
Thorpe, M. F., 502
Shimada, J., 506-7
Thorson, W., 791, 846
Shiren, N. S., 71, 551, 582
Tirikham, M., 212, 365, 615
Shirley, D. A., 303, 315-6
Tinsley, B. M., 321, 324
Shortley, G. H., 593
Title, R. S., 351
Shulman, R. G., 365, 397, 767-8, 780
Trammell, G. T., 199
Shuskus, A. J., 335-6
Trees, R. E., 679
Siegert, A., 427-8
Trenam, R. S., 140, 186, 218, 279, 339,
Sierro, J., 488, 490
437, 458-9
Silhouette, D., 429
Trommer, W., 457
Silsbee, R. H., 502
Trozzolo, A. M., 389
Simdnek, E., 487 Tsang, T., 358
Simon, F. E., 74, 77 Tucker, E. B., 399
Singh, S., 305 Twidell, J. W., 489-90
Slack, G. A., 468, 470
Slichter, C. P., 203 Uebersfeld, J., 84
Smirnov, A. L., 331 Unsworth, P. J., 258-9
Smith, D., 628 Usui, T., 529
58

--- Page 913 ---

898 AUTHOR INDEX
Van den Handel, J., 427 White, R. L., 502
van Niekerk, J. N., 506 Whitley, S., 57
van Vleck, J. H., 1, 65, 69, 124, 134, 271, Wickersheim, K. A., 502
285, 376, 460, 475, 516, 519, 523, 527, Wickman, H. H., 349, 389
557, 559, 564, 578, 595-6, 648-9, 746, Wielinga, R. F., 470
791, 835, 855 Wigner, E. P., 615, 644, 649
van Wieringen, J. S., 413 Wilkens, J., 445, 464-5, 488
Vella-Colleiro, G., 305 Williams, F. I. B., 140, 215-6, 252-3, 269,
Venkateswarlu, P., 442 279, 313, 335, 338, 340, 343, 459, 463,
465, 711, 736, 830
Wagner, G. R., 573 Williams, H. J., 389
Wagner, P. E., 70, 580-1 Windsor, C. G., 784, 787
Walker, M. B., 565 Wolf, W. P., 68, 317, 321, 323, 327-9, 332,
Waller, I., 63-4, 515, 552-3, 556, 562 351, 502, 532, 560, 719-20, 728
Walsh, W. M., 451 Wong, E. Y., 277, 304, 307, 313, 315, 322,
Walters, G. K., 470 325, 347, 349, 355
Walther, H., 254 Wong, J. Y., 425-6, 446
Wanklyn, B. M., 340 Wood, D. L., 283
Ward, I. M., 479, 482 Woodbury, H. H., 198, 470, 664
Warshaw, S. I., 572 Woodgate, G. K., 252-4, 411, 711-2
Watanabe, H., 441-2 Woonton, G. A., 434, 441
Watkins, G. D., 470 Wooten, J. K., 623
Watson, R. E., 276, 283-4, 299, 304-5, Wu, C. S., 77
328, 391, 399, 411, 413, 415, 449, 453, Wyard, S. I., 201
474-5, 478, 480, 593, 679, 687, 704, 706, Wybourne, B. G., 277, 282-3, 323, 341,
709 347-8, 350
Weakliem, H. A., 332 Wysling, P., 487
Weber, M. J., 328-9, 572
Weeks, R. A., 331, 333 Yariv, A., 351, 468, 471
Weger, M., 444 Yngvesson, K. S., 552, 561
Weil, J. A., 198 Yuster, P. H., 40, 488
Weinstock, B., 15, 347, 355, 358
Weiss, P. R., 528 Zalkin, A., 278-80
Weisskopf, V. F., 124 Zaripov, M. M., 846
Wertz, J. E., 208, 432, 453-5, 466, 487 Zavoisky, E., 365
Wetsel, G. C., 351 Zdansky, K., 487, 574
Wheeler, R. G., 304, 480 Zeks, B., 829
Whiffen, D. H., 226 Zeldes, H., 199
Whiffin, P. A. C., 487 Zverev, G. M., 331, 429-30

--- Page 914 ---

SUBJECT INDEX
A-tensor, 26, 166, 168, 170, 750 bonding effects, 392-8, 679
abelian group, 601 orbital reduction factor, 424-6
acoustic paramagnetic resonance, 436 — orbitals, 764-8, 788
actinide group, 346-64 Born— Oppenheimer approximation, 792,
— ions, 347 807, 809, 814-5
in CaF, 350 validity of, 793
2
octahedral symmetry, 354 — functions, 810
— series, 347 'brute force* method, 74, 78, 84
adiabatic condition, 103-4, 106 'burning a hole in a line', 72, 236-7
— demagnetization, 365
— rapid passage, 73, 82-3, 90, 104-8, C symmetry, 285-95, 733, 736
zh
112-4, 220-1, 237-8, 240-2, 578 C symmetry, 733
3v
Ag in KC1, 40 CaCO, 439
3
Ag2+ in KC1, 488 CaF , 281, 325, 467-8, 490, 719
2
— in LiCl, 490 — dipolar interactions, 524
— in NaCl, 490 CaO, 281, 325, 719
Al in quartz, 40 cavity coupling, 130
A1O, 389, 475 — design, 129
2 3
allowed transitions, 28 — detuning, 126
Am2+ in CaF, 351-3 •— geometry, 125
2
Am2+, g,, 354 — optimum coupling, 127, 129
angular momentum, 615—7 — resonator, 125
anhydrous rare earth chlorides, 305 CaWO, 280, 467-8, 475, 718, 733
4
anisotropic exchange, 59, 495—9 CdF, 281, 331
2
interaction, 501, 508, 855 CdO, 467
modulated by phonons, 552 CdS, 467-8
— ^-factor, 135-9, 402, 420, 455 CdSe, 467
— spectrum, vibronic doublet, 827 CdTe, 467-8
anisotropy, 41 Ce3+, 33, 308
anti-bonding orbitals, 764-8, 773, 780, — in (7 symmetry, 308
3A
787-8 — in C symmetry, 323
3v
antilinear antiunitary operator, 644 — in LaMg(N0) , 24HO, 323, 579
2 3 3 12 2
anti-shielding effects, 55, 491, 501, 687, CeCl, 310-1
3
707-9 central field approximation, 42
antisymmetric direct products, 657, 661 CeO, 282, 331
2
antiunitary operator, 645 cerium ethylsulphate, 310, 501
atomic beam triple resonance, 252-4, 258, — magnesium nitrate, 68, 279-80, 581
299 [(CH)N]PtCl, 347
34 2 6
available power, 127 [(CH)N]UC1, 355
34 2 6
axial field, 419 characters, 604-5, 607, 620, 630, 657
— symmetry, 18, 157, 178, 200 chemical shift, 716
a, ft, y for a single electron, 873 chlorides, lanthanide, 303-25
circular polarization, 15, 120-2, 132, 178,
Back-Goudsmit region, 6-7 726
BaF , 281, 325, 467 circularly polarized nuclear field, 225-6,
2
BeO, 467 232
biquadratic exchange, 534—5 radiation, 9, 120, 139, 146, 290,
Bloch equations, 115 355
Bohr magneton, 585 classical equations of motion, 102-3
bolometer detection, 130-2 Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, 620-3, 626,
— sensitivity, 131-2 675, 754

--- Page 915 ---

900 SUBJECT INDEX
Cm3+ in CaF , 351-3 O2+ in CdS(oc), 470
2
— in La(CHS0), 9HO, 350 — in MgO, 436
2 5 4 3 2
— in LaCl, 349-50 — in octahedral field, 434-6
3
Cm3+, g 354 Cr3+, 43
j9
244 Cm 3+ in CeO 2 , ThO 2 , 352 — in A1 2 O 3 , 273, 432-3, 451
Co(NH)Cl, 475 — in complex cyanides, 479
36 3
Co(NH)(S0), 6H 0, 124 — in MgO, 431
42 42 2
Co+ in CaO, 453 Cr3+(d3), 779-80
— in MgO, 453 — in KNaCrF, 780
2 6
Co2+ in CdS(oc), 470 O3+, 3d3 in octahedral field, 412
— in CdTe, 470 53 Cr 3+ in A1 2 O 3 , 432-4
— in CoCsBr, 470 — in MgO, 434
3 5
— in CoCsCl, 470 Cr*+ in a-A!O, 429
3 5 2 3
— in cubic ZnS(0), 470 cross relaxation, 71, 265, 269-73
— in MgO, 752, 846-7 crystal electric potential, 12, 45, 285, 287,
— octahedral symmetry, 497, 752, 769-72 557, 758-9, 761
Co2+, 3d7, 758 — field, 12, 595-9, 673
69Co2+ in MgO, 270, 447 configuration, 598
cobalt ammonium sulphate, 77, 176, 518 energy, 379
cobalt ous salts, high anisotropy, 449 • — — parameters, 304-5, 321
CoCsBr, 467 terms, 598
3 5
CoCsCl, 467-8 theory, C symmetry, 285
3 5 3h
commutation relations, 722, 748 — imperfections, 205-8
— rules, 616 — orientation using forbidden transitions,
complex conjugation, 644-6 227
— cyanides, 380-1, 762, 769 CsCr(Sr), 12HO, 523
42 2
— susceptibility, 116-7, 120-4, 126 CsTi(SO), 12HO, 417
42 2
— XY , 392, 804 CsZrCl, 347
6 2 6
concentration dependence of r 553 Cu(CHCOO), H 0, 506-9
l9 3 2 2
conduction electrons, 39, 132 [Cu(HO)]2+, 456, 462
2 6
configuration interaction, 49, 591, 675-705, (Cu, Mg)Bi(N0) , 24H 0, 460
3 2 312 2
709, 761 (Cu, Mg)O, 460
configurations, 42, 590-1 (Cu, Mg)SiF, 6HO, 460
6 2
contact interaction, 47, 256, 695, 753-4, 786 Cu(NH)SO, H O, 528
34 4 2
copper ammonium selenate, 56 CuSO, 5HO, 58, 435, 513-4, 529
4 2
• sulphate, 57 (Cu, Zn)(BrO), 6HO, 460
32 2
— caesium sulphate, 57 Cu2+, 807, 814, 817-8, 826
core polarization, 46-7, 251, 254, 258, — hyperfine structure, 457-9
267, 297-300, 411, 413, 432, 434, 452, — inBeO, 471
458, 480, 484-5, 702-6, 709, 711, 780, — in CaO, 466
787, 803 — in CdW0 , 574
4
Coulomb energy, 282, 382-3, 795 — in copper fluosilicate, 816
— field, 42 — in glass, 202
— interaction, 379, 384, 394, 491, 499, — in LaMg(NO) , 24DO, 458-9
2 3 312 2
502, 792 — in LaMg(NO) , 24HO, 458, 463,
2 3 312 2
— repulsion, 363, 696 465
coupled spin-phonon system, 575 — in MgO, 466, 832
covalency, 764-7, 833 — inZnO, 468, 471
covalent bonding, 476, 480, 598, 661, 721, Cu2+, 3d9, 807
728, 761-89, 846 • — in cubic symmetry, 830-2
orbital reduction, 773-5 — in MgO, 831
spin-orbit coupling, 775-7 Cu3 + in A1O, 451-4, 476, 487
2 3
• — complexes, 758 cubic coordination, 325, 374, 743
[Cr(H0)]3+, 431 — field, 372-6
2 6
CrSO, 5HO, 434-5 - — • — operator, 373-4
4 2
Cr° in Si, 846 parameter (Dq), 377-8, 391, 468
Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3+(d5), 779, 781 splitting, 44, 142-51, 325-38, 341-5,
Cr+, Mn2+, Fe3 + in octahedral field, 436-42 351-9, 372-96, 629-42, 719-32, 739-60

--- Page 916 ---

SUBJECT INDEX 901
cubic field states, 375 — strong octahedral field, 487-90
— group, 667, 720-2, 731, 795, 811, 822 — tetrahedral symmetry, 404
0, 629, 661-4 3d group, 703
character table, 856 — cubic terms for, 878
direct products, 856 — cyanides, 476
irreducible representations, 630, — (Dq), £, 379, 391
856 — A, 399-400
O, 641, 763 — nuclear properties, 416
h
— potential, 367, 667-70, 719 — <r-3>, <r2), <r*>, p, 399
octahedron, 669 — Racah parameters, B, C, 378, 391, 395
tetrahedron, 670 — tetrahedral symmetry, 467-71
— representation Dj, states of, 857 3d1, tetrahedral symmetry, 469
— splitting for 4/7, 335 3d2, tetrahedral symmetry, 469
— symmetry, 14, 24-5, 367, 372, 649, 667, 3d3, tetrahedral symmetry, 469
685-6, 742, 751, 794, 797, 805 3d3(4^), 782-3
departures from, 405-6 3d4, tetrahedral symmetry, 469-70
— — nuclear electric quadrupole inter- 3d5, tetrahedral symmetry, 440, 470
action, 303 3d5, *S ions, representative values, 440
— terms, 768-9, 878 3d6 octahedral field, 443
— zinc blende, 467 — tetrahedral symmetry, 470
Curie's law, 40, 545, 849, 852 3d7 octahedral field, 446-9, 769
cyanides, 762 — tetrahedral symmetry, 470
3d8 octahedral field, 449-55
D-tensor, 151-2, 170, 750 — tetrahedral symmetry, 470
de triplet, 379, 744 3d8(3^), 782-3
dy doublet, 379, 744 3d9 octahedral field, 455
(de)6 sub-shell, 477 — tetrahedral symmetry, 470-1
d1 eightfold coordination, 490 4d group, 472-89, 769
— octahedral field, 404-5 • — — • core configuration, 472
— strong octahedral field, 478 nuclear properties, 473
— trigonal distortion, 417-26 spin-orbit coupling, 474
d2 octahedral field, 405 <r-»>, <r2>, <r*>, 474
— strong octahedral field, 381-4, 479, — hyperfine structure, 478
769, 772-3 — ions, 474
— trigonal distortion, 426—30 5d group, 472-89, 769
d3 core polarization, 434 — core configuration, 472
— covalency effects, 433 •— nuclear properties, 473
— strong octahedral field, 383-5, 479-80 — hyperfine structure, 478
— tetrahedral symmetry, 405 — ions, 474
— trigonal distortion, 432 spin-orbit coupling, 475
d* orthorhombic distortion, 434 defects, 206
— strong octahedral field, 385-6, 480-1 degeneracy, 601
— tetragonal distortion, 434 demagnetizing field, 854
— tetrahedral symmetry, 404 de, dy states, 379
d5 fine structure, 436-42 diamagnetic shielding, 686
— hyperfine structure, 436 — susceptibility, 585
strong octahedral field, 481-3, 485 — term, 585-6
— strong octahedral field, 385-7, 481-6, diamagnetism, 1
768-9 diamond, 55
d9 octahedral field, 404 dipolar broadening, 516
— strong octahedral field, 388, 486 — hyperfine interaction, 753—4
d7 octahedral field, 383, 405 — interaction, 396, 523, 536, 854-5
— strong octahedral field, 389, 486-7, 769 dipole-dipole interaction, 689
d8 strong octahedral field, 390, 487, 772-3 Dirac equation, 586, 691
— tetrahedral symmetry, 405 direct products, 612-3, 625, 630, 721, 796,
d9 octahedral field, 455 798
tetragonal distortion, 456-8 — relaxation process, 63-7, 240, 553-5,
trigonal distortion, 458-66 558-60, 563-74, 582, 828-30

--- Page 917 ---

902 SUBJECT INDEX
displacement in time D, 643 phonon interactions, 334
t
distant Endor, 273 — spin density, 408
donors in silicon, 221, 234-42 electronic and nuclear magnetic dipole
Doppler effect, 52 moments, 1-5
double cubic group 0+, 634-7 — magnetic octupole moment, 342
character table, 858 — multipole terms, 139-63, 851
direct products, 859 — oscillatory spin Hamiltonian, 136-9,
irreducible representations, 858 230
states of, 860 — quadrupole splitting, 151-63, 854
— nitrates, 278, 320-5, 365 tensor, 683
• — quantum line, 208, 469 — spin Hamiltonian, 398—406
— tetragonal group, 639 — Zeeman interaction, 7, 13, 34-6, 398,
— trigonal group, 640, 649 400, 677-8
character table, 861 electrostatic interaction, 55, 371
irreducible representations, 862 — repulsion, 594
doublet E, 770 — shielding, 415
— orbital ground state, 402—3 Endor, 87-93, 299, 354, 656
Dy2+ in BaF , 328 — accuracy, 91-2, 217
2
— in CaF, 327-30, 494 — crystal orientation, 261
2
— in SrF 2 , 328 — enhancement effects, 222, 228-33
Dy3+ in CaF , 328 — level populations, 245
2
— in CaO, 329 — line widths, 264-71, 454
— in C symmetry, 317 — on donors in silicon, 234-42
3h
Dy3+, Er3+ in O , symmetry, 325 relaxation effects, 239-42
3l
dynamic Jahn-Teller effect, 401, 403, 417, — relaxation effects in, 243-51
426, 446, 459, 462, 469, 490, 790-2, 804, — sign determination from, 223—7, 233
846 — transition, 223, 225-7
*E state, 808-32 indirect observation, 272
— nuclear orientation, 74-87 entropy, 848
polarization, 78, 80, 273-4 equivalent noise temperature, 128
— orbit— lattice interaction, 557 — operator, 628, 670-9, 683, 692, 863
— saturation, 118, 130, 220, 240-1 — representation, 602
AM = ±2 transition, 21, 155, 159, 208, 454 Er3+ in CaF, CdF, ThO, CeO, 330-2
2 2 2 2
Am = 0 transition, 181 — in CaO, 332
Am = ±1, ±2 transition, 182 — in C symmetry, 320
3h
— in (7 , symmetry, 325
3t
*E level, 797-804 — in cubic field, 330-2
• — resonance spectrum, 802 — inMgO, 331-2, 727
e (doublet), 379 — inZnSe, 331-2
¥ effect, 528 Er3+, Ho2+ in CaF, 330
2
effective spin, 10-16, 133 ethylsulphates, 303-25
— Hamiltonian, 35, 407 Eu2+ in BaO, 337
effet solide, 84 — in CaF, 252, 263, 269, 271, 335, 337,
2
Einstein coefficients of absorption and 340, 342-3, 572-3, 711
emission, 542 Eu2+ in CaO, 335-7
electric dipole moment, 215, 295, 659-664, — in SrCl, 335
2
736 — in SrO, 337
transitions, 214—6 Eu3+ in C symmetry, 316
3h
— dipole— dipole interaction, 499 Euler angles, 604, 617
— field effect, 659-64 EuO, 281
gradient, 345, 415 EuS, 281
— quadrupole tensor, 628 EuSe, 281
— quadrupole— quadrupole interaction, EuTe, 281
491, 500-2 exchange broadening, 59, 529
electromagnetic radiation bath, 542 — interactions, 41, 57, 59, 410-1, 491-2,
— density, 543 494-9, 502, 594
— field, heat capacity, 547 line shape, 527
electron paramagnetic resonance, advan- modulated by phonons, 552
tages and limitations of, 93-4 — narrowing, 57-9, 527-9

--- Page 918 ---

SUBJECT INDEX 903
excited configurations, 667 — constant, 3
— terms, 377, 381, 758-60 • — in cubic fields, 142-51
— vibronic state, 828 — in strong magnetic fields, 156-63
exclusion principle, 702-3 — spin operators, 140
— splittings, 402
4/ group, 276-345, 705 first moment, 538
flip-flop transitions, 78
— crystal field parameters, 304—5, 321,
fluorine hyperfine structure, 260, 262—4,
335
269, 397
— hyperfine constants, 286, 298
— ligands, 365
— ionic size, 276
forbidden hyperfine lines, 204—5
— nuclear data, 286
— <r2), <r*>, <r6), 276 — hyperfine transitions, 186-91, 207-8
— <r-3>, 300 — transitions, 560, 727
forced precession, 98, 105
— resonance data, 306-7, 322
— resonance, 106, 116
— £, 284
4/ ions, multiplicative factors, 874—5 Fortran notation, 628
4/7, hyperfine constants, 340 fourth moment, 516, 522-3
interactions, 341 free radicals, 39
— in C symmetry, 338
3h
— in C 3v symmetry, 338 gr-factor, 135-9, 759
— in cubic symmetry, 336, 343 — ellipse, 422
— ions, 335 — negative, 144
4/13,Yb3+, 719 — sign of, 15, 138-9, 422-3
5/ group, 344-64, 715 g, isotropic in S- state, 151, 440
— ionic size, 347 g-tensor, 13, 15, 23, 134, 167, 169-70, 729,
— £, 347 750
5/1, octahedral symmetry, 354-9 — effect of electric field, 663-4
5 5 / / 2 3 , , U U 4 3 + + i i n n C C a a F F 2 2 , , 3 3 5 5 0 0 < g / a ll, r n g e j_ t s f , o 4 r 6 F 8 5 orbital triplet, d1, 421
5/4, U2+ in CaF 2 , 350 gauge invariance, 585
5/7, 8S|, T 6 doublet, 352 Gaussian distribution, 55, 213, 735
Faraday rotation, 566 — line shape, 55, 522-4, 528
Fe+ in MgO, 846-7 Gd3+ in A1O, 338-9
— in Si, 846-7 — in bismu 2 th 3 magnesium nitrate, 339
F F e e 2 2 + + ( i C n N C - a ) 6 O , 4 , 4 76 46, 846-7 — — i i n n C C a a F O 2 , , 3 3 3 3 5 5, 572
— in CdTe, 470 — in CeO, 340
2
— inMgA! 2 O 4 , 470 — in LaCl 3 , 339, 341
— in MgO, 208, 444, 446, 501-2, 582, 831, — in lanthanum ethylsulphate, 339
835, 846-7 — in neodymium ethylsulphate, 535—6
— in NaF, 445 — in SrCl, 335
2
— inZnF 2 , 212 — in ThO 2 , 207, 335, 340, 343
— inZnS(^), 470 ground configurations, 4/ ions, 282
Fe2+(3d6), 704 — multiplet of 4/6, 7^, 283
— in MgO, 835 FI, F singlets, 325-6
Fe3+, 162, 779 F! sin 2 glet, 632, 739, 809, 811
— in complex cyanides, 482 F singlet, 430-1, 449-50, 469, 632, 739,
2
— in glass, 203 742, 752-3, 809, 811
— inK 3 Co(CN) 6 , 482-3 F 3 doublets, 325-7, 329, 342, 375, 417,
— in MgO, 441 436, 455, 459, 469, 494, 501, 631, 640,
Fe3 + (CN-), 476 740-4, 757, 770, 790, 792, 797, 799, 804,
6
fictitious angular momentum, 373, 403-4, 809-11, 813, 816-7, 820, 831
427, 632, 659, 752, 857 — non-magnetic, 633, 745
— orbital momentum, 769-70 2F level, Zeeman spin Hamiltonian,
3
— rotation R, 653 801
— spin, 651, 722, 734, 739, 750 F , F triplets, 325-7
4 5
fine structure, 16-25, 108, 139-63, 172 — states for cubic representations, 858
— axial symmetry, 157 F in trigonal axes, 633
4

--- Page 919 ---

904 SUBJECT INDEX
T triplet, 329, 383, 427, 430, 446, 469, contact interaction, 410
4
497-8, 501, 631, 639, 661, 663, 721, 739- contact term, 695-6
40, 742-3, 752-3, 755, 790, 832-47 covalent reduction, 414
T triplet, 329, 373, 375, 417, 419, 421, cupric acetate, 509
5
423, 430, 443, 451, 455, 469, 501, 631, diamagnetic effects, 408
661, 663, 721, 739-40, 742-4, 752-3, energy levels, 183
755, 757, 790, 832-47 equivalent operators, 409
— d1 in octahedral field, 418 — — europium, 251
— in trigonal axes, 633 free atoms, 163
T , T doublets, 325-6, 337 F doublet, 412-3, 415
6 7 3
T doublet, 148-50, 329-31, 334, 345, 357, orbital singlet, 412—3
6
471, 636, 650, 721, 752-4 — triplet, 414
— in cubic field, anisotropy of, 353 relative intensity, 168
Fe, F Kramers doublets, values of g, relativistic corrections, 7 1 1-2
7
876 effects, 297, 408, 411
T doublet, 143-4, 148-50, 330-2, 334-5, 5-electrons, 410
7
344-5, 357, 636, 650, 721, 752-3 £-state ions, 710-1
T quartet, 143-6, 149-50, 165, 325-6, 328, sign determination, 185
8
331-2, 337, 342, 345, 351, 353-4, 357, — — tensor, 134, 651, 655, 713
463, 470, 480, 501, 636, 716, 721-32, - — • — transition, 183
752-3, 755, 802 zero-field transitions, 179-80
— circular polarization, 145 — terms, 852
— crystal distortions, 729-30
— nuclear electric quadrupole interaction, icosahedral crystal field, 325
731-2 — symmetry, 321
icosahedron, 278
H in CaF, 40 'ideal' paramagnet, 853
2
HJ, optimum orientation of, 137-8 improper rotations, 640-2, 661
half -field line, 454, 518 induced absorption, 60, 558
Hartree-Fock calculations, 705 — emission, 60, 558, 560
4c? group, 475 inhomogeneity in D and g, 454
— method, 590-2, 698, 703 inhomogeneous broadening, 52-3, 72, 92,
— wave -functions, 595, 599, 667-8, 703, 110-1, 114, 221, 265, 267, 521, 535,732
710, 761, 763, 767, 775 intensity, 119, 162
high- order terms in the spin Hamiltonian, — distribution, 202
341 intermediate coupling, 335, 593, 714-5,739
— Zeeman effects, 35 5d group, 480
high -temperature approximation, 850 — crystal field approach, 372-7, 380,
Ho2+ in CaF , 330-2 597-8, 676, 761
2
Ho2+, Er3+ in a cubic field, 331 — ligand field, 44, 47, 371, 398, 407-8,414
Ho3+ in C symmetry, 318 internal energy, 544, 848-9, 853
3h
hole configurations, 673, 744 in variance, 601
holmium ethylsulphate, 319 inversion, 660
homogeneous broadening, 53, 72, 92, 110, — operation, 641, 764
112, 522, 535 — symmetry, 670, 736
Hund's rule, 42, 282, 379, 479, 592, 672-3, inverted population, 73
678, 692, 698, 710, 714, 744, 759, 762, 873 ionic bonding, 661
hyperfine anomaly, 239, 251, 253, 452, — complex, 767
706-7, 712, 717 — diffusion, 536
— coupling, 801 — size, 4td and 5c? ions, 473
— energy levels, 8, 27 • , 4/ ions, 276
— fields for 3d8 ions, 453 , 5/ ions, 347
— interaction, 50 ions of type A, 745, 777-81
sign, 29 — B, 751
• — line widths, 465 [IrBr ]2-, 484
6
— multiplet, 5 [IrCl ]2-, 484
6
• — operators, 48 iron group, 559, 598, 670, 676, 684, 695,
— structure, 5-8, 172, 589, 759 697, 703, 705, 761

--- Page 920 ---

SUBJECT INDEX 905
irreducible representation, 603—9, 612, Lande factor, 587-8, 627, 677
614, 617, 620, 625, 764, 795-6, 804 — formula, 4, 752, 833
of 0, 630 — interval rule, 6, 282, 400, 633-4, 593,
of 0+, 634-7 679, 840
of O, 768 lanthanide chlorides, 277, 287, 303-20, 733
h
— tensor operators, 624—8 — compounds, 277
(IrX)2+ complexes, 486 — double nitrates, 277, 287, 320-5, 733
6
Ir4+ in NaPtCl, 6HO, 483-4 — ethylsulphates, 277-8, 303-20, 733
2 6 2
— inKPtCl, 531-2 — ions in cubic symmetry, 325
2 6
— in (NH)PtCl, 483-4, 486, 532 — nitrides, 501
42 6
isolated representations, 720 — series, 277
isomer shift, 847 lanthanum ethylsulphate, 30
isotropic exchange interaction, 57, 495-9, — hexa-antipyrene iodide, 279
498, 508, 510-14, 516, 527-8, 855 Laplace equation, 631
— singlet spectrum, 826-7, 829, 831-2 Larmor velocity, 115
lattice strains, 436, 548, 552
3; -symbols, 621 level populations, 272
ej-symbols, 623, 675-6, 835 ligand field, 11, 39, 41, 43
Jahn-Teller coupling, 791, 807, 826, 835, energy, 371
837, 845, 847 modulation, 64
— distortions, 490 — hyperfine interaction, 108, 264
for a d9 ion, 460 structure, 50, 93, 192-200, 250, 271,
— effect, 51, 406, 436, 449, 460, 464-5, 365, 396, 485, 762, 777-89
486, 790-847 Co2+, 784-8
orbital triplet, 832-47 correction terms, 781—4
P coupling, 835-41 effects of Is wave-functions, 783
3
P coupling, 841-6 Endor measurements of, 259
5
tunnelling, 820-6, 842-4 ions of type A, 777-84
— energy, 461, 805, 843 ions of type B, 784—8
— spectrum, motional narrowing, 826-30 — ions, 392
— theorem, 735, 792, 795-6, 804 — orbitals, 392
— quadrupole hyperfine structure, 788-9
KMgF, 366, 396 line breadth parameter, 522
3
KMnF, 784 — broadening by TI, 574
3
KCuCl, 2HO, 528 spin-spin interaction, 514-29
2 4 2
K(Ir, Pt)Cl, 531-2 — shape due to dipolar interaction, 52 1-7
2 6
K [Ir, PtBr ], 485 method of moments, 515—20
2 6
KOsCl, 481 — shift at low temperatures, 537-40
2 6
KPtCl, 475 — width, 54, 119
2 6
KRuCl, 481 linear operator, 601-2, 606
2 6
KCo(CN), 475, 762 — polarization, 121-2, 124-5, 132, 136
3 6
KFe(CN), 482, 762 — representation, 602, 608
3 6
KFe(CN), 3HO, 475 — unitary operator, 644
4 6 2
Kramers degeneracy, 289, 647-56, 797, 835 — vibronic Hamiltonian, 811
— doublets, 12-13, 342, 406, 414, 420, local fields, 109
601, 558-9, 564-5, 649-64, 685, 729, 736 longitudinal relaxation time, 109
— ion, 563, 566, 757 Lorentzian function, 110
weak crystal field, 713 — line shape, 58, 522, 528, 574
— theorem, 640 dilute salts, 531
Kramers -con jugate state, 647—8, 729 low temperatures, change of intensity, 162
Kramers-Kronig relations, 123 LS-coupling, 3, 12, 42, 282-5, 348, 371,
407-10, 469, 587-9, 593, 597-8, 683-4,
<L|| a ||L>, <L|| 0 ||L>, values for 3d group, 712, 714
873 — breakdown, 253-4, 284-5
La(CHSO), 9HO, 346, 349
2 6 4 2
LaCl, 346, 348 magnetic cooling, 40, 78, 365
3
— phonon velocity, 551 — dilution, 41, 54, 111, 530-1
La2+ in CaF, 489-90 — dipole, 165, 286, 688
2

--- Page 921 ---

906 SUBJECT INDEX
magnetic dipole interaction, 52, 57-8, 499, — in SrF , 572
2
521, 529 — in ZnS, 441
— dipole-dipole interaction, 491-5 — pairs, in MgO, 535
— hyparfine constant A values of, 286, Mn2+(d5) in KMnF, 780
Jy 3
298 Mn2 + (3d5), 704, 779
Hamiltonians, 296, 723 Mn3 + in KMn(CN), 480
3 6
interaction, 6-7, 36, 78, 227-8, 326, Mn4+ in MgO, 431
364, 406-14, 445, 560, 570-2, 687-95 55Mn4+ in A1O, 434
2 3
second-order correction to, 257 Mo5+ in CaWO, 489-90
4
thermal modulation, 248 — in KSnCl, 479
2 6
— • — operator, 47, 778 — in K(InCl), 3HO, 478
3 6 2
structure, 25-31, 169, 171, 174-5, — in TiO, 479
2
196-200, 296-301, 480, 746, 753, 756, 789 molecular field approximation, 854
3d-group, 406-14 — orbitals, 12, 49, 762-89
nuclear electric quadrupole inter- mosaic structure, 205
action for 3d8, 452-4 Mossbauer measurements, 847
orbital contribution, 407-8 motional narrowing, 465, 527, 536, 831
— — • — second-order effects, 173, 176 — in liquids, 536
sign determination, 177 multiplet ground state, 565
— spin contribution, 408-9 multipole
— ion— lattice interaction, 558 — interactions, 499-502
— moment, 663 • — moment, 681
— multipole operators, 687 mutual spin flips, 522
— octopole, 688
— resonance intensity, 92 N in diamond, 40
— spin— spin interaction, 562 Na [Ir, PtBr]6HO, 485
2 6 2
— vector potential, 584, 688 Na(Ir, Pt)01 , 6HO, 50, 485
2 6 2
magnetization, 102, 848 Nd3+, 30, 67, 216
magnetogyric ratio, 2, 3 — in C symmetry, 313
3h
— tensor, 651 — in C symmetry, 324
3v
magnetostatic modes, 539 — in LaCl, 255-9, 349
3
manganese ammonium sulphate, 172 — in LaMg(NO) , 24HO, 324, 568-71
2 3 312 2
— fluosilicate, 158 — in yttrium ethylsulphate, 67, 216, 568-
maser amplifier, 73-4 71
matrices of spin— orbit coupling, 448 143Nd in lanthanum ethylsulphate, 179
matrix elements of operator equivalents, negative temperature, 70, 73, 578
864-72 neodymium ethylsulphate, 515, 527, 529,
— transformation, 662 535-6, 538
— unitary, 617 — — dipolar interaction, 524—5
measurements in strong fields, 23 (NH)(Ir, Pt)Cl, 485, 532
42 6
MgAlO, 468 (NH)PtCl, 475
2 4 42 6
(Mg, Cu)La(N0) , 24DO, 186 [NiF]2+, 762, 766, 768, 775
3 2 312 2 6
MgO, 55, 281, 325, 475, 719 [Ni(H0)]2+, 451
2 6
— phonon velocity, 551 NiSiF, 6HO, 451
6 2
minimum detectable susceptibility, 128 61Ni in A1O, 265-9
2 3
signal, 128 Ni+ in MgO, 466
Mn+ in Si, 846 — in LiF, NaF, 464, 808
Mn° in Si, 846-7 Ni2+ in A1O, 266, 451-4, 476, 487
2 3
Mn°(3d54s2), 704 — in CaO, 453
Mn2+, 701-2, 705 — in KNiF , 476, 780
3
— in BaF , 572 — in MgO, 208, 453, 582
2
— in CaO, 441 — in ZnLa(NO) , 24HO, 451
3 2 312 2
— in CaCo, 439 Ni2+(d8), 780
3
— in complex cyanides, 482 Ni2+(3d8), 704
— in KFe(CN), 3HO, 482-3 Ni3+ in A1O, 487, 831
4 6 2 2 3
— in MgO, 208, 441-2 — in CaO, 487
— in powder, 203—4 — in MgO, 487
— in RbMnF , 442 noise power, 73
3

--- Page 922 ---

SUBJECT INDEX 907
non-bonding orbitals, 768 optimum sensitivity, 129
non-Hermitian operators, 647 Orbach— Blume process, 560
non- interacting ions, 851 Orbach relaxation process, 66-8, 323, 445,
non-Kramers doublets, 24, 32, 213-6, 313, 560-6, 568-9, 572, 579, 582, 828
315, 318, 324, 342, 363, 454, 470, 501, orbital contributions, (/-values, 464
565, 736 — degeneracy, 596
— • — hyperfine interaction, 295 — ^-factor, 377, 3&3, 404, 728, 833
line shape, 214-6, 295 • reduction of, 395, 400
spin Hamiltonian, 294 — hyperfine interaction, 753-4
— ions, 209-16, 292, 317, 558-9, 563, — magnetic moment, 50, 585
566-7, 732-41, 750, 757 — magnetization, 782
non-linear shielding, 304 — moment reduction, 424—6, 432, 443,
normal coordinates, 795, 797, 804 482, 773-5, 847
— modes of vibration, 460 — momentum, 401, 585, 838, 840
NpF , 346-7, 362 quenching, 51, 596, 648-9, 846
6
— in UF, 355-9 — • by Jahn-Teller effect, 839
6
NpO, 501 — splitting factor, reduction in, 841
2
(NpO)2+, 347-8 — triplet, coefficients m, n, 876
2
— in (UO)Rb(NO), 360-363 orthogonality relation, 603, 609
2 33
nuclear alignment, 40, 76, 365 Os4+, 480
— electric quadrupole oscillatory electronic Zeeman interaction,
effects, 184 136-9, 230-1
interaction, 8, 31-3, 36-7, 163-71, • — nuclear 0-factor g 230
l9
178, 181, 225-8, 254, 260, 286, 301-3, Hamiltonian, 233
326, 342, 345, 363-4, 414, 434, 445, 458, Zeeman interaction, 230
478, 680-7, 740, 746, 754-5 overlap integral, 764-5
lattice contribution, 259, 302
ligand field contribution, 415 P-tensor, 166, 170, 750
thermal modulation of, 248 p-ligand orbitals, 778
moments, 3d group, 416 Pa4+ in CsZrCl, 354-5, 359
2 6
, 4d group, 473 packet -shift ing mechanism, 237
, 5d group, 473 pair spectra, 502-14, 524-35
, 4f group, 286, 340 — aniso tropic exchange, 505-6
— — — , definition, 683 — dissimilar ions, 509—14
operator, 46-7, 680-7, — isotropic exchange, 504-5
— induction, 106 — similar ions, 502-9
— magnetic resonance in KOsF, 480 palladium group, 598
2 6
— moments, 4/, 286; 3d, 416; 4d, 5d, 473 para-electric transitions, 736—7
— multipole, 682 paramagnetic anti- shielding, 223
— polarization, 74, 77, 79, 80-1, 83, 85-6 — relaxation, 124, 573
— quadrupolarization, 75-7, 79-81, 83, — resonance data, ethylsulphates, 306
86 trichlorides, 307
— transition probability, 232 double nitrates, 322
enhancement of, 221-2, 228, 250 — shielding, 167
— transitions, 31, 89 — susceptibility, 585
— Zeeman effect, 6, 196-200 parity, 642, 660, 687
interaction, 7, 27, 74, 224, 228-9, partition function, 848
414-6, 746, 852 Pauli matrices, 617, 651-2, 691, 799-800,
804, 810-1
octahedral complex, 49, 797 — principle, 590
— coordination, 367, 374, 743 Pd3+ in A1O, 487
2 3
— crystal field splitting A, 476 permutation group $ , 641
4
— symmetry, 325 phase angle, 116-7
one -dimensional harmonic oscillators, 837 — coherence, 110—2
one-electron operators, 594-5, 666, 673 phonon avalanche, 70, 574-83
operator equivalents, 626 bath relaxation, 582
matrix elements, 864—72 time, 575
optical spectra, 276 — bottle neck, 69, 566, 574-83

--- Page 923 ---

908 SUBJECT INDEX
phonon effects on g- values, 312, 334 — 180 degree, 113-4
— energy density, 548, 554-5, 558, 580 pulses, 113
— heat capacity, 574, 580 (PuO)2+, 347-8
2
— -induced transitions, 465 — in (UO)Rb(NO), 363
2 33
— interactions, 51 7r-bonding, 379, 424
— line width, 575 — orbitals, 392, 477, 763
— mean free path, 574—5
— occupation number, 548, 577 quadrupole— quadrupole interaction, 501-2
phonon coupling, 582 quantum-mechanical tunnelling effect,
— radiation bath, 63, 547-51 463
energy density, 547 quenching factors, 840, 844, 847
field, 491, 547 — orbital momentum, 51, 403, 840, 846
— scattering, 574 — spin-orbit coupling, 840
— system, specific heat, 549-51
— temperature, 548, 576 <r-3> values, 300, 710-1
— wavelength, 551 Racah operators, 628
platinum group, 598 — parameters B, 386-7, 392, 395, 476-7,
plutonyl sodium acetate, 364 479, 772
Pm3+ in C symmetry, 315 (3B + <7), 478
3h
point charge approximation, 665, 743 Racah parameters (7, 386-7, 392, 394-5,
model, 762 479
— defects, 39 reduction of, 395
— dipolar interaction, 260, 263-4 — 6j -symbols, 622
polarization effects, 665 Raman relaxation process, 63—7, 554-7,
— rules, 30 560, 562-6, 568, 571-2, 582, 649, 828-
polarized nuclear targets, 84 30
population inversion, 70, 83, 221 at high temperatures, 556-7, 572
potential energy, 795, 837 rare-earth ethylsulphates, 287-8, 303-20
powder spectrum, 200—5 — group, 276-345, 559, 597, 670, 674, 676-
power absorbed, 120, 125 7, 684, 694, 750, 761
— saturation, 62, 72, 80, 88-90 cubic symmetry, 719—32
Pr2+ in CaF, 328 Rb(UO)(NO), 75, 348, 360-4
2 2 33
Pr3+ in C symmetry, 312 Re4+ in KPtCl, 480
3h 2 6
— in C symmetry, 324 reducible representation, 603, 605, 607,
3v
— in CaF , 328, 351 612-3, 641
2
— in double nitrate, 733 regular octahedron, 369—70
— in LaCl, 499 relative intensities, 24, 159, 726
3
— in yttrium ethylsulphate, 216 — function of temperature, 141, 151, 160,
processing magnetization, 104-5, 116, 118, 162-3, 429, 505-7, 534, 538
122 relativistic contributions, 47, 253-4, 267,
precession, 9, 97 299-300
— frequency, 10 relaxation effects, 108
— magnetic dipole, 2 — paths, 79, 81-2, 85, 88-9, 219, 243,
— velocity, 3, 95 246-7, 272
pseudo-magnetic hyperfine interaction, 38, — processes, 248
257-8, 345, 717 — rates, 247
pseudo -nuclear electric quadrupole inter- restricted Hartree— Fock functions, 704,
action, 37-9, 257-9, 316, 349, 417, 715, 711
717 Rh° in AgCl, 488
— Zeeman effect, 38-9, 164, 257-8, 267, Rh2+ in ZnWO, 487
4
316, 354, 707, 715-6, 732, 749, 755 rhombic group, 639, 654
interaction, 31, 91, 167, 228, 254, — symmetry, 750
416, 851 rotating coordinate system, 95, 103, 105,
Pt3+ in A1O, 487 107, 112-4
2 3
— in BaTiO, 487 — magnetic field, 97, 120
3
— in yttrium aluminium garnet, 478 rotation group, 600, 604, 607, 616-27,
PuF , 346 629, 634, 651, 721, 764
6
pulse 90 degree, 113 — of axes, 137

--- Page 924 ---

SUBJECT INDEX 909
rotational invariance, 587 spatial rotation 5, 652-3, 655, 696, 741
— symmetry, 589, 596 — symmetry, 760
Bu3+ in A1O, 484 specific heat, 852, 855
2 3
— in Co(NH)Cl, 482-4 — — constant field, 849-50, 853
36 3
rubidium aluminium sulphate, 162 magnetization, 849, 853
Russell-Saunders coupling, 587 — representations, 635-6, 640, 661
spectrometer sensitivity, 93, 125—132
S = f , rhombic symmetry, 155-6 spin-bath relaxation, 69
S — f, axial symmetry, 160 spin coupling, energy, 379
— cubic field, 142-8 — densities, 397, 408, 410, 703-4, 706,
— zero magnetic field, 438 712, 778, 780
S = |, 1 , 142-51 dependent forces, 587—9
S = 1, cubic field, 147-51 — diffusion, 71, 265, 273
5=1, 152-5 spin echoes, 113-5
— rhombic field, 153-5 — flips, 71, 111-3, 199, 520, 522, 830
5 = 1, 19-22 spin-Hamiltonians, 93, 133-216, 340, 372,
— in strong field, 22 650-6, 746, 749-51, 756, 848, 851
5 = 2, weak-field Zeeman effect, 209-13 2E state, 817
s- configurations, 695 — — - signs of parameters, 223
65, cubic splitting, 441-2 spin-lattice interaction, 60-74, 123
65, g- value, 441 relaxation, 41, 61, 69, 73, 78, 92-4,
5-state ions, 573 828, 830
satellite transitions, 198 concentration dependence, 553
saturation, 79, 81, 123-4, 220, 240-1, 244, ligand field modulation, 557—74
270 thermodynamic approach, 545
— effect on Endor line width, 249 time, 61, 109, 117, 129, 465, 535-
— parameter, 1 1 8-9 6, 544, 732
Sc2+ in CaF, 469, 831-2 Waller process, 551-7
2
— inSrF , 469, 831-2 — magnetic moment, 586
2
second moment, 55, 516, 518-20, 522-3, — magnetization, 782
526, 528, 530 — operators, 140-1, 287-8, 371-2, 377
dipolar interaction, 521 spin-orbit coupling, 4, 42, 50, 283-4, 347,
dissimilar ions, 520 371, 377-8, 383, 398-400, 402-6, 419,
order effects, 29 423, 428, 431, 433-5, 448, 455, 491, 495-
Zeeman effect, 210, 291 9, 508, 557-8, 592-3, 597-8, 648, 673,
selection rules, 99, 660-1, 726 679, 745-7, 753, 756, 758-9, 775-7, 782,
— time reversal, 656 784, 816, 829, 831, 833-5, 839-41, 847
self-consistent field, 590 reduction in, 395-6, 400, 432, 477,
semiconductors, 39 775-7, 835, 839-41
shape function, 100, 118, 120 spin-orbit coupling parameters, 3d, 378,
shielding effects, 48, 55, 259, 304, 491, 501, 391, 399-400
597, 687 4d, 474
sign of D, 23, 161 5d, 475
— 0, 15, 138-9 4/, 284
— hyperfine parameters, 225-8, 233, 262 5/, 347
similarity transformation, 602, 608 spin packet, 54, 56, 72, 92, 112, 130, 236-7,
singlet orbital ground state, 401, 745 244, 249, 264, 269
triplet transitions, 503 — quadruplet, 430
six-j symbol, 623, 675-6 — quintuplet, 434
sixfold symmetry, 718 spin-spin interactions, 41-2, 52-60, 93,
Slater determinant, 590-3, 666, 670, 672- 109, 123, 271, 398-402, 405-6, 414, 430,
5, 698-9, 702-3, 705-6, 761, 769, 771-2, 433-5, 442, 444, 546, 593-4, 648, 678-9,
777, 784-5, 788 745, 748-9, 753, 759, 851, 853-5
Sm2+ in SrF, 283 axial symmetry, 525-7
2
Sm3+ in C symmetry, 315 modulated by phonons, 552-7
zh
— in (7, symmetry, 324 parameter p, 399, 678-9
3
solid effect, 84 relaxation, 71
— state maser, 73 time, 264, 522, 535

--- Page 925 ---

910 SUBJECT INDEX
spin-spin interaction, temperature depen- tetragonal distortion, 367, 369, 372-5,
dent effects, 535-40 729-30, 755, 826, 839
spin system internal energy, 544 — group, 638-9, 641-2
specific heat, 549-51 character table, 861
— temperature, 61, 71, 117-8, 123, 273, — symmetry, 751, 756, 801-2
545, 576 tetrahedral coordination, 369, 374, 743
— wave theory, 532 — symmetry, 661—4
spinels, 468 group T , 641-2
d
spontaneous emission, 60, 70, 544, 560 thermal analysis, classical, 583
SrCl, 281 — bath, 574
2
SrF , 281, 325, 467 — equilibrium, 61-2, 106-7, 113-4, 120,
2
SrWO, 280, 467 541-7, 583
4
Stark splitting, 12 — magnetic properties, 848—55
static crystal field, 839-40 — noise power, 131
— Jahn- Teller distortion, 846 — relaxation, 828
effect, 459, 462, 470, 490, 790, 804-8, — reservoirs, 583
821, 825-7, 829, 836, 840-1, 844 thermodynamic potential, 848
dynamic features, 807-8 third-order Zeeman effect, 35, 291-2, 425
— magnetic saturation, 129, 537 ThO, 282, 325, 331
2
steady-state conditions, 115 threefold symmetry, 654-6, 718
— methods, 566 Ti2+ in ZnS, 469
— solution, 105 Ti3+ in A1O, 417, 425, 847
2 3
Sternheimer shielding, 302 Ti3+, V4+ octahedral field, 417
stimulated absorption, 580 time -conjugate states, 563
— emission, 70, 74, 580 dependent perturbation, 99
strain-broadened spectrum, 831 even operator, 647-8, 716-7, 734, 747,
— effects, 429, 816-20 835
- — Hamiltonians, 829 odd operators, 342-3, 647-8, 651, 717,
— -induced energy, 826 733
strains, large, 818-20 — reversal, 12, 141, 313, 558-9, 643-64,
— random, 213, 817 682, 688, 716, 721, 725, 731, 733-4,
• — very small, 818 747-8, 750, 760
stress constant V , 817 — operator, 646-50, 657
ES
strong crystal field approach, 377—92, 598 Tm2+ in CaF, 263, 271, 327-8, 332-4,
2
— field Zeeman effect, 146-7, 156-63 337
— Jahn-Teller coupling, 807 — in cubic symmetry, 333
— ligand field, 45, 48, 371, 407-8 — in SrF , 328
2
octahedral complex, 476-8 i69 Tm 2+ in CaF2) 269
strongly allowed transitions, 32 Tm3+ in <7 symmetry, 320
3ft
susceptibility, 851-2, 854 Tm3+(4/12, 3# ), 674
6
symmetric direct product, 657, 722 transient methods, 566
— tensor, 653, 750 transition groups, 40
or-bonding orbitals, 392, 763 — probability, 100, 102, 122, 136, 564, 734-5
ff-bonds, 359, 379 — rate, 60, 119, 249, 542
transitions, satellite, 198-9
(£)6 sub-shell, 477 transmission spectrometer, 127
2
Tb3+ in C symmetry, 317 transverse relaxation time, 109, 114
sh
— in ethylsulphate, 738-9 triad spectra, 532
— in yttrium ethylsulphate, 567 trigonal distortion, 369-70, 372, 374, 726,
Tb*+ in ThO, 335-7, 340, 343 729-30, 755, 839
2
Tc4+, 480 reduction, 841
— in KPtCl, 479 — field parameter v, 391
2 6
temperature fluctuations, 131 — fields, 374, 376, 745, 755
— -independent susceptibility, 559 — group character table, 861
tensor components, 839 Z>, 639-40
3
— G , 652 irreducible representations, 861
n
— g 651-5, 713 — strain, 816
vv
— operators, 670, 672, 681, 688, 799-801 — symmetry C, 654-6, 751, 756, 846
3

--- Page 926 ---

SUBJECT INDEX 911
triplet orbital ground state, 403-6, 751 — states, 809-42
— t t , 379, 769-70 virtual phonon coupling, 60
— T 19 T 2 , 770 interaction, 502
tripositive ions in A1O, 389-91
2 3 V(NH)(SO), 12HO, 426-8
truncated Hamiltoman, 517 4 42 2
tunnelling, 820-6, 844
W , Jahn-Teller energy, 805
two-dimensional harmonic oscillator, 836-7 JT
Waller process, 552—7
— electron operators, 595, 666
warping, 813, 816, 820
— -quantum transition, 454
— terms, 811, 814-5, 838
— -valued representation, 619
weak crystal field, 597, 713-9, 761
r\ angular dependence, 570—1
— field Zeeman interaction, 165
— measurement, 566
effect, 143-6, 209
Tb, spin— bath relaxation time, 576-83
— ligand field, 43, 45, 407
weakly allowed transitions, 30
U3+ in LaCl, 349
3 — covalent compounds, 767
U2+, U3+, U4+ in CaF, 350-1
2 Wigner coefficients, 620-3, 625
UF , 346
6 Wigner-Eckart theorem, 586, 593, 624,
ultimate sensitivity, 126
653, 658-9, 670, 675-6, 682, 721-2, 759,
unimodular group, 634
788, 810, 832, 835
unitary matrix, 617
WKB approximation, 824
— operator, 617
wurtzite, 467
— transformation, 644
— unimodular group, 618
XY complex, 804
unnormalized spherical harmonics, 628 6
e orbitals, 392-4
unrestricted Hartree-Fock method, 704, g
ligand orbitals, 877
711
molecular orbital combinations, 877
UO, 501
2 £ orbitals, 392-4
(UO)2+, 347-8, 359 2
2 — octahedral complex, normal coordi-
— in (UO)Rb(NO), 360
2 32 nates, 878
(U0)Na(CHOJ, 348
2 2 3 3
(U0)Rb(N0), 348, 360
2 3 3 Y2+ in CaF, 489-90
2
V2+ in CaF, 846 Yb3+ in CaF 2 , 263, 332-5, 344-5
2 — in CaO, 333-4
— in complex cyanides, 479
— in CdF, ThO, CeO, 333
— inMgO, 431 2 2 2
V2+, Cr3+(d3), 779-80 — in C 3h symmetry, 320
V2+, Cr3, Mn4 in octahedral field, 430-4 — in cubic symmetry, 333—5
51V2+m A1O, 434 yttrium ethylsulphate, 67
2 3
— in cubic ZnS, 469
V3+, 383 Zeeman effect, in free atom, 586-9
— in oc-AlO, 429 — energy, 849
2 3
— in ZnS, 469 — Hamiltonians, 723, 801
V3+, Cr4 m octahedral field, 426-36 — interaction, 11, 402, 406, 586, 677, 745,
V4+ in A1O, 417, 425-6 748, 758, 840
2 3
Van Vleck cancellation, 564, 649 zero field measurements, 161, 163
— paramagnetism, 1 spectrum, 153
vanadium fluosilicate, 191 — magnetic field for S = f , 438
vector coupling, 622 point energy, 807
vibromc doublet, 827, 829, 831, 839 motion, Jahn— Teller effect, 464—5
— functions, 818, 824 vibrations, 541, 721
— T doublet, 810-6, 815 ZnO, 467-8
3
— Hamiltoman, 812, 835, 838, 841-2 ZnS, 467-8
— operators, 839 ZnSe, 467
— singlets, 810, 816, 826 ZnTe, 467

--- Page 927 ---

Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CRO 4YY