

--- Page 1 ---

Magnetic fields and radical reactions: recent developments and
their role in nature
Brian Brocklehurst
Department of Chemistry, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK S3 7HF.
E-mail: b.brocklehurst@sheffield.ac.uk; Fax: 0-114-273-8673; Tel: 0-114-222-9524
Received 22nd March 2002
First published as an Advance Article on the web 18th July 2002
Recombination of pairs of radicals is exceptional in being applied field (Zeeman splitting) and with magnetic nuclei, the
affected by magnetic fields. The mechanism has been known isotropic hyperfine couplings, a. (Many important nuclei are not
for some thirty years, but recently new applications have magnetic, e.g. 12C and 16O.) Hyperfine couplings are familiar
appeared and research has been extended to very high fields from EPR spectroscopy and range from 0.1 to 2–3 mT for
(up to 30 Tesla). Claims that low electromagnetic fields common organic radicals. Radical pair (RP) theory has found
damage health have led to extensive medical, chemical and the bulk of its applications in spin resonance research; spin
evolution in RPs differs between the nuclear spin states which
physical research: no firm evidence of hazards has emerged;
leads to ‘spin-selective reactions’. Since conventional spin
on the other hand, migrating birds orient themselves in the
resonance measurements depend on differences in the Boltz-
earthAs field (50 mT): radical pairs may provide the
mann distribution among the energy states of a few parts per
mechanism.
thousand (EPR) or per million (NMR), such processes can give
spectacular effects. Chemically induced dynamic polarisation
(CIDEP and CIDNP) has become a very large research area in
1 Introductory its own right; there is not space to include it here. Nor is it
possible to do justice to many well-developed areas, e.g.much
Magnetic field effects (MFEs) are now studied over a very wide of the older solution work and studies of micelles and
range: superconducting magnets provide fields of more than ten photosynthetic reaction centres. Other MFEs not covered are
Tesla for industry, for research (spin resonance, NMR and EPR) magnetic isotope effects which also result from radical pairs,
and for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). At the other processes involving triplet excited states,1 gas-phase dissocia-
extreme, over the last ten years concerns have arisen about tion of excited molecules,2 and bulk effects of fields such as
potential hazards due to environmental electromagnetic (EM) orientation of liquid crystals.
fields of a few microTesla. For comparison, the field between The next section sets out the basic ideas of RP theory; for
the poles of a horseshoe magnet might be 100–200 mT and the mobile liquids its predictions have been borne out by experi-
earthAs field is ~50 mT. At first sight, effects on chemical mental work spanning nearly 30 years. The amount is now very
reactions appear very unlikely; even a field of 1 T produces a large: in a thorough review in 1992, Steiner and Ulrich1listed
splitting of the electronic energies of a radical of only 11.2 J some 774 papers and 34 earlier reviews. Section 3 contains
mol21; for comparison, kT is ~2500 J mol21 at normal examples chosen to illustrate the principles and the types of
temperatures; heats of typical chemical reactions are ~10–100 experiments used. Most space is given there to radiolumines-
kJ mol21. Indeed there is no effect at all on most ground state cence: this is the author’s own interest but arguably it provides
reactions. The exception is provided by the rates (not the the best illustrations of the basic phenomena and research in this
equilibria) of recombination of free radicals and radical ions in area is very active at present.
solution and in solids; this is the subject of this review. Later sections describe recent developments including a
The behaviour of radical pairs in mobile liquids at moderate wider range of experiments and the study of low field effects,
fields (~1–100 mT) is particularly simple: it depends on the LFE, where the Zeeman interaction is less than the hyperfine
relative magnitudes of the interactions of electron spins with an couplings, necessitated by the possibility of health hazards.
Sections 4 and 5 describe work on electron transfer processes
and radical reactions in solids and biological materials. These
Dr Brocklehurst was born in Dover, England. After studying at
are more complicated because the anisotropic components of
Oxford under Dr E. J. Bowen, he held research fellowships at
hyperfine coupling no longer average to zero. No final
AERE, Harwell, and the Uni-
conclusions about health hazards are yet possible, but while the
versity of California, Berkeley,
positive evidence is weak there can be no doubt that birds make
with Professor G. C. Pimentel.
use of the geomagnetic field to aid migration over long
In 1960 he joined the staff in
distances, while many organisms use it orient themselves
Sheffield. He has collaborated
(sections 6 and 7). The S.I. unit the Tesla has replaced the gauss,
with groups in Canada, at
G, (1 T = 10000 G) but the latter still appears widely in the
AERE, the Radiation Labora-
literature so both are used as needed.
tory (University of Notre Dame,
Indiana) and at Oxford. He has
specialised in electronic spec- 2 Concepts
troscopy, luminescence, radia-
tion chemistry and, since 1968, 2.1 Spin correlation
in magnetic field effects.
Most molecules have singlet ground states. The spin behaviour
of the electron pairs in each orbital is said to be correlated: the
DOI: 10.1039/b107250c Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311 301
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2002
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online / Journal Homepage / Table of Contents for this issue

--- Page 2 ---

two spins are oriented in opposite directions and their phases are
also related: this is another way of saying that there is no
resultant spin momentum. In a triplet state, the two unpaired
spins are also correlated but now they are parallel and their
phase relation gives a total spin of one. In a molecule, this
correlation is dictated by the powerful electron exchange
interaction, J. If a bond is broken to produce two radicals or an
electron is transferred to a neighbouring molecule to produce
radical ions, Jbecomes zero or very small.
An important concept is the distinction between stationary
and non-stationary states. The solutions of a particular wave
equation are stationary states or eigenfunctions; the singlet and
triplet states of a molecule provide an example. When a bond is
broken forming radicals, momentarily the spin wavefunction
becomes a non-stationary state of the RP, because the
hamiltonian has changed; suddenly Jis very small, less than or
comparable with the electron–nuclear hyperfine interactions.
The result is that the wavefunction will oscillate back and forth
between singlet and triplet. In wave-mechanical terms, the non- Fig. 1Energy levels of one proton, one electron (Breit-Rabi diagram); a =
stationary state can be treated as a superposition of the true 1 mT.
stationary states which are solutions of equations like (1) for
each radical. A parallel can be found in the vibration of
molecules: spectroscopy deals with the stationary states, called
normal vibrations, but a collision between two molecules may
lead to a superposition of such motions in which energy flows
back and forth between different bonds.
‘Correlation’ is used here to describe the connection between
two electron spins. It is retained despite conversion between the
spin states which is said to be coherent. Eventually the
correlation is lost by spin relaxation (section 2.6), a random
process very familiar in EPR where it dictates the width of the
lines; typically it takes a few microseconds for radicals in
solution.
Fig. 2Energy levels for two electrons; exchange interaction, J ≠ 0.
2.2 Spin evolution: the simple case
by a, the two pairs of levels each by a/2. Fig. 2 shows the field
dependence of the spin states for two electrons; for clarity the
The interaction between an electron, magnetic nuclei such as case of a small Jis shown. When J = 0, T and S are degenerate
those of hydrogen (simply called protons here for convenience), 0
at all fields. When magnetic nuclei are present, these lines are
and an external field, B, is given by
replaced by close bands of levels. In a strong field, electrons and
nuclei are decoupled and both precess round the field direction
(1) as shown in Fig. 3. The rate for electrons is determined by the
sum of the external field and the local field of the nuclei.
Interconversion between singlet and triplet is most easily
The second and third terms correspond to the two parts of the understood using a vector model of angular momentum; Fig. 3a
hyperfine interactions summed over the various nuclei; ais the shows the T and S states for two electrons. The field differs
0
contact term which is independent of orientation; Ais used for slightly between different nuclear spin orientations, so the two
the classical, dipolar interaction of two magnets which is electrons may precess at slightly different rates. If so, the overall
orientation dependent. The Zeeman interaction between the state oscillates between S and T through mixed states. The
0
field and the electron spin is represented by the first term; that other two triplet components are not involved, Fig. 3b; this can
with the nuclei can be neglected. m B is the Bohr magneton. gis be understood in terms of the splittings in Fig. 2. For a single
commonly called the g-factor: departures from the free electron proton, it is a simple matter to derive an equation describing this
value, g e , of 2.0023 are due to contributions from the orbital behaviour.3
angular momentum, usually small for organic radicals; it too
may be anisotropic. Eqn. (1) is about energies but both (2)
frequency and field units are commonly used for energy levels;
1 mT M 28.0 MHz. Here field units have been used as far as r (t) is the probability of an initially pure singlet remaining so
S
possible so that aand Bcan be readily compared. Sand Iare the after time, t; simply related to r (t) are the yields of triplet from
S
operators for electron and nuclear spin. For spin-resonance triplet or triplet from singlet (T from S); e.g.the latter is (1 2
experiments, Bìa, eigenvalues of S and I are +1⁄ and 21⁄ for r (t)) so some of the plots in the figures may appear to be upside
2 2 S
aand bspins. This meaning of S is not needed further: in the down. Dgis the difference between the (isotropic) g-values of
remainder of the review, S and T are used as shorthand for the two radicals. The second factor contains a/2 (in units of
singlet and triplet states; T , T and T are components of T. radians per second) corresponding to the a/2 splittings in Fig. 1.
+ 0 2
In mobile liquids rapid molecular rotation simplifies matters An important result is that the time-average value of r , år Å, is
S S
because the Aterm and the anisotropic part of gaverage to zero. one half.
Eqn. (1) can then be solved analytically in many cases, notably At zero field the three triplet components become indis-
when Bìa. It is also possible at any field provided that only tinguishable (Fig. 2); if J = 0, one might expect a limiting value
one type of nucleus is present (one value of a). Fig. 1 shows the of år Åof one quarter and a field effect, ratio field on/field off,
S
field dependence of the energy levels of one electron and one of two or 100% increase, but this is seldom reached.3 One
proton. The EPR transitions (at right) at high field are separated reason is that at zero field electrons and protons precess round
302 Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 3 ---

their resultant. The vector diagram for one electron and one is ~1/B, 0.7 ms for the geomagnetic field of 50 mT. Relaxation
proton (Fig. 3c) is symmetrical; though their magnetic moments times seldom exceed a few microseconds; 50–60 Hz and other
are very different, the particles have the same angular oscillating fields up to 1 MHz are essentially constant over such
momentum. As a result the changes in the electron orientation times. Only the effects of static fields are considered in most of
are smaller; however the two electrons now see local fields with this review.
different orientations, provided both interact with nuclei then Once B ì a, the hyperfine effects level off. It is useful to
the overall result is that år Åis less than one half, though it may define a characteristic field at which half the limiting effect is
S
not reach the possible limit of one quarter. In the simple case the reached. Using the semi-classical method, it can be shown1
oscillating term contains cos(at) corresponding to the splitting that
at the left of Fig. 1, so spin evolution is faster than at high field.
For low fields the behaviour becomes still more complicated,
but the time-dependence of S is still represented by equations
with cosine terms and a constant term. When eqn. (1) cannot be
(4)
solved analytically (more than one type of proton and low or
zero field), it is still possible to calculate r using computer
S
programmes or approximations such as the ‘semi-classical
Here Iis the spin quantum number for the each type of nucleus,
method’.1Magnetic field effects are then given by the ratio of
e.g.1 or 0 for two protons, 1 for one deuteron; suffixes a and b
r or år Åin a field to that at zero field. Fig. 4 shows results of
S S indicate the two radicals. This result is valid providing the
some computer calculations.
radical decay by reaction, electron transfer or relaxation is
sufficiently slow compared to spin evolution. In strong fields,
the Dgfactor (eqn. (2)) may become important: if tis short then
2.3 Spin changes and diffusion loss of initial spin character by this means can lead to reduction
in the field effect.
When radical ions recombine, the product may be an excited In non-polar solvents the final approach of recombining ions
state: observation of fluorescence makes possible time-resolved is very fast; there is no barrier to reaction and both singlet and
measurements of the ratio of the r values down to one triplet states are accessible so it is reasonable to suppose
S
nanosecond (section 3.1, also 4). Spin evolution can be followed recombination rates are equal and exchange and electron–
and the limiting field effect measured directly. More commonly, electron interaction can be neglected. Radical ions in polar
effects on the overall yield are measured. Neutral radicals solvents (section 3.2) provide an intermediate case between ions
(section 3.3) usually correlate with an attractive ground state in hydrocarbons and neutral radicals: both singlets and triplets
singlet and a repulsive anti-bonding triplet. Only singlet pairs can react, but their rates may well be very different because ion
can react; triplet pairs must separate. Re-encounter of unreacted solvation produces barriers. For example, triplet pairs may react
pairs has a high probability which leads to a complicated more readily if excited singlets are not accessible and the large
situation in which both molecular diffusion and spin evolution energy release of ground state formation puts it in the Marcus
must be considered. Further complexities arise for neutral ‘inverted region’ (where reaction rates are reduced by the
radicals from the exchange and dipolar interactions between the Franck-Condon principle). The same is true of charge transfer in
unpaired electrons. Detailed theoretical treatments are numer-
ous because of the importance of CIDNP, etc.However, for a
qualitative description of the MFEs, one simply wants to
illustrate the expected dependence of år Å on field and on
S
reaction time; oscillating curves (Fig. 4) are not very in-
formative. It is convenient to use the ‘exponential model’1 to
simplify description; it is assumed that singlet and triplet pairs
decay by first order processes with the same rate constant.
Then
(3)
where tis the mean lifetime of the RP. This is especially useful Fig. 4Calculations of the evolutions of the singlet character in the pyrene/
in illustrating the importance of the relation between lifetime 1,3-dicyanobenzene system from an initial pure singlet.28At long times the
zero field curve rises above that for 0.1 mT. Reproduced from Int. J. Radiat.
and spin evolution: the smaller the field, the more time it takes
Biol., vol. 69, B. Brocklehurst and K. A. McLauchlan, ‘Free Radical
for a field effect to develop.
Mechanism for the Effects of Environmental Electromagnetic Fields on
When B > Sathe time taken for high field effects to develop Biological Systems’, pages 3–24, copyright 1996, with permission from
is ~1/a, typically a few nanoseconds; when B < Sa, the time Taylor and Francis, Ltd.
Fig. 3Vector representations of spin motion: (a) and (b), two electrons at high field, (a) showing the conversion between S and T; (c) electron and proton
0
at zero field.28 Reproduced from Int. J. Radiat. Biol., vol. 69, B. Brocklehurst and K. A. McLauchlan, ‘Free Radical Mechanism for the Effects of
Environmental Electromagnetic Fields on Biological Systems’, pages 3–24, copyright 1996, with permission from Taylor and Francis, Ltd.
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311 303
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 4 ---

large organic molecules and assemblies, notably photosynthetic
reaction centres (section 5.1).
2.4 Low field effect
In general, vector models and other physical descriptions should
be used with care; it is best to solve the wave equations first and
look for a model afterwards. The author accidentally came
across the LFE in this way.3 Because of concerns about EMF
and health in recent years the need to understand low field
effects has grown. Their mechanism is less obvious than at high
fields. The cosine terms in the equations reflect the splittings
between energy levels: when levels are degenerate, there will be
cosine terms with zero argument, which contribute to the fixed
term, and so to år Å. The existence of a degeneracy at zero field
S
(Fig. 1) accounts for the failure of år Åto reach the limiting value
S
of one quarter. It follows that further causes of splitting will be
important. In particular, a small field suffices to split the zero Fig. 5Effects of low fields and orientation (q) on the singlet recombination
yield for a single proton radical pair; wis the electron Larmor frequency;
field levels and år Å decreases. In terms of the vector model,
S singlet and triplet decay rates are 0.1a/2p. Anisotropy values were taken as
fields < ado not uncouple electron and proton but the resultant
A = A = 0.3a, A = 20.6a.4bReproduced from Chem. Phys. Lett., vol.
xx yy zz
(Fig. 3c) can precess round them. The LFE is illustrated by the 334, C. R. Timmel, F. Cintolesi, B. Brocklehurst and P.J. Hore, ‘Model
numerical calculations in Fig. 4, which also emphasises the calculations of magnetic field effects on recombination reactions of radicals
point that the lower the field, the longer the time required for the with hyperfine interactions’, pages 387–395, copyright 2001, with permis-
effect to take place; only at long times is it clear that r at 0.1 sion from Elsevier Science.
S
mT is less than the zero field value.
‘bumps’ or resonances are remarkable (Fig. 5) and again are not
Detailed calculations4show that, for mobile liquids, the LFE
lost on averaging. These are due to curve crossings where the
can be quite large at long times, between 10 and 40%. An
arguments of some cosines again equal zero. Such behaviour
interesting point which emerged, again accidentally, is that the
can occur in other cases, e.g.when the Dg.Bterm matches an a
relative sign of different a values in the same radical has an
factor at high field; e.g.for a single proton (eqn. (2)) when Dg.B
effect at low fields (reducing the LFE) though not at high. The
= a/2, år Å = 3/4 not 1/2.
same is true in EPR where the signs of acannot be determined S
directly at the fields normally used. Alkyl radicals typify such
behaviour: a- and b-protons have a values of ~22.2 and
2.6 Spin relaxation
~+2.7 mT respectively.
The LFE provides a first illustration of Kramers’ theorem
There are many contributions to spin relaxation; EPR textbooks
which states that the lowest state of an odd number of spin-one-
provide more details. For radicals in solution, relaxation times
half particles (one must include the electron here) must be at
are typically a few ms, so that coherent processes are much faster
least doubly degenerate: this degeneracy can only be split by a
but this is not always true; also, relaxation is sometimes field
magnetic field, not by an electric field, i.e.not by any valence
dependent, so it must be considered briefly here.
interaction.
The two types of relaxation are characterised by T and T . T ,
1 2 1
the spin-lattice relaxation time, is concerned with re-orientation
of the spin, aÔb, i.e.conversion between the T or T and T
2.5 Anisotropy effects + 2 0
or S (Fig. 2) states in this context; T , the spin–spin relaxation
2
time, changes the phase relation between the spins, inter-
Radical reactions can take place in solids viaelectron transfer;
converting T or S (cf.Fig. 3). The distinction disappears at zero
ions and neutral radicals may recombine in viscous liquids. In 0
field, but since T and T may differ in a field, this can produce
both cases the anisotropy of hyperfine and Zeeman interaction 1 2
MFEs in radical pairs. Typically the two times are comparable
can no longer be neglected. The effects become very compli-
in mobile liquids but become distinct at higher viscosities. Spin-
cated: a tour de force5 for the alkylcob(III)alamin system
lattice relaxation results from fluctuating local fields, usually
(section 5.2) illustrates this, though it should be noted the
due to re-orientation of the radical itself; the contribution of the
authors set a long relaxation time limit of 50 ms which
anisotropy, A, is field independent, but that of g anisotropy
exaggerates the low field effects. Here one and two proton
increases with the square of the field, producing a further field
systems are used for illustration.
dependence. In some radicals, solvent-induced fluctuations of
The effect of anisotropy, A, is another case of Kramers’
the orbital contribution to the g-value itself produce fast
theorem. A single spin-half particle can reduce r to one quarter
S relaxation: notably the ·OH radical relaxes in < 1 ns in solution
by splitting the zero field levels, but this is not the case for two,
because fluctuations in hydrogen bonding modulate the g-value;
or any even number of spin-one-half nuclei or, e.g., one
no field effects on its reactions are observed.
deuteron3 because of the remaining degenerate ‘Kramers’
doublets’. For two protons and one electron, aalone gives one
quartet and two doublets: Asplits these levels into four doublets,
and the conditions for seeing a LFE remain. 3 Reactions in solution: experimental results
Even for a single proton the outcome at low fields depends on
the orientation of the field and the symmetry of the situation.4In 3.1 Radioluminescence of hydrocarbons
many radicals, A is axial, i.e., two of the principal values are
equal. Fig. 5 provides an example; demonstrating the complex- Ion recombination in pure alkanes is extremely fast; it can be
ity of the results. Even when an average over all orientations is slowed from picoseconds to nanoseconds by addition of
taken, the LFE remains, though much smaller than in the case of aromatics which trap both electrons and positive charge,
fast rotation. When the asymmetry is greater, A ≠ A ≠ A , allowing time for development of field effects. One can assume
xx yy zz
the LFE decreases further but does not disappear entirely. The that the product yields reflect the singlet and triplet contents of
304 Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 5 ---

the RP wavefunction (section 2.3) and another advantage is that in spurs containing two or more ion pairs, an electron may
nearly all the ion pairs undergo geminate recombination return to its initial partner, or to a different cation where there is
because of coulombic attraction; RPs are initially separated by no spin correlation; MFEs have been used to investigate
ranges of distances with mean values of 5–10 nm, much larger this.7,8
than the range of J, but much less than the Onsager escape In principle, the field effect oscillates in time (Fig. 4); but this
distance, ~30 nm at room temperature. is not easy to observe: the positive ‘hole’ usually spends a
An early test of RP theory of MFEs was provided by isotope significant time in the solvent. (This explains the larger effect in
studies6(Fig. 6). Hyperfine couplings to protons are ~6 times squalane in Fig. 6.) Also, the numbers of nuclei and values of a
are usually large: e.g., p-terphenyl cation and anion both have
14 protons with 4 hyperfine couplings. Use of partial deutera-
tion and separate scavengers for hole and electron can produce
a system with just one large coupling. Spectacular oscillations
then become visible. This has been demonstrated by Molin and
his collaborators at Novosibirsk, who have used field effects on
fluorescence and related measurements for a wide range of
studies8b of oscillations due to a and g-value differences
between the solutes (Fig. 8a). The results agree well with EPR
Fig. 6 Field effect on fluorescence intensity of g-irradiated 1022 M
solutions in (a) squalane and (b) cyclohexane; circles, naphthalene;
triangles, naphthalene-d8.6Reproduced from Chem. Phys. Lett., vol. 47, R.
S. Dixon, F. P. Sargent, V. J. Lopata and E. M. Gardy, ‘Fluorescence from
g-irradiated solutions of naphthalene-d8. Effect of an applied magnetic
field.’, pages 108–112, copyright 1975, with permission from Elsevier
Science.
larger than to deuterons. The MFE for deuterated species is
smaller when B is large, because spin evolution is slower; the
recombination rate itself is unaffected by the field. In contrast,
at low field the Zeeman interaction more easily overcomes the
weaker deuterium hyperfine coupling (cf.Fig. 1).
Squalane (2,6,10,15,19,23-hexamethyltetracosane) is a con-
venient solvent for many purposes, when higher viscosities are
needed. It extends ion recombination into the microsecond
region,7 but solute rotation is still fast enough to average out
anisotropy effects. The initial sharp rise shown in Fig. 7 arises
Fig. 8 (a) Decay of radio-luminescence from solutions of deuterated p-
terphenyl (1023M) and diphenyl sulfide (3 31022M) in isooctane; (b) the
curve at 170 G is used as a reference curve for the oscillating component:
curves A and B, 0.12 and 0.012 M respectively. Points are theoretical.8b
Reproduced from Chem. Phys. Lett., vol. 246, V. M. Grigoryants, B. M.
Tadjikov, O. M. Usov and Yu. N. Molin, ‘Phase-shift of quantum
oscillations in the recombination luminescence of spin-correlated radical-
ion pairs’, pages 392–398, copyright 1995, with permission from Elsevier
Science.
measurements of aand g; in some cases parameters have been
obtained which are not otherwise accessible. The rate of hole
Fig. 7Field effect on fluorescence decays of p-terphenyl in squalane excited scavenging can be determined from the phase-shifts observed at
by 90Sr b-particles. Reproduced from J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., vol. low concentrations (Fig. 8b).
93, B. Brocklehurst, ‘Ion recombination luminescence in squalane solu- MolinAs group have made a number of observations of the
tions: spin relaxation effects’, pages 1079–88.
LFE in radioluminescence7 and this has been applied to the
study of distribution of ion separations:9a spectacular demon-
because spin evolution is faster at zero field (section 2.2). The stration is shown in Fig. 9. The range of the LFE reflects the
plateau region, around 100 ns, is followed by field-dependent strength of the fluorine hyperfine coupling (a = 13.7 mT) in
spin relaxation which finally destroys the spin correlation. The C F 2. The bump at 3ais due to a curve-crossing: the maximum
6 6
extent of the limiting effect, 40% enhancement in the plateau at B = 0 can be understood in the same way of course; their
region, is smaller than the 50–100% expected for initial singlets. weakness (curve B) is due to charge exchange between anion
This reflects the complications of radiolysis: in short tracks and and neutral hexafluorobenzene. The shift in the LFE minimum
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311 305
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 6 ---

lend themselves to computer modelling and a start has been
made in this direction. Puzzles remain however: the extent of
the effect has been found to decrease near the ionisation
threshold in aliphatic solvents, and it is always smaller in
aromatics than in alkanes. Published work on aromatics is
limited; a very detailed study of crystalline anthracene has been
made and field effects have been seen in VUV-excited
DNA.7
3.2 Ultraviolet photo-ionisation
Photoionisation in the UV requires donors with a low ionisation
potential and acceptors with a high electron affinity; aromatic
amines and cyano compounds are commonly used with
hydrocarbons. Polar solvents are needed to facilitate ionisation;
Fig. 9 Field-induced changes in fluorescence yield of 0.086 M hexa- provided the solvation energy is not too high, recombination
fluorobenzene in perdeutero-isooctane-d relative to the high field value: into singlet excited states is possible; observation of fluores- 18
excitation by (A) 123.6 nm photons, (B) b-particles: full line is a theoretical cence is especially convenient since recombination usually
prediction.9Reproduced from Chem. Phys. Lett., vol. 264, V. O. Saik and S. leads to an exciplex which emits at longer wavelengths than the
Lipsky, ‘Magnetic field effects on recombination fluorescence: comparison parent neutral molecules. Whereas radiolysis is indiscriminate,
of VUV and fast electron excitation’, 649–654, copyright 1997, with
initial ionisation taking place in the solvent, UV photons are
permission from Elsevier Science.
absorbed specifically by the solutes; so only two ions are
involved, though at higher concentrations charge exchange
is due to wider distribution of ion pair separations for irradiation
effects are found.
with b-particles.
MFEs in such systems were extensively studied in the late
The complexities of radiolysis can be simplified by using
’70s and the ’80s by Weller and his colleagues, their
vacuum UV photons >8–10 eV to produce single ion pairs or
experimental work complemented by Schulten’s theoretical
very small groups of ions: at lower energies (e.g. Fig. 9), the
work.1Good agreement was found, notably field dependences
solute is ionised not the solvent. Synchrotron light sources (such
agree well with eqn. (4). Fig. 11 illustrates an interesting
as Daresbury’s SRS) which are now widely available, provide
photons over a wide range in the VUV and X-ray regions.
Experimentation is difficult and the data in Fig. 10 required use
Fig. 10 Initial singlet fractions calculated from MFEs for p-terphenyl in
squalane: closed circles, data from 3 stations of the SRS and for 90Sr b-
Fig. 11 Field dependence of triplet yields in acetonitrile solutions of
particles (far right); open symbols and lines from theoretical predictions.
dimethylaniline donor–pyrene acceptor pairs linked by a (CH) chain.10
Reproduced from Chem. Phys. Lett., vol. 211, B. Brocklehurst, ‘Radi- 2n
Reproduced from J. Phys., Chem., vol. 97, U. Werner, W. Kühnle, and H.
oluminescence of Alkane Solutions: Comparison of Experiment and
Staerk, ‘Magnetic-field dependent reaction yields from radical-ion pairs
Simulation over a Wide Energy Range’, 31–35, copyright 1993, with
linked by a partially rigid aliphatic chain’, pages 9280–9287, copyright
permission from Elsevier Science.
1993, with permission from the American Chemical Society.
of three stations for different energy ranges. Single ionisations development, the study of the dynamics of linked pairs of
produce the maximum at left; the minimum is due to cross- donors and acceptors;10 lower concentrations can be used,
recombination when many ion pairs are close together: the obviating charge exchange. The link is usually a flexible chain,
particle tracks become more sparse for high energy electrons (–CH –) ; at some values of n a ‘J-resonance’ is observed; it
2 n
(fast b-particles or from g-rays). MFEs have also been used to follows that for most of the life of the ion pair there is a small
study luminescence from tracks of fast protons and helium and nearly constant exchange interaction; the resonance occurs
ions.7 As expected, the extent of the effect decreases with when the Zeeman interaction matches this (Fig. 2). All these
increasing LET (linear energy transfer) but it does not disappear systems were also studied in Japan by groups associated with
entirely, showing that some correlation between ions remains in Nagakura, Hayashi and Tanimoto2 (see below). Surprisingly,
the penumbra of a very dense track. only a few time-resolved measurements have been reported11—
These results illustrate the usefulness of MFEs in radiation a pity in the author’s view because the dynamics of these pairs
chemistry.7They do not provide very detailed information but are less simple than in radiolysis. Solvation provides barriers to
they have the unique feature of detecting the presence of spin recombination so the rate constants for singlet and triplet
correlation between two radicals. Measurements of this type formation may be different.
306 Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 7 ---

3.3 Neutral radicals
MFEs are normally very small for neutral radicals meeting at
random; 25% (the singlets) can react directly; initial triplets
require time for spin evolution and then a re-encounter—much
less probable. Large couplings would help; e.g.study of H + H
recombination (where the ortho/para ratio would change) is
feasible because a = 50 mT for hydrogen atoms, but this has not
been done.7 The effects remain small even when pure triplet
RPs are produced by photolysis unless radical separation is
restricted in some way, paralleling the coulombic attraction of
radical ion pairs. The work of Turro et al. on the emulsion
polymerisation of styrene produced spectacular results: applica-
tion of a field increased the average molecular weight fivefold
by reducing the rate of radical recombination. In connection
with health hazard work, Scaiano et al.12showed that MFEs on
RPs derived from triplet benzophenone could be enhanced by
addition of bovine or human serum albumen which restrict
radical diffusion. Similar but smaller enhancement was ob- Fig. 12Field effects on product yields from photodissociation of derivatives
tained with DNA. of deoxybenzoin, C 6 H 5 CO.CXY.C 6 H 5 , in SDS micelles. Results scaled to
100% of effect at 1.74 kG, which is ~10–20%.13Reproduced from Chem.
Far more work (some hundreds of papers) has been done on
Phys., vol. 153, I. A. Shkrob, M. F. Tarasov and A. L. Buchachenko,
RPs in micelles, typically detergents of the type
‘Electron-spin exchange in micellized radical pairs. 2. Magnetic-field and
H(CH 2 ) n SO 4 2Na+. The spins of RPs produced photochemically magnetic isotope effects in multinuclear pairs’, copyright 1991, with
can remain correlated until the radicals escape into the bulk permission from Elsevier Science.
solution and so significant effects have been seen.1,2 Micelle
radii are typically 2–3 nm, so that electron exchange and, = 10 which probably corresponds to equal rates of recombina-
possibly, dipolar interaction between the radicals complicate the tion and escape. The structural effects, differences between
spin evolution. Large effects require competition, usually ionic and neutral micelles and sulfates and sulfonates are not yet
between recombination and escape. This remains a very active understood. More experiments and modelling are required.
area;2 here we concentrate on the LFE since micelles can be
regarded as simple models of biological systems (cf. sections
3.4 and 6.2). 3.4 Very high fields
Shkrob et al.13 studied reactions of radicals produced in
micelles by photo-dissociation of deoxybenzoin derivatives. Micelles and linked pairs have also been used to study effects of
They found three types of field dependence, (i) due to hyperfine very high fields. Several laboratories now routinely use
interaction and exchange, (ii) due to spin relaxation and (iii) an superconducting magnets.2,15Ten T constant fields are availa-
intermediate case. Type (i) was shown by small radicals and ble and measurements up to 30 T with pulsed fields have been
these produced an LFE: Fig. 12 illustrates the usefulness of reported. In a number of experiments a ‘reversion’ is observed
isotopic substitution; the fully deuterated radicals probably also at high fields where the hyperfine effect has become constant;
show a LFE but the appropriate fields would be much smaller. Fig. 14 shows an example of this; benzophenone reduction in
The field dependence obeys eqn. (3) very well. The crossing SDS behaves similarly.16 Two factors are probably involved,
point (change of sign of the field effect) obeyed a similar the Dg effect (cf. eqn. (2)) which increases the rate of
relation, but interpretation of the LFE is complicated by the interconversion between S and T and spin relaxation due to
0
likely involvement of exchange. Larger radicals produced by anisotropy of the g-values which leads to conversion between
abstraction from the surfactant by triplet benzophenone did not T and T and the other components. In these fields, Dgeffects
+ 2
show a LFE; there was also a striking difference in the field become significant even for organic radicals where Dgis small.
dependence; these were classified as type (ii). When the orbital contribution is large, Dgmay be very large as
In comparable work14 on benzophenone in a range of the next example shows.
micelles small LFEs have been found; results are shown in Fig. Studies of MFEs at normal fields tend to be outshone by time-
13. The reason for the discrepancy is not known, but the later resolved EPR which provides detailed spectroscopic informa-
experiments are time-resolved (cf. Fig. 14), the earlier results tion about the radicals involved. However, this technique is
are total yields. Both groups agree that size and structure of the limited to times greater than 10 ns. When optical detection is
micelles play an important role. Internal viscosity decreases used, MFEs are limited only by the rate of spin evolution. This
with increasing size: both size and viscosity decrease with has been demonstrated recently in study of ion recombination
temperature. The largest effects were found for sulfates with n over a few ps:15the oxazine cation has a normal g-value but the
Fig. 13Temperature dependence of LFEs on (CH)COH radicals in sodium dodecyl sulfate: (a) 296 K, (b) 312 K, (c) 328 K.14Reproduced from Int. J.
6 52
Radiat. Biol., vol. 76, R. W. Eveson, C. R. Timmel, B. Brocklehurst, P. J. Hore and K. A. McLauchlan, ‘The effects of weak magnetic fields on radical
recombination reactions in micelles’, pages 1509–22, copyright 2000, with permission from Taylor and Francis.
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311 307
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 8 ---

mamide/tetrahydrofuran mixtures. When the viscosity was
increased by adding cellulose acetate, the MFE became greater
when the exciting light was polarised parallel to the field than
when it was polarised at right angles. The exciting light selects
different molecular orientations.
5 Biological systems
5.1 Photosynthetic reaction centres
Charge separation is of immense importance in nature. The
photosynthetic reaction process is essentially the foundation of
Fig. 14Decay of (CH)COH radicals at very high fields: benzophenone
solutions in Brij 35. 6 16 5 R 2 eproduced from Chem. Phys. Lett., vol. 267, K. life on earth. Its mechanism has evolved to prevent wasteful
Nishizawa, Y. Sakaguchi, H. Hayashi, H. Abe and G. Kido, ‘A laser flash charge recombination by transferring the electron very quickly.
photolysis study of the effects of ultrahigh magnetic fields up to 29.6 T on If this process is blocked by removing or reducing the quinone
dynamic behaviour of radical pairs in micellar solutions’, pages 501–506, acceptor this does not happen and recombination into the
copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier Science. ground state or the triplet of the chlorophyll dimer takes place.
Zeeman interaction in the ethyl ferrocene anion is highly MFEs are observed and have been studied since the 1970s22
anisotropic, granging from 20.7 to 2.4; the average Dgis ~1 though the larger part of the research uses CIDEP and time-
corresponding to a spin evolution time of 1 ps at 10 T. resolved EPR. An early remarkable demonstration of the role of
Experiment agreed well with theory; spin relaxation is fast too hyperfine coupling came from algae grown in D 2 O which
but does not compete on this time-scale. Extension of this survived long enough to show an isotope effect.
technique to other fast processes will be very useful. Fig. 15a shows measurements on a suspension of quinone-
depleted reaction centres of triplet yields. Initially the low field
4 Viscous liquids and solids
Since the discovery of the electrical properties of polyacetylene
which earned a Nobel prize in 2000 a great deal of research has
been devoted to the applications of conducting polymers,
especially electroluminescence. Typically, electrons and holes
are injected into a thin layer of a conducting polymer such as
polyphenylenevinylene, PPV; the resulting ‘polarons’ react to
produce fluorescence. Initially it was supposed that spin
considerations would limit the efficiency of this process to 25%
but recent measurements of relative singlet and triplet yields
have shown this to be incorrect.17 While the spin restriction
should perhaps be reconsidered (e.g. recombination may be
slow unlike that in alkane solutions), it may be that unreacted
pairs are able to separate: the charge of a polaron is spread over
a number of monomers, reducing the coulombic attraction.
Another experimental approach is to use photoionisation; the
initial pair is spin correlated and small MFEs have been
observed on both the photocurrent18aand fluorescence.18bMore
work using time-resolved field effects on luminescence could
help unravel the mechanisms.
The observation of magnetoplasticity, the effect of field on
the ease of deforming crystals appears extraordinary, but it is
now well established.19a It can be understood in terms of
dislocations; typically these are centres involving an impurity
atom such as Ca in NaCl; during deformation layers of atoms
move past the impurity. A weak bonding interaction (singlet),
impedes this process where a triplet would not; singlet–triplet
conversion leads to field dependence. This mechanism19b has
been confirmed by optically detected magnetic resonance
measurements.19a
A more doubtful area involves the extensively studied effect
of fields on precipitation of calcium carbonate from hard water;
related work claims to show memory effects in liquids
involving fields.20 This is very hard to accept but one can
speculate that these phenomena, if real, involve dislocations;
crystal growth during precipitation and dissolution of particles
in suspension depend on dislocations. RF radiation leads to the Fig. 15(a) Relative yields of triplets in quinone-depleted photosynthetic
formation of aragonite in addition to calcite but there appears to reaction centres; (b) relative yield anisotropy in non-viscous buffer
(triangles) and in viscous glycerol/buffer (circles).22a Reproduced from
be no corresponding work on MFEs.
Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem., vol. 34, S. G. Boxer, C. E. D. Chidsey and M. G.
Surprisingly, little work has been published on viscous
Roelofs,, ‘Magnetic-field effects on reaction yields in the solid-state—an
liquids. Basu et al.21studied exciplex emission from solutions example from photosynthetic reaction centers’, pages 389–417, copyright
of diphenylhexatriene and 1,4-dicyanobenzene in dimethylfor- 1983, with permission from Annual Reviews.
308 Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 9 ---

fall and the high field rise in yield were ascribed to hyperfine notably there is evidence for an LFE (the high points at left
interaction and the difference in g-value between the two ions, almost on the axis are at 10 gauss).
respectively. Later it was found that the electron–electron
dipolar interaction was also involved. Increasing the viscosity
slows rotation of the centres (the relative position of the radical
6 Hazards of environmental fields
ions is fixed) and the quantum yield becomes anisotropic (Fig.
The rise in prosperity in the industrial nations has been
15b). The change in sign is very striking, clearly demonstrating
parallelled by increases in the incidence of a number of
that two different effects are involved.
illnesses.24–28The use of electricity has been put forward as a
possible cause. Effects might be direct, involving chemical
processes, or indirect, via some synergism with hazardous
5.2 Enzyme reactions
materials such as carcinogens. Physicists have pointed to
ionisation of the air below power lines and its ability to
MFEs have been demonstrated for enzyme reactions which
concentrate radon decay products and chemical carcinogens.24
require co-factors related to vitamin B
12
, cyanocobal(III)amin:
Another hypothesis is that ‘light at night’ (LAN) interferes with
the field dependence shows that an RP mechanism is involved.
circadian rhythms and so reduces the production of melatonin in
There is a number of such reactions and a theoretical study of
the pineal gland; this hormone may prevent the development of
the possible LFE has been made.5 Grissom has reviewed his
cancer cells.25 These concerns have led to a great deal of
detailed experimental work on the B systems23a and con-
12 research, which can be roughly classified as epidemiological,
cludes that those important for human health will be insensitive
empirical (laboratory work on animals or biological materials)
to magnetic field; he also surveys the possibility of MFEs on
and chemical.
other enzyme reactions. Fig. 16 shows some of his later work on
6.1 Epidemiological studies
If it occurs at all, EM field-induced damage to human health is
not a common process, so statistical work is particularly
important. Exposure varies widely from place to place and from
time to time, so studies of electrical workers are of special
interest: women are few in this profession, but evidence has
been reported for a higher level of breast cancer among male
workers.25Most work has been devoted to childhood cancers,
especially acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, which has been the
subject of legal actions. Early surveys appeared to show slight
correlations, not statistically significant individually but mostly
in the positive direction. Later studies have not confirmed an
effect. A great effort went into the UK Childhood Cancer Study
of all cancer types in Britain over seven years; 350 people
including Sir Richard Doll (who first associated lung cancer
with smoking) contributed to the report;26it found no evidence
of association for average fields < 0.4 mT, in agreement with
similar work in other countries. Numbers of cases exposed to
higher fields were too few for definite conclusions to be
drawn.
6.2 Biological systems—low fields
A great variety of work on biological materials27has produced
many claims, but no clearcut pattern has emerged and attempts
to reproduce results in other laboratories are often unsuccessful.
Work with typical environmental fields on biological systems is
very difficult and researchers tend not to report negative results.
Regarding LAN, there are reports that induction of tumours in
laboratory animals by chemical carcinogens is speeded up both
by exposure to light and to EM fields;25 again these are
Fig. 16 Field dependence of fitted rate constants of the two stages of
controversial.
reduction of horseradish peroxidase after oxidation.23bReproduced from J.
Am. Chem. Soc., vol. 119, M. B. Taraban, T. V. Leshina, M. A. Anderson
and C. B. Grissom, ‘Magnetic Field Dependence of Electron Transfer and
the Role of Electron Spin in Heme Enzymes: Horseradish Peroxidase’, 6.3 Chemical studies
pages 5768–5769, copyright 1997, with permission from the American
Chemical Society. An alternative approach is to start from known or proposed
effects on chemical reactions. Among many suggestions only
horseradish peroxidase,23bone of a family of haem-containing the RP mechanism is well-established but it is not yet clear
enzymes; again, these are in vitroexperiments. The central iron whether it is relevant to human biology.28 There is also the
atom is first oxidized with hydrogen peroxide and then reduced question of the direction of the effect: a visit to a pharmacy will
back in two stages by an enolate which forms a radical; fitting suggest that radicals are harmful and this assumption is adopted
to a kinetic model shows that both steps have similar field here though it is not always true.29Where radicals are useful the
dependences, though details of the radical pair step are not yet following arguments should be reversed.
known; both hyperfine interactions and Dgeffects are involved Two cases arise: (a) two radicals generated by radiation or
as expected from the EPR data of the haem and the oxy-radical; light or as byproducts encounter at random, reacting if they are
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311 309
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 10 ---

singlets, the remaining 75% triplets unable to react at once; (b) remarkably they always synthesize crystals below the single
in some specific process involving temporary formation of RPs domain limit. However, this is not the whole story: some
from a singlet precursor, decay into a triplet state enhances the organisms need light for navigation using magnetic fields;33in
escape of radicals. Case (a) must involve the normal or high newts, the detectors are in the pineal gland, in birds, in the
field effect which hinders triplet to singlet conversion; for (b) eye.
singlet to triplet must be enhanced (increasing the escape of A plausible mechanism for the avian compass must provide
radicals)—the LFE. Case (a), sometimes at least, will occur in large changes with orientation and account for its properties: (i)
unconfined surroundings where encounters will be short-lived birds cannot detect the polarity of the field but distinguish north/
and the MFE very small at low fields, especially compared to south using the inclination. Their sensitivity is extraordinary:
the 25% of singlet encounters. Case (b) looks more likely: the Fig. 17 shows recent observations on captive birds taken to sites
effects are larger, pairs are more likely to be constrained but
small fields need very long times; that implies constrained
systems where anisotropy effects may reduce the magnitude of
the LFEs.
However, chemists should remember that biological systems
are full of surprises. Reaction mechanisms are far from simple
and it is possible that very small effects can be amplified. Only
static fields have been considered so far: while oscillating fields
(up to 1 MHz) are not likely to affect the chemical process, it has
been proposed that the complexity of enzyme kinetics could
lead to considerable amplification.30 At higher frequencies
(microwaves), absorption of radiation among the spin states can
interconvert singlet and triplet levels; this phenomenon is
familiar in strong fields (optically detected magnetic resonance)
but observations at zero or low field have only been made very
recently.31
Laboratory work has only demonstrated effects of fields
down to ~0.1 mT. Provided the radical lifetimes are long Fig. 17Take-off orientations of white-crowned sparrows in Arctic Canada:
enough similar effects at lower fields are possible and numerical gN and mN mark directions of geographic and magnetic north; (a–c) under
calculations have been used to investigate them in more detail.4 natural clear skies, (d–f) under simulated overcast sky; magnetic inclina-
It must be remembered that fields of ~10 mT correspond to spin tions —(a,b) 87.1°, (b,e) 88.6°, (c,f) 89.7°. Arrows mark mean orienta-
tions.36 Reproduced from Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, vol. 268, S.
evolution times of several ms. Only in a few cases are spin
Åkesson, J. Morin, R. Muheim and U. Ottosson ‘Avian orientation at steep
relaxation times equal to or much longer than this and those of
angles of inclination: experiments with migratory white-crowned sparrows
reactive oxygen species, common causes of biological damage, at the magnetic North Pole’, pages 1907–1913, copyright 2001, with
are generally much less. Finally, true zero field is irrelevant in permission from The Royal Society.
nature because of the geomagnetic field and local fields in an
in the Arctic;36 navigation at the magnetic north pole is
organism. For this reason, bumps or resonances are of special
impossible of course but birds moved to sites very close to it,
interest.
where the inclination is 1.4° from the vertical, can still locate
their migration direction. (ii) Their response is quite sharply
6.4 Conclusions tuned to the strength of the field though they are able to adapt to
artificial changes. (iii) The involvement with light is demon-
One certain conclusion is that effects of exposure to fields are strated by wavelength effects; birds utilise the earthAs field if
not proportional to field strength; those of us who have exposed to white, blue or green light but not to red; salamanders
experienced MRI scans can be thankful for that, because they use red too. Natural magnets such as magnetite do not readily
may require some 20 minutes exposure to fields of a few T explain features (i) and (iii); the latter in particular led Schulten
which are quite strongly modulated. Fields due to electrical to postulate a RP mechanism.37 In this case, hyperfine
equipment which affect the population at large are very small, anisotropy must be involved, and the RP would probably consist
usually smaller than the geomagnetic field, but oscillating at 50 of fixed radical ions formed by charge transfer. Since light
Hz; data can be found in the reviews.27,32 Field strengths are detection in the eye is highly developed one might postulate
rarely proportional to power because of cancellations due to the ionisation of rhodopsin itself, but rods can rotate about their
wiring type; often they are larger for electrical gadgets than for long axis; recent work on cryptochromes suggests they are more
mains cables. Clearly much more work is needed. One might likely candidates.37Field effects on electrical signals from the
well conclude that small fields cannot possibly be dangerous but optic nerve have been detected38but the full range of physical
one must not forget that birds navigate using the geomagnetic techniques has not yet been applied to this.
field (0.05 mT) and many other organisms use it to aid
orientation.33–35
8 Future developments
7 Animal orientation and navigation In 1976, Peter Atkins wrote in Chemistry in Britain,39 ‘The
study of the effects of magnetic fields on chemical reactions has
The commonest magnetic material found on the earthAs surface long been a romping ground for charlatans’. Outside chemistry
is magnetite. The magnetic interactions between iron atoms are this is still true though some claims (dowsing?) may yet be
such that small crystals, between 0.05 and 1 mm in length, correct and there can be no doubt about bird navigation. In the
consist of single domains34 if needle-shaped; all the spins are early ’70s, work on MFEs on radical pairs had just begun. Now
oriented the same way and they produce strong fields for their the study of RPs is well-developed though the applications are
size; multiple domains are more stable in larger crystals and not fully exploited, partly because of CIDEP and CIDNP; these
fields largely cancel out. Many organisms, including fish35and are powerful techniques for spectroscopy but MFEs have many
some bacteria (including those claimed to come from Mars), use uses as I have hoped to show. Much more can be done: more
magnetite crystals to orient themselves in the geomagnetic field; practical use could be made of magnetic isotopes40 and field
310 Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online

--- Page 11 ---

variations; biologists might do well to use stronger fields, a few 14 R. W. Eveson, C. R. Timmel, B. Brocklehurst, P. J. Hore and K. A.
mT rather than mT initially. Chemists need to put more effort McLauchlan, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 2000, 76, 1509.
15 P. Gilch, F. Pollinger-Dammer, C. Musewald, M. E. Michel-Beyerle
into studying resonances. Finally the great advantage of MFEs
and U. E. Steiner, Science, 1998, 281, 982.
is simplicity: strong or well-defined fields are not needed; any
16 K. Nishizawa, Y. Sakaguchi, H. Hayashi, H. Abe and G. Kido, Chem.
magnet will do! Phys. Lett., 1997, 267, 501.
17 M. Wohlgennant, K. Tandon, S. Mazumdar, S. Ramasesha and Z. V.
Vardeny, Nature, 2001, 409, 494.
18 (a) K. Lüders and S. Blumstengel, Z. phys. Chem., 1993, 182, 189; (b)
9 Acknowledgments
K. Lüders, S. Blumstengel, E. L. Frankevich, A. A. Chaban and M. M.
Triebel, Z. phys. Chem., 1993, 182, 201.
The authorAs experiments on MFEs have involved the help of 19 (a) Yu. I. Golovin, R. B. Morgunov and A. A. Dimitrievski, Mater. Sci.
many people in many places, at AECL, Pinawa, Manitoba, at Eng., A, 2000, 288, 261; (b) M. Molotski and V. Fleurov, J. Phys. Chem.
B, 2000, 104, 3812.
AERE, Harwell, the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory and the
20 M. Colic and D. Morse, Colloids Surf., A, 1999, 154, 167.
Daresbury Laboratory: it would be impossible to thank them all.
21 T. Sengupta, S. Aich and S. Basu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103,
I am particularly grateful to the following, Professors N. M. 3784.
Atherton and P. W. Atkins who explained the behaviour of spins 22 (a) S. G. Boxer, C. E. D. Chidsey and M. G. Roelofs, Ann. Rev. Phys.
in the ’60s and ’70s, and in recent years Professor K. A. Chem., 1983, 34, 389; (b) recent sources are M. Volk, A. Ogrodnik and
McLauchlan who invited me to Oxford to collaborate with him M. E. Michel-Beyerle, in Anoxygenic Photosynthetic Bacteria, eds. R.
E. Blankenship, M. T. Madigan and C. E. Bauer, Kluwer, Dordrecht, p. and Dr. P. J. Hore and their groups. Financial support came from
595, 1995; B. van Dijk, J. K. H. Carpenter, A. J. Hoff and P. J. Hore, J.
the above institutions, the EPSRC, the Leverhulme foundation
Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 464.
and the Electromagnetic Fields Biological Research Trust. 23 (a) C. B. Grissom, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 3; (b) M. B. Taraban, T. V.
Leshina, M. A. Anderson and C. B. Grissom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997,
119, 5768.
24 A. P. Fews, D. Henshaw, D. L. Henshaw, P. A. Keitch, J. T. Close and
10 References
R. J. Wilding, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1999, 75, 1505.
25 R. G. Stevens, S. Davis, D. B. Thomas, L. E. Anderson and B. W.
1 U. E. Steiner and T. Ulrich, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 51. Wilson, FASEB J., 1992, 6, 853; P. A. Valberg, R. Kavet and C. N.
2 Dynamic Spin Chemistry: Magnetic Controls and Spin Dynamics of Rafferty, Radiation Res., 1997, 148, 2; L. S. Caplan, E. R. Schoenfeld,
Chemical Reactions, eds. S. Nagakura, H. Hayashi and T. Azumi, E. S. O’Leary and M. C. Leske, Ann. Epidemiol., 2000, 10, 31.
Kodansha, Tokyo, Wiley, New York, 1998. 26 N. Day et al., Lancet, 1999, 354, 1925.
3 B. Brocklehurst, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1976, 72, 1869; B. 27 A. Lacy-Hulbert, J. C. Metcalfe and R. Hesketh, FASEB J., 1998, 12,
Brocklehurst, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1979, 75, 123. 395.
4 (a) C. R. Timmel, U. Till, B. Brocklehurst, K. A. McLauchlan and P. J. 28 B. Brocklehurst and K. A. McLauchlan, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1996, 69,
Hore, Mol. Phys., 1998, 95, 71; (b) C. R. Timmel, F. Cintolesi, B. 3.
Brocklehurst and P. J. Hore, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 334, 387. 29 R. J. P. Williams, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1985, 311, 594.
5 J. M. Canfield, R. L. Belford and P. G. Debrunner, Mol. Phys., 1996, 89, 30 C. Eichwald and J. Walleczek, Biophys. Chem., 1998, 74, 209.
889. 31 J. R. Woodward, C. R. Timmel, K. A. McLauchlan and P. J. Hore, Phys.
6 R. S. Dixon, F. P. Sargent, V. J. Lopata and E. M. Gardy, Chem. Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 077602.
Lett., 1975, 47, 108. 32 J. Swanson, D. Renew and N. Wilkinson, ‘Power lines and health’,
7 B. Brocklehurst, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 213. Physics World, 1996, November, 29.
8 (a) S. V. Anishchik, O. M. Usov, O. A. Anisimov and Yu. N. Molin, 33 W. Wiltschko and R. Wiltschko, J. Exp. Biol., 1996, 199, 29; M. E.
Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 31; (b) V. M. Grigoryants, B. M. Deutschlander, J. B. Phillips and S. C. Borland, J. Exp. Biol., 1999, 202,
Tadjikov, O. M. Usov and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 246, 891.
392. 34 D. T. Edmonds, Electricity and Magnetism in Biological Systems, OUP,
9 V. O. Saik and S. Lipsky, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 264, 649. Oxford, 2001.
10 U. Werner, W. Kühnle and H. Staerk, J. Phys., Chem., 1993, 97, 35 M. M. Walker, C. E. Diebel and C. R. Green, J. App. Phys., 2000, 87,
9280. 4653.
11 S. N. Batchelor, C. W. M. Kay, K. A. McLauchlan and I. A. Shkrob, J. 36 S. Åkesson, J. Morin, R. Muheim and U. Ottosson, Proc. R. Soc.
Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 13250. London, Ser. B, 2001, 268, 1907.
12 N. Mohtat, F. L. Cozens, T. Hancock-Chen, J. C. Scaiano, J. McLean 37 T. Ritz, S. Adem and K. Schulten, Biophys. J., 2000, 78, 707.
and J. Kim, Photochem. Photobiol., 1998, 67, 111. 38 P. Semm and R. C. Beason, Experientia, 1990, 46, 372.
13 I. A. Shkrob, M. F. Tarasov and A. L. Buchachenko, Chem. Phys., 1991, 39 P. W. Atkins, Chem. Br., 1976, 12, 214.
153, 443. 40 B. Brocklehurst, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 72, 587.
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 301–311 311
.MA
23:03:1
5202/92/01
no
yrarbiL
TIM
yb
dedaolnwoD
.2002
yluJ
81
no
dehsilbuP
View Article Online