

--- Page 1 ---

Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England (1g8o) vol 62
Free-radical reaction in biological systems
T L Dormandy MB PhD FRCSEd FRCPath
Chemical Pathologist, Whittington Hospital, London
Key words: FREE RADICALS; SUPEROXIDE; INFLAMMATION; PEROXIDATION;
PROSTAGLANDINS
Summary ments for maintaining the constancy of life.
Free radicals are a highly reactive chemical This applies both to structure and to function.
species which differ from all other species in Although enzymes can act in free solution,
possessing an unpaired electron. Although free they are at their best when forming part of
radical activity in living systems is energetic organised structures. Conversely, the main
tenance of living structures depends on the
ally improbablf, recent work suggests that a
ceaseless activity of enzymes. Functionally
number of important biological processes de
enzymic pathways maintain a balance between
pend on it. In contrast to enzymic metabolism
energy-consuming and energy-producing path
these free-radical processes tend to be non
ways. Energy generated enzymically can be
cyclic, irreversible, non-homoeostatic, and
stored as chemical fuel : energy consumed
energetically wasteful. For the organism as a
enzymically can be used to accomplish bio
whole they may nevertheless have considerable
logical work. It is a perfect homoeostatic sys
survival value. Free radicals are too short-lived
tem, most tellingly represented by interlocking
to be demonstrable in tissues; but methodo
cycles. The cycles have no beginning and no
logical advances are leading to the detection
end just as enzymic charts have no top and no
and measurement of characteristic free-radical
bottom. But if life as portrayed by enzymic
reaction products. The findings suggest that
biochemistry goes on smoothly and indefinitely
free-radical activity is not only a potential
life in reality does not.
cause but also a common, perhaps invariable,
All living individuals decay and die; and
consequence of cell damage. It is possible that
even their relative longevity depends on the
some of the secondary products of free-radical
continuous decay and death of the units of
reactions may help to regulate the body's local
which they are composed. There are, more
and systemic response to injury.
over, countless biological processes which are
essential for the survival of complex organ
Introduction
isms but which are yet non-homoeostatic, non
For a hundred years biochemistry and chemi
cyclic, irreversible, and wasteful in terms of
cal pathology have been firmly rooted in
energy. These processes could be - indeed
enzymology. Perhaps too firmly. Sir Frederick
they undoubtedly are-influenced by enzymes;
Gowland Hopkins epitomised the catalytic
but, like death itself, they do not fit into the
~ature of. enzy~es by stating that 'an enzyme general pattern of enzymic biochemistry. To
IS where It acts. To prove their presence, in
understand them we need to recognise a dif
other words, we need only demonstrate their
ferent kind of biochemical reaction, and more
accelerating action on a specific biochemical
and more evidence suggests that these depend
change. The aphorism is true; but like most
on the generation and activity of free radicals.
aphorisms it is open to distortion. It is not true
that in biological systems where there is action The concept of free radicals
there must be an enzyme; yet it is this dis Before considering free radicals in a biological
torted doctrine that has become tacitly ac context it may be useful to recall some facts
cepted. of physical chemistry. All conventional chem
By and large enzymes are Nature's instru- ical species have one characteristic in com-
From an Arris and Gale Lecture delivered on 8th February I979

--- Page 2 ---

Free-radical reaction in biological systems 1 8g
mon : they have a paired electron comple In the previous paragraph 'theoretically'
ment. Electrons can be conceived as negative and 'if' are italicised because for many years
charges circling around a positive nucleus. The it was axiomatic that, apart from the gas state
reason why they need to be paired is that, in and a few freak instances, homolytic fission
addition to orbiting around the centre, they could never happen. The twin foundations of
also spin around their own axis; and to main modern chemistry, the concepts of valency
tain stability every electron that spins to the and of molecular weight, seemed to forbid it.
right must be balanced by an electron that Not until the 1930s was this article of faith
spins to the left. An ordinary chemical bond, disproved. Workers in the oil industry then
therefore, represents two electrons, each side showed that, even though free radicals might
contributing one; and when the bond splits it have an independent lifespan of only a few
splits in such a way that one fragment retains microseconds, free-radical activity accounted
both electrons and the other retains neither. for some of the most important and most
Water, for example, can be represented by spectacular chemical transformations known.
the simplified electronic structure : The rancidification of fats and oils in particu
lar was shown to be a free-radical chain re
action in which each step is activated by the
•• uptake of an oxygen molecule. This was a
liberating discovery. Within a few years plas
where the dots are the electrons derived from
tics and polymers of every shape and kind, all
the oxygen atom and the crosses are the elec
based on free-radical technology, were trans
trons derived from the two hydrogen atoms.
forming everyday life. Only on biological
When the molecule ionises one fragment keeps
thinking did the new species make little im
two bonding electrons and thereby acquires a
pact. There were probably two reasons for
formal negative charge (OH-); the other frag
this.
ment keeps none and thereby acquires a for
I
mal positive charge (H+) : Because all chemical systems tend toward
stability and because stability demands the
+ -
pairing of electrons a large single dose of
H: ?.~ H~ [H }[??.~ ~ energy is generally required to generate a re
active free radical. The purpose of inter
mediate metabolism on the other hand-in so
far as biological transactions can be said to
But it is theoretically possible for a bond to have a purpose-and the idee fixe of classical
split in such a way that the two fragments biochemistry is the parcelling up of large
retain one bonding electron each-that is, by lumps of energy into minute doses. It could be
'homolytic' fission. If that happened and if argued, in other words, that free-radica,L gen
one of the resulting fragments maintained a eration along normal metabolic pathways is
separate existence for long enough to react intrinsically improbable. Not that such rational
independently with another molecule or ion, (if misguided) arguments were ever advanced.
then the fragments would qualify as 'free Free-radical activity was not seriously con
radicals' and the reaction would be 'free sidered in a biological context because of the
radical reaction'. In the case of water this forbidding image of free-radical processes in
type of fission would generate a hydrogen non-biological systems. These processes, it
atom (as distinct from a hydrogen ion) and a seemed, could be delayed or prevented, but
hydroxy free radical : once they had been triggered off they were
unstoppable, uncontrollable, and irreversible.
Many were highly destructive. Some were
literally explosive. To biochemists, conditioned
for half a century to the subtle interplay and
self-regulating equilibria of enzymic cycles,
(The conventional notation for a free radical the pattern seemed profoundly irrelevant to
is a single dot. The hydroxy radical is there life, positively unbiological. Exceptions were
fore OH".) of course recognised - the biological conse-

--- Page 3 ---

I qo T [, Dormandy
quences of high-energy irradiation was one fibroplasia to pulmonary fibrosis, as well as
but not until the past decade did free-radical for the modulating influence of oxygen ten
activity emerge as a biological phenomenon sion on the effects of high-energy irradiation.
perhaps as important and as ubiquitous as But, less obviously, there can be little doubt
enzymic catalysis. that these free radicals also play a role in
phagocytosis, in prostaglandin generation, and
The chemical pathology of free radicals perhaps in immune-complex formation (I).
Such a new subject cannot, of course, be re 2) Transitional-metal ions-ions which can
viewed in a historical perspective; and indeed lose or gain a single electron as they change
advances are now so fast and in so many di from one valency state to another-have long
rections that any kind of perspective is bound been recognised as powerful initiators of free
to prove illusory. (Carcinogenesis and throm radical oxidations in industrial chemistry and
bosis are among the fields which are being they are no less powerful in biological mix
invaded by free-radical concepts and which tures. The rate of free-radical oxidation in
can barely be mentioned in the present review. many tissue homogenates is largely determined
No doubt there are others.) Nevertheless, it by their free iron content ( 2), and tissue
may be helpful to group current develop damage due to iron overload in vivo probably
ments around three complex questions. First, depends on free-radical reactions catalysed by
what are the physical and chemical factors the metal ( 3,4).
which promote free-radical generation in liv 3) Organic solvents such as carbon tetra
ing organisms? Second, how do living organ chloride are acute liver poisons, and Slater
isms protect themselves against free-radical laid the foundations of free-radical bio
damage? And third, what are the biological chemistry in Britain by demonstrating the
consequences of free-radical activity? free-radical nature of the damage ( 5). The
wide implications of his findings - for ex
FACTORS WHICH PROMOTE FREE-RADICAL ample, in relation to alcohol and drug toxicity
ACTIVITY in man-still need to be fully explored.
Free-radical activity may still appear un 4) The degree of unsaturation of the ma
controllable in comparison with metabolic terial is an important variable, susceptibility
regulation; but we now recognise a diversity to free-radical attack in homologous series in
of physical and chemical variables which pro creasing with the number of double bonds in
mote or inhibit it. the molecule. This means that in cells the
1) Molecular oxygen is a critical ingredient most 'essential' polyunsaturated lipids are also
of most biological free-radical processes, so the most vulnerable. It may also account for
critical that we tend to use the terms 'free the central role of arachidonic acid in so much
radical' and 'oxygen free radical' almost inter current physiological, pharmacological, and
changeably. (Similarly we tend to equate pathological research.
'antioxidants' with 'free-radical scavengers'.) 5) High-energy irradiation, both with X
There are several reasons for this, all of them rays and with ultraviolet light, undoubtedly
related to the unique properties of the oxygen generates free radicals; its therapeutic and de
molecule. Because in some respects the mole structive effects largely depend on this.
cule behaves not like a molecule but like two 6) Structural disintegration is still the least
unstable free radicals strung together it will recognised and may yet prove to be the most
avidly latch on to other unstable molecular important cause of biological free-radical ac
sites. This may bring about complete homo tivity. None of the factors mentioned so far
lytic bond disruption. Under certain con dents the argument that free-radical generation
ditions, moreover, the molecule itself can in biological systems is intrinsically improbable
undergo step-wise (single-electron) reduction, on energetic grounds. What does dent it is the
generating in the process a number of intensely fact that it is based almost entirely on know
reactive free-radical intermediates. It must be ledge gained from studying only two types of
assumed that it is these free-radical inter biological material-intact structures (tissues,
mediates which are responsible for clinical cells, microsomes) or structureless solutions
'oxygen damage' of all kinds, from retrolental and homogenates. It ignores the crucial event

--- Page 4 ---

Free-radical reaction in biological systems I 9 I
that separates these two stable states, struc THE CONSEQUENCES OF FREE-RADICAL
tural breakdown itself. It is true that we know ACTIVITY
extraordinarily little about the chemical re For some years free-radical pathology faith
actions peculiar to this transition; but we can fully reflected its origins in industrial chemistry.
nevertheless make a few generalisations. The What concerned food chemists was loss of
build-up of organised biological structures is food by rancidification. What concerned
highly energy-consuming and much of the biochemists was loss of cell lipids by peroxida
energy consumed probably remains latent in tion. It had of course been known for many
structural organisation itself. This means that years that lipids disrupted by free radicals
structural breakdown is, potentially at least, undergo tortuous secondary fragmentation;
an immensely exergonic happening. Of course but the possibility that free radicals
some of the energy released may be dissipated. might not only destroy but also generate
But the picture of stricken cells simply dis biologically active metabolites was barely en
integrating is almost certainly false. Their visaged until the 1 96os. A group of Austrian
demise probably more closely resembles a sub workers then showed that many free-radical
microscopic explosion. The force of such an products were cytotoxic, especially to certain
explosion could disrupt stable electron pairs, strains of neoplastic cells, and that some of
and perhaps it almost invariably does. the active fragments could be separated and
partially characterised chromatographically
PROTECTION AGAINST FREE RADICALS ( 12). Since then watery extracts and water
Turning from promotion to protection, food soluble free-radical products of increasing
chemists have shown that, however hard we purity have been prepared from autoxidising
try to preserve unsaturated lipids exposed to lipids and they have proved to be extra
air, light, moisture, and trace-metal catalysts, ordinarily potent in an astonishing range of
they will sooner or later rancidify. This en in-vitro systems. The mixture includes anti
capsulates a biological as well as an industrial bacterial agents ( 13), compounds which affect
problem ( 6). Living cells are shot through platelet aggregation, intermediates which in
with unsaturated lipids. (We would instantly fluence the intrinsic and extrinsic clotting
set solid if they became saturated-as we do mechanism (14), and many, perhaps most,
in rigor mortis.) They contain numerous tran of the prolific kinship of the prostaglandins.
sitional-metal complexes. They are drenched
in oxygen. We incubate ourselves at 37°C and METHODOLOGY
we are in continuous if not always purposeful At this point we must pause to make the
motion. Why then do we not go rancid? The somewhat trite reservation that in-vitro po
answer is far from clear. Circulating anti tency is no proof of an in-vivo role. Free
oxidants such as vitamin E are essential safe radicals have a lifespan of the order of micro~
guards in many animal species; but, except seconds and except in special cases, using
perhaps in the perinatal period, they do not special instrumentation, their presence in tis
seem to be indispensable in man (7,8). A sues cannot be detected. Evidence, therefore,
whole family of enzymes - catalase, various of biological free-radical activity has always
peroxidases, the superoxide dismutases-can rested on more remote effects; and for 20
forestall or extinguish oxygen free radicals, years it has rested on a single chemical re
but they are probably only second-line, emer action.
gency mechanisms (6,9). The copper-protein In I 944 Kohn anq Liversedge described a
new 'aerobic metabolite' which appeared in
caeruloplasmin is a powerful antioxidant, but
brain homogenate exposed to air and which,
it is an extracellular protein ( 10,11). Probably
on heating in acid, formed a coloured com
the most important single factor which prOo
plex with thiobarbituric acid (TBA) ( 16). It
tects organised structures from free-radical in
was subsequently shown that the metabolite,
jury is structural organisation itself; so long
malonyldialdehyde (MDA), is a distant off~
as this is preserved the ingredients of free shoot, or rather a mixture of distant offshoots,
radical oxidation remain insulated from each of the free-radical peroxidation of poly
other (9). unsaturated lipids ( 17,18). Methods based on

--- Page 5 ---

192 T L Dormandy
the reaction were rapidly and widely adopted radical fragmentation. These - tor example,
in the food industry and, further refined, they ethane and pentane-are eliminated by living
helped to establish the ground-rules of free organisms in expired air; and, although they
radical biology. They could even be applied are present only in picomolar concentration
to clinical diagnosis. Human red blood cells and should perhaps be expressed in 'micro
generate MDA when exposed in vitro to oxi soupC<ons', they can be identified and mea
dant stress ( 19) and their susceptibility to free sured by gas-liquid chromatography ( 26-28).
radical oxidation correlates with their suscep At a different experimental level subtle struc
tibility to haemolysis ( 20,2 I). (Currently the tural changes which may follow free-radical
MDA assay enjoys an Indian summer as a attack on cells and subcellular organelles can
quick measure of prostaglandin synthesis, be monitored by chemilluminescence, polar
though the implications of MDA generation isation, and deformability ( 29-33).
are often ignored.) But although the MDA/
TBA reaction provided ample proof that SUPEROXIDE AND INFLAMMATION
human tissues are vulnerable to free-radical Paradoxically perhaps further and persuasive
attack and even suggested that vulnerability proof of in-vivo free-radical activity has come
may be related to disease, it never provided from a new family of enzymes, the super
proof that such an attack ever occurs in vivo. oxide dismutases ( 34). Unlike other protective
Red blood cells, for example, can be induced enzymes (for example, catalase, glutathione
to autoxidise under stress, but even in severe peroxidase), the dismutases are true free
haemolytic states fresh cells contain no sig radical scavengers-that is, their specific sub
nificant amounts of MDA. The probable ex strate is not a stable or relatively stable mole
planation crystallised only during the past cule but the superoxide-ion free radical (O-").
few years as a result of the work of Tappe! This probably accounts for the lateness of
and his group. They showed that MDA and their discovery. One cannot prepare a solution
related compounds readily interact with pro of free radicals as one can prepare a solution
teins and other molecules which possess re of starch or lactic acid; the free-radical sub
active amino groups. The Schiff-base-type strate has to be continuously generated as a
complexes formed in this way no longer give transient intermediate in the course of another
a positive TBA reaction, but they have dis enzymic reaction. By capturing the inter
tinctive fluorescent spectra (22,23). The latter mediate the dismutase aborts the first reaction,
finding suggested a new methodological ap and it is this inhibition which is measured.
proach.
The superoxide dismutases are widely dis
Potentially, fluorescence spectroscopy is a tributed and it has been suggested that the
highly sensitive tool whose value in biological presence of powerful free-radical scavengers
research depends on the relative specificity and in most cells hints at widespread in-vivo free
definition of the fluorescent properties of the radical activity. Whether or not this is a re
compounds studied. On the face of it free spectable argument, the enzymes have pro
radical products, a large, unstable, and in vided a much-needed tool for identifying free
cestuous tribe, hardly qualify. Yet for once radical steps in complex biological processes.
the difficulties are proving less debilitating than Inflammation is an immediate challenge. It is
anticipated, and characteristic complexes both a basic biological response whose local and
of lipid and of non-lipid origin are now being systemic components have been described in
identified and measured in fresh tissues and minute detail but whose underlying trigger and
tissue fluids (24). regulating mechanisms have remained elusive.
But fluorescence spectroscopy has not been We can, of course, indulge in name-dropping,
the only recent methodological advance. Ultra talk of 'amines', 'kinines', 'prostaglandins', and
violet spectroscopy can be used to measure this, that, and the other 'factor'; but names
'diene conjugation', a characteristic double provide no answers to a long series of rhetorical
bond pattern of damaged fatty-acid chains questions. What triggers off the capillary di
( 24,25). An entirely different 'non-invasive' latation? What regulates the astonishingly
technique depends on the formation of highly precise and concerted migration of phago
volatile hydrocarbons as a result of free- cytes, the stepping-up of leukopoiesis in dis-

--- Page 6 ---

Free-radical rraction 1n biological systems
l~-)1
tant sites, the rise m body temperature, the References
immune response? The specific inhibition of
I Ciba Foundation . symposium. (new ser., No 65).
some of these events by superoxide dismutase Oxygen free rad1cals and t1ssue damage. Am
points to the generation of oxygen free radicals sterdam: Excerpta Medica, I 979·
as a key event. It also suggests that some of the 2 ~ills _ED. ~echanism of lipid peroxide formation
products of free-radical activity play a role as m am mal t1ssues. Biochem J I 966;99: 667-76.
essential messengers and mediators ( 35-41). 3 Seymour CA, Peters TJ. Organelle pathology in
pnmary and secondary haemochromatosis with
special reference to lysosomal changes. Br J
Changing concepts Haematol I978;4o: 239-53.
Experimental advances are turning long-held 4 Torielli MV, Gabriel L, Dianzani MU. Ethanol
induced hepatotoxicity; experimental observations
concepts upside down. Fifteen years ago bio
on the role of lipid peroxidation. J Pathol I979;
logical free-radical reactions were envisaged
I26:II-25.
in so far as they were envisaged at all-as a 5 Slater TF. Free radical mechanisms in tissue in
rare potential cause of cell death. It now ap jury. London: Pion, I972.
pears that free-radical activity may be the 6 Dormandy TL. Biological rancidification. Lancet
I96g;2: 684-8.
sequel of most forms of structural damage.
7 Dormandy TL. Vitamin E and antioxidant ac
For centuries rancid fat was regarded as a tivity. Proc R Soc Med I977;7:9I-3.
source of lethal toxins. It now appears that 8 Tappe! AL. Protection against free radical lipid
some products of rancidification may play a p~roxidation reactions. In: Roberts J, Adelman
RC, Cristofalo VJ, eds. Advances in experimental
role in protecting the organism as a whole
biology and medicine. New York: Plenum Press,
against the effect of local tissue destruction.
1978:111-3!.
But many conceptual difficulties remain, and 9 Dormandy TL. Free radical antioxidants. Lancet
one in particular could become a stumbling I978;r: 247-50.
block. IO Al-Timimi DJ, Dormandy TL. Inhibition of lipid
autoxidation by human caeruloplasmin. Biochem
It is possible to draw too sharp a distinction
j I977; I 68: 283-8.
between enzymic and free-radical processes : 11 Cranfield LM, Al-Timimi DJ, Gollan JL, White
in living systems the two are inextricably AG, Dormandy TL. Serum antioxidant activitv
linked. (On the one hand enzymes can both in normal and abnormal subjects. Ann Clin Bio'
chem (in press).
beget and extinguish free radicals; on the
12 Schauenstein E. Autoxidation of polyunsaturated
other free radicals can both stimulate and de esters in water. .J Lipid Res 1967;8: 417-28.
stroy enzymes.) The distinction is nevertheless 13 Gutteridge JMC, Lamport P, Dormandy TL.
valid. Enzymes have become familiar because The antibacterial effect of water-soluble com
enzymic activity means a succession of replicate pounds from autoxidising linoleic acid. J Med
Microbial 1976;9: ro_')-I o.
moves which extend over a long period of
14 Barrowcliffe TW, Gutteridge JMC, Dormandy
time. Free-radical reactions cannot be paraded TL. The effect of fatty-acid autoxidation pro
in this way. A single free radical may be the ducts on blood coagulation. Thromb Diath
trigger which sets in motion an extended Haemorrh 1<}75;33: 271-6.
I5 Gutteridge JMC. The consequences of lipid au
sequence of events, but the initiating species
toxidation in biological material. PhD thesis,
may exist only for a split second. Some free
University of London, I974·
radical products may be characteristic, but 16 Kohn HI, Liversedge M. A new aerobic meta
others are not. When reaction products can be bolite whose production by brain is inhibited by
apomorphone, atropine, ergotamine and mena
generated either by a free-radical or by an
dione. J Pharmacal I944;82: 92-roo.
enzymic route (for example, many of the pro
17 Barber AA, Bernheim F. Lipid pcroxidation: its
staglandins) the unquestioning tendency at measurement and significance in animal tissue.
present is to assume the enzymic alternative. Adv Gerontal Res 1967;2: 355·
Not only are enzymes familiar and ubiquitous, 18 Dahle LK, Hill EG, Hollmann RT. The thio
barbituric acid reaction and the autoxidation of
but their action can also be replayed experi
polyunsaturated fatty acid methyl esters. Arch
mentally without an 'unrealistic' input of
Biochem Biophys I 962 ;98: 253-6 r.
energy. Yet the assumption may be wrong. 19 Dormandy TL. The autoxidation of red cells. Br
Enzymic activity is the foundation of every .T Haematol I971;2o:457-6r.
biological system; but when systems them 20 Stocks J, Offerman EL, Modell CB, Dormandy
TL. The susceptibility to autoxidation of human
selves change the underlying mechanism is
red-cell lipids in health and disease. Br J Hae
more likely to be an act of free radicals. matol 1972;23: 7I3-24.

--- Page 7 ---

194 T L Dormandy
2 r Goldstein BD, McDonagh EM. Spectrofluorescent .JI Oyanagui Y. Participation of superoxide anions
detection of in vivo red cell lipid peroxidation. at the prostaglandin phase of carrageenan foot
] Clin Invest 1976;57: 1302-7. oedema. Biochem Pharmacal 1976;25: 1465-
22 Chio KS, Tappe! AL. Synthesis and character 72.
isation of the fluorescent products derived from 32 Johnson RB, Lehmeyer JE. Elaboration of toxic
malonyldialdehyde and amino acids. Biochemistry oxygen products by neutrophils in a model of
196g;8: 2827-32. immune complex disease. J Clin Invest 1976;
23 Tappe! AL. Lipid peroxidation and fluorescent 57:836-41.
molecular damage. In: Trump BF, Arstila A, 33 Slater TF. Free radical mechanisms in tissue
eds. Pathobiology of cell membranes. New York: injury. London: Pion, 1972.
Academic Press, 1975: 144-72. 34 Fridovitch I. Superoxide dismutases. Adv Enzy
24 Lunec J, Dormandy TL. Fluorescent lipid mol 1974;41 =35-97·
peroxidation products in synovial fluid. Clin Sci 35 Babior BM, Kipnes RS, Carnutte JT. Biological
Mol Med 1979;56:53-9· defence mechanisms: the production by leuko
25 Di Luzio NR. Protective effect of vitamin E on cytes of superoxide. J Clin Invest 1973;52: 741-
plasma dienes in man. J Agric Food Chern 1972; 4·
20: 486-g1. 36 Shohet SB, Pitt ], Baehner RL, Poplack DJ.
26 Horvat RJ, Lane WG, Ng H, Shepherd AD. Lipid peroxidation in the killing of phagocytosed
Saturated hydrocarbons from autoxidising methyl pneumococci. Infect Immun 1974;10: 1321-8.
lin oleate. Nature 1964;203: 523-4. 37 Yost FJ, Fridovitch I. Superoxide radicals and
27 Dillar CJ, Litov RE, Savin WM, Dumelin EE, phagocytosis. Arch Biochem Biophys 1974;161:
Tappe! AL. Effects of exercise, vitamin E and 395-401.
ozone on pulmonary function and lipid peroxi 38 Salin ML, McCord JM. Free radicals and in
dation. J Appl Physiol 1978;45: 927-32. flammation. ] Clin Invest 1975;56: 1319-23.
28 Cohen G, Riely C, Lieberman M. Ethane for 39 McCord JM. Free radicals and inflammation. Sci
mation from lipid peroxides in mammalian cells. ence 1974;185:529-31.
Fed Proc 1968;27:648. 40 Puig-Parellada P, Planas JM. Synovial fluid de
29 Mamedov TG, Konev VV, Popov GA. Chemil gradation induced by free radicals. Biochem
luminescence in the reactions of lipoxidase and Pharmacal 1977;27: 535-8.
haemoprotein oxidation of unsaturated fatty 41 Muus P, Bonta IL, Oudsten SA den. Plasma
acids. Biofizika 1973;18:643-8. levels of malonaldehyde, a product of cyclo
30 Stossel TP, Mason RJ, Smith AL. Lipid peroxi oxidase dependent and independent lipid permo
dation by human blood phagocytes. J Clin Invest dation in rheumatoid arthritis. Prostaglandins
1974;54=638-45· 1979;2: 63-5·