

--- Page 1 ---

Tejaswini Uppuluri
PALB9109
Seed science and technology
1

--- Page 2 ---

Oxidation is any chemical reaction that involves the moving of electrons. Specifically, it
means the substance that gives away electrons is oxidized
Free radical: an atom or Any molecule that has lost an electron and is left with an
Types of free radicles
unpaired electron.
Highly reactive, Very short half-life, Generate new radicals by chain reaction, Cause
damage to biomolecules, cells and tissues.
They can be produced either through autoxidation or enzymatically by lipoxygenase which
is present in many seeds.
Antioxidant:
Antioxidants are the substances that are present in plants or in seeds at lower
concentration compared to that of oxidizable substrates, significantly delays or prevent
oxidation of substrates.
An antioxidant is a molecule capable of inhibiting the oxidation of other
molecules. Oxidation is a chemical reaction that transfers electrons or hydrogen from a
substance to an oxidizing agent. Oxidation reactions can produce free radicals. In turn, these
radicals can start chain reactions.
2

--- Page 3 ---

Reactive Oxygen Species(ROS)
The formed chemical upon species incomplete reduction of molecular oxygen
Reduction Accumulation of ROS leads to cell disturbances injury in and seed development
or germination processes
3

--- Page 4 ---

4

--- Page 5 ---

 Lipid peroxidation is a free-radical chain process leading to the deterioration of
polyunsaturated fatty acids, because they contain multiple double bonds in between
which lie methylene bridges (-CH2-) that possess especially reactive hydrogen atoms.
 Most frequently cited cause of seed deterioration
 Free radicals cause profound membrane damage and loss of membrane integrity.
Generation of free radicals enzymatically or by autoxidation
 Singlet oxygen (O )
2
 Superoxide anion (O -)
2
 Hydrogen peroxide (H O )
2 2
 Hydroxl radicals (OH-)
 Free radicals are suspected of attacking chromosomal DNA.
 Potential targets are purine and pyrimidine bases.
 Modifications in the strand lead to increased propensity to genetic mutations.
 Occurs in all seeds, but more in oil seeds.
5

--- Page 6 ---

Below 6% Between 6-14% Above 14%
Lipid Peroxidation is Lipid Peroxidation
Auto Oxidation is primary
minimum Because stimulated by the activity
cause of seed deterioration
sufficient water is of hydrolytic oxidative
available act as a buffer enzymes such generated
against autoxidatively free radical attack as
lipoxygenase
6

--- Page 7 ---

Auto Oxidation by free radical reaction.
Autoxidation may be primary cause of seed deterioration at
moisture content below 6%.
Above 14 % moisture content, lipid
peroxidation may again be stimulated by the activity of hydrolytic
oxidative enzymes such as lipoxygenase
7

--- Page 8 ---

Lipid peroxidation initiates a chain of events that leads to loss of membrane integrity,
Definition:
changes protein structure and chromosomal DNA modifications
Lipid peroxidation is the oxidative degradation of lipids. It is the process in which free
radicals "steal" electrons from the lipids in cell membranes, resulting in cell damage. This
process proceeds by a free radical chain reaction mechanism. As with any radical reaction,
the reaction consists of three major steps:
initiation, propagation, and termination. The chemical products of this oxidation are
known as lipid peroxides or lipid oxidation products (LOPs)..
The end products of lipid peroxidation are reactive aldehydes, such as malondialdehyde
(MDA) and 4- hydroxynonenal (HNE), the second one being known also as "second
1. Initiation is the step in which a fatty acid radical is produced. The most notable initiators
messenger of free radicals" and major bioactive marker of lipid peroxidation, due to its
in living cells are reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as OH· and HOO·, which combines
numerous biological activities resembling activities of reactive oxygen species.
with a hydrogen atom to make water and a fatty acid radical.
2. Propagation: The fatty acid radical is not a very stable molecule, so it reacts readily with
molecular oxygen, thereby creating a peroxyl-fatty acid radical. This radical is also an
unstable species that reacts with another free fatty acid, producing a different fatty acid
3. Termination : When a radical reacts with a non-radical, it always produces another radical,
radical and a lipid peroxide, or a cyclic peroxide if it had reacted with itself. This cycle
which is why the process is called a "chain reaction mechanism". The radical reaction stops
continues, as the new fatty acid radical reacts in the same way.
when two radicals react and produce a nonradical species. This happens only when the
concentration of radical species is high enough for there to be a high probability of collision
of two radicals. Living organisms have different molecules that speed up termination by
neutralizing free radicals and, therefore, protecting the cell membrane. One important
antioxidant is vitamin E. Another important antioxidant is vitamin C. Other anti-oxidants
made within the body include the enzymes superoxide dismutase, catalase, and peroxidase.
8

--- Page 9 ---

9

--- Page 10 ---

Lipoxygenases (LOXs)
 Non-heme iron containing dioxygenases. Widely distributed in plants and
animals.
 Catalyze polyunsaturated fatty acid to yield unsaturated fatty acid hydro-
peroxides.
 Initiates the synthesis of a group of acyclic or cyclic compounds called
oxylipins-products of fatty acid oxidation with diverse functions in the plant
cells.
(Helena Porta and Mario Rocha-Sosa, 2002)
10

--- Page 11 ---

LOX activity in membranes can be reduced by
 Reducing the quantity of polyunsaturated fatty acids in seeds through breeding
 Short time heat treatments (Peanut- 79 0C/ 90s; 600C/ 10min)
Inhibitors of LOX [U28938 (300μg/mg protein), Nordihydroguaiaretic acid (500 μM),
4-Nitrocatechol (600 μM) and Eicosa-5,8,11,14-tetraynoic acid (200 μM)]
 Temperature of storage
Substrate concentration and pH.
Damage of mitochondrial membrane due to lipid peroxidation leads
 To reduces respiration capacity.
 Reduced ATP production leading to reduced energy availability for the breakdown of
food reserves.
 Reduce the supply of ATP to the growing points during germination.
11

--- Page 12 ---

 Lipid peroxidation occurs with α-tocopherol deficiency.
 Containing high concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids and transition metals.
 Biological membranes of cells and organelles are constantly being subjected to
various types of damage.
12

--- Page 13 ---

Signalling Mechanism in seeds
13

--- Page 14 ---

Effect of lipid peroxidation and related parameters on the storability of soybean
(Glycine max) seeds
 Thirteen soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merill] genotypes (grouped as six “good
storers” and seven “poor storers”) were selected .
 To understand the relationship between lipid peroxidation, antioxidant activity and
seed storability.
 Good storers possessed significantly high activity (p<0.05) of LOX-1 and lower
activity of LOX-2 as compared to poor storers.
 Significant increase (p<0.05) in HPL activity was observed in all poor storer
genotypes and correlated with higher accumulation of lipid peroxides, total MDA and
carbonyl content.
 LOX-1, LOX-2 and HPL enzymes as potential indicators to determine the
storability of soybean seeds and also can be used as the parameters.
Vaibhav Kumar et al., 2015
14

--- Page 15 ---

VMVaoarridaiuatlitaoiotnino i nnin ih nlyi ptdhoreoo pxleeyvrgoeexln ioadfse elliyp(aLisdOe pX(eH)r oPisxLoi)d veaiscz t.ii,nv L igtOioeoXsd -b 1ae,nt wLd OepeXono- gr2 o,s otLodOr eaXrns-d3a p fatoecort ir1v s2itt oimerseo rbnsethatwfst eeoref n
DPPH radical scavenging activity and antioxidant capacity of soybean
1sgt2oo rmoadgo ena.nt hds poofo srt osrtoagreer.s after 12 months of storage.
genotypes.
15

--- Page 16 ---

How to measure lipid peroxidation?
1. Direct detection of free radicals
Electron spin resonance(ESR)
2. Detection of primary and secondary products of free radical damage
Estimation of Hydroperoxides, Conjugated dienes, Malondialdehyde,
Hexaldehyde etc……
3. Loss of substrates
There is preferrential deletion of PUFA(Linoleic and Linolenic acids)
4. Monitoring changes in antioxidant levels
Tocopherols, Ascorbate, Glutathione
5. Effect of antioxidant treatments.

--- Page 17 ---

1. Spectrophotometric
Component Method
4-hydroxynonel HPLC
Isoprostanes HPLC, ELISA
Exhaled gases GC
Lipid DNA adducts Fluroscence
Devasagyam et al. 2003
17

--- Page 18 ---

2-ThioBarbituric Acid Reactive Substances (TBARS) are naturally present in biological
specimens and include lipid hydroperoxides and aldehydes which increase in concentration
as a response to oxidative stress. TBARS assay values are usually reported in
malonaldehyde (malondialdehyde, MDA) equivalents, a compound that results from the
decomposition of polyunsaturated fatty acid lipid peroxides. The TBARS assay is a well-
recognized, established method for quantifying these lipid peroxides, although it has been
criticized for its reactivity towards other compounds other than MDA. This kit offers the
researcher a straightforward, reproducible and consistent method for analyzing urine for
lipid peroxidation products.
Principle:
This assay is based on the reaction of a chromogenic reagent, 2-thiobarbituric
acid, with MDA at 25°C. One molecule of MDA reacts with 2 molecules of 2-
thiobarbituric acid via a Knoevenagel-type condensation to yield a chromophore with
PINK COLOUR
absorbance maximum at 532 nm
18

--- Page 19 ---

Iodometric method
Iodometric method for lipid hydroperoxides determination is one of the oldest
methods and is still used to determine lipid peroxide number. The method can be applied
to extracts of biological samples without present the oxidizing agents. The possible
interfering factors are especially the presence of oxygen, hydrogen peroxide and protein
peroxides, which are able to oxidize iodide.
Principle of this method is based on the ability of lipid hydroperoxides to oxidize iodide
(I-) to iodine (I2), which further reacts with unreacted iodide (I-) to triiodide anion (I3-)
and can be determined spectrophotometrically at 290 or 360 nm
Modification of the iodometric method using commercially available reagent used for the
determination of lipid (hydro)peroxides spectrophotometrically at 365 nm
19

--- Page 20 ---

Ferrous oxidation in xylenol orange
Lipid hydroperoxides (LHPO) were determined spectrophotometrically based on their
reaction with an excess of Fe2+at low pH in the presence of the dye xylenol orange.
Triphenylphosphine‐mediated hydroxide formation was used to authenticate the signal
generated by the hydroperoxides.
20

--- Page 21 ---

 Lipid modification
 Regulation of oxygen pressure
 Antioxidant treatments
 Hydration/dehydration treatments

--- Page 22 ---

22