

--- Page 1 ---

Weak magnetic field effects in biology are measurable—
accelerated Xenopus embryogenesis
in the absence of the geomagnetic field
Alessandro Lodesani,1,∗ Geoff Anders,1,2,† Lykourgos Bougas,3 Tobias
Lins,4 Dmitry Budker,3,5,6,7 Peter Fierlinger,4 and Clarice D. Aiello1,‡
1Quantum Biology Institute, Los Angeles, USA
2Leverage, USA
3Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany
4Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
5Helmholtz Institute Mainz, Mainz, Germany
6GSI Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
7Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, USA
(Dated: October12,2024)
Despite decades of reports of weak magnetic field effects in biology across the
tree of life and on a broad range of cell types, the evidence to date remains met
with skepticism. To remedy this, we present open-data, large-scale, and varied
morphologicalevidencethatXenopuslaevisembryodevelopmentisacceleratedin
a well-engineered, environmentally-calibrated hypomagnetic field of less than 1 nT.
These data imply that basal tadpole physiology can sense and react to the absence
of Earth’s minute magnetic field of approximately 50 µT. The effect is significant,
as demonstrated by a variety of statistical measures. As no definitive biophysical
mechanism has been identified to account for its occurrence, this study raises the
question of which mechanism provides the most plausible explanation. How that
question is answered may have implications in a variety of fields, including human
health,behavioralecology,andspaceexploration.
∗
alessandro@quantumbiology.org
†
geoff@quantumbiology.org
‡
clarice@quantumbiology.org

--- Page 2 ---

1. Summary
The biological effects of weak magnetic fields, such as Earth’s geomagnetic field ( ∼ 50 µT),
have long been reported, but remain poorly understood and met with skepticism [1, 2].
This scientific stalemate is due both to the absence of a definitive biophysical mechanism
to explain such effects, and to experimental shortcomings. First, the rationale has been
thatthebiologicaleffectsofweakmagneticfieldsarenegligiblebecausethefieldstrengths
arethoughttobetoosmalltotriggerabiophysicalsensingmechanism. Second,large-scale,
thoroughly environmentally controlled data are lacking, and existing results are often
ambiguous regarding whether the effects are truly attributable to magnetic fields or other
environmental factors. However, the reality of a given effect can be established absent
a known mechanism with a sufficiently well-designed experiment. Here, we demonstrate
that the development of Xenopus laevis embryos is significantly accelerated when they are
raisedinahypomagneticenvironment(<1nT)shieldedfromEarth’sgeomagneticfield. Our
large-scale dataset and analysis code are publicly available. After extensive calibration of
environmental conditions, our assessment is that the origin of the effects is the absence of
Earth’smagneticfield. Ourmainfindingisthusthatthebasalphysiologyofanon-migratory
specieslikeXenopuslaevissignificantlyreactstoamagneticshiftontheorderof50µT,with
effects observed as early as one day post-fertilization. These results are sufficiently robust
to advance the scientific consensus that weak magnetic fields indeed exert measurable
biological effects. We also raise the question of which underlying mechanism could best
explain our observations. Answering this could have far-reaching implications across fields
suchashumanhealth,behavioralecology,andspaceexploration.
2of 250

--- Page 3 ---

2. Introduction
Weak magnetic field effects in biology have been reported for many years [1]. Reported
effects are wide-ranging, from the up- and down-regulation of cell proliferation [2], to DNA
repair [3], to cellular respiration and metabolism [4, 5], to cytoskeleton configuration [6, 7],
and ion channel functioning [8]. There are also established migratory phenomena, such as
the ability of birds to navigate at dusk, which are presumed to depend on Earth’s magnetic
field [9], whichisitselfvery weak.
Nevertheless, these magnetic effects have remained controversial. First, weak magnetic
∼
fields (we consider shifts of 1 mT, on the order of a cell phone’s field [10], or smaller to
be ‘weak’ for the purposes of this paper) are broadly not expected to be strong enough
to have any noticeable effect on biological organisms. Second, the magnitude of reported
effects does not vary directly with field intensity, yielding uncertainty about the underlying
mechanism. Therealityofagiveneffectcanbeestablishedabsentaknownmechanismwith
a sufficiently well-designed experiment. However, until now the studies of weak magnetic
field effects in biology have suffered from shortcomings, ranging from small sample sizes to
inadequatelycontrolledconditions.
In our experiment, we raise Xenopus laevis frog embryos in a carefully constructed
hypomagnetic chamber. The chamber, in combination with compensation coils, subtracts
the Earth’s magnetic field (of approximately 50 µT), yielding a hypomagnetic condition
of less than 1 nT, close to zero. We examine over 2,750 tadpoles over 10 batches. The
first seven batches have Xenopus embryos, raised in individual wells, divided randomly
between the hypomagnetic condition and a control condition, which is a deactivated cell
incubator with comparable light, humidity, and temperature conditions. Of these, the first
three batches were used to identify a plausible hypothesis, namely, that Xenopus embryos
raisedinahypomagneticconditionexperienceaccelerateddevelopment;theremainingfour
batches test this hypothesis. We then raise three further batches of embryos in a positive
control, where the Earth’s magnetic field is recreated inside the hypomagnetic chamber,
and embryos are again divided between the hypomagnetic chamber and the deactivated
incubator.
3of 250

--- Page 4 ---

Usingavarietyofobjectivemorphologicalmeasures,wefindsignificantdifferencesbetween
the tadpoles raised in the hypomagnetic condition and the regular and positive controls.
Differences, which pertain to both the shape and color of the embryos, are visible upon
inspection and are confirmed by a variety of statistical tests, where the role of human
judgmentisreducedasmuchaspossible. Thedifferencesappearonday1post-fertilization
and are present on days 2 and 3 post-fertilization; on day 3, the embryos are preserved
in formalin. The differences we observe are consistent with those observed by other labs,
both those that studied the effects of minutely increasing and decreasing the intensity of
magnetic fields experienced by Xenopus embryos. All of our data has been made publicly
available.
This experiment solidifies direct observational evidence for weak magnetic field effects in
a particular biological system. Since we remove a pre-existing magnetic field, rather than
applying a new one, it follows that Xenopus development is impacted by Earth’s magnetic
field. Xenopus is not migratory, so there is no reason to expect that it would evolve
mechanisms to navigate using Earth’s magnetic field, especially as early as day 1 post-
fertilization. There are also no indications of magnetite, as in magnetotactic bacteria, or
conductionchannels,likethoseinsharksandrays. Thisraisesthequestionofthemechanism
andbiologicalsignificanceof theeffect,whichwespeculateon only briefly.
Historically, our experiment bears some resemblance to that of Francis Hauksbee [11],
who in the early eighteenth century used a sophisticated air pump to create a superior
vacuum condition for studying electricity. In this case, rather than an air pump, we use
a mu-metal and copper-shielded box; rather than bringing air pressure close to zero, we
bring the magnetic field close to zero; and rather than confirming the electrical nature of
light emitted by frictional processes, we confirm that weak magnetic field effects in biology
aremeasurable.
4 of 250

--- Page 5 ---

3. Theexperimentiswell-controlled,withmagneticfieldenvironmentas
theonlysignificantvariable
We chose Xenopus laevis for our experiments because it is a widely used model organism
in embryology, with straightforward husbandry and embryos that can be raised at room
temperature (Supplementary Section SI1). Frogs are mostly non-migratory, with known
exceptions of magnetic geofield sensing during pond changes [12]; we see no clear
evolutionary advantage for Xenopus laevis in being able to sense Earth’s weak magnetic
field early in embryogenesis. Our selection of Xenopus is thus based on how common it is,
ratherthanon anydesiredorganismaltrait.
Forthreedays,weraiseeachtadpoleindividuallyinthewellsof24-or48-wellplates,witha
totalofover2,750tadpoles. Thissetupdisruptschemicalcommunicationbetweentadpoles,
completely prevents cross-contamination, and, most importantly, allows us to monitor the
morphologicaldevelopmentofeachindividual. Allplatesarepreparedatthesametimeand
filledwith0.1xMarc’sModifiedRinger’s(MMR)solution(SupplementarySectionSI2)fromthe
same bottle. After in vitro fertilization (Supplementary Section SI2) and egg randomization
(Supplementary Section SI3), embryos are placed in either a hypomagnetic or control
environment (i.e., exposed to Earth’s ambient magnetic field) and left undisturbed for 24
hours, with the plates’ plastic lids on. Imaging is performed approximately every 24 hours
post-fertilization (p.f.) for three days (Supplementary Section SI4). Day 1 and 2 imaging
sessions are usually completed in well under an hour, since the embryos are not motile,
while day 3 tadpoles are fixed in formalin prior to imaging. Typical images for each day are
displayed in panel c)of Fig. 1; the entirety of our image database, along with all developed
code, is organized and accessible in the project’s GitHub depository (a guide is found in
Supplementary Section SI69). We perform one in vitro fertilization per week, with the
resultingtadpolepopulationsreferredtoas‘batches’(e.g.,batchB2isthesecondbatch;for
abatchoverview,seeSupplementary SectionSI5).
Thehypomagneticchamber,depictedinpanela)ofFig.1,isamulti-layeredmetalenclosure
designed to block ambient magnetic fields primarily through passive shielding. Its residual
magnetic field is measured at less than 1 nT. Details on the chamber and the magnetic
5 of 250

--- Page 6 ---

calibration procedure are provided in Supplementary Section SI9. Between batches B5
and B6, the chamber, which initially shielded only against DC and low-frequency fields
using mu-metal, was upgraded with a permanent copper shell to block AC fields as well.
Calibration curves thus refer to either the initial configuration (‘DC shielding’) or the final
configuration (‘AC+DC shielding’). Tadpole rates of embryogenesis inside the chamber
beforeandaftercoppershieldinginstallationaresimilar,addingstrengthtotheproposition
that the observed biological effects are due to DC field shielding. Tadpoles in the control
grouparekeptinsideaclosed,butswitchedoff,cellincubator. Thisenvironmentisreferred
to as the ‘control box’ (see Supplementary Section SI10); Earth’s weak DC magnetic field
permeates the control box. Batches B1–B7 are regular experimental runs; batches denoted
+1–3arepositivecontrolruns,whereamagneticfieldmimickingEarth’sisartificiallyapplied
insidethehypomagneticchamber(seeSupplementary SectionSI11).
Environmentalfactorsthatareknowntoperturbembryogenesiswererecordedforthetwo
environments. Sensors were excluded from the experimental environments during runs to
prevent interference with the ambient magnetic field, so all calibrations were conducted
separately under carefully replicated conditions. A thorough discussion about the effects
of environmental factors, including a comparison of humidity, pressure, and light intensity
andspectrumisprovidedinSupplementarySectionSI12. Lightlevelsarelow,with0.0873 ±
±
0.0003luxinthecontrolboxand0.0751 0.0002luxinthehypomagneticchamber. Curves
oftemperaturearepresentedinpanel b)ofFig. 1.
Temperature is a critical factor regulating the speed of Xenopus embryogenesis: Warmer
temperatures accelerate development [13]. Before installation of the AC shielding (batches
B1–5), the temperature was up to half a degree lower in the hypomagnetic chamber than
in the control box. After the AC shielding was added (batches B6–7), this temperature
difference shifted slightly, with the hypomagnetic chamber now being marginally warmer
by 0.10–0.15oC. In positive control runs (batches +1–3), the heat generated by the coils
furtherincreasedthetemperaturedifferencetoapproximately0.45oC.Allthosefiguresare
conservative; actual temperature differences are likely less pronounced due to
thermalizationwiththelabenvironment(detailsinSupplementary SectionSI12).
6of 250

--- Page 7 ---

After thoroughly assessing temperature, light levels, humidity, and pressure between the
hypomagnetic chamber and the control box, we conclude that any observed significant
effectsaremostlikelydue tothedifferenceinmagneticfieldconditionsbetweenthem.
Inourexperiments,wedetectsignificantvariabilityinthedevelopmentalspeedofembryos
acrossdifferentweeklybatches. Thisvariabilitydoesnotappeartoarisesolelyfromtheuse
ofdifferentfemalesastheeggsourceeveryweek(seeSupplementarySectionSI6). Although
not extensively documented in the literature—with the exception of one comprehensive
study[14],whichreachesasimilarconclusion—wesuspectthatsuchvariabilityisacommon
occurrence that remains largely unreported; we have reported and quantified it in a way
thatwebelieveisadequateandmeetsor exceedsthestandardsof thefield.
Despitethelargebatch-to-batchvariability,wecanqualitativelydistinguishthecontrolfrom
the hypomagnetic population as early as day 1 p.f. These observations are evident in panels
d)throughf)ofFig.1. First,day1p.f.embryosinthehypomagneticchamberexhibitgreater
eccentricity, suggesting accelerated development. d) depicts all day 1 images of batch B2
arranged by increasing eccentricity. By 24 hours p.f., most embryos in the hypomagnetic
population have progressed beyond the circular-shaped egg stages, exhibiting a more
elongated, bean-like shape. Day 1 images have frames color-coded based on the health
assessmentofthetadpolesbyday3(seeSupplementarySectionSI7: Greenindicateshealthy
tadpoles; orange indicates one health condition; red indicates multiple health conditions;
andblackindicatesthosethatweredeceasedbyday1p.f.). Theimagesalsoshowthemajor
and minor axes of each embryo, as determined by the algorithm to calculate eccentricity
described in Section 4. Second, hypomagnetic tadpoles appear paler in color in both day 2
andday3images. e)displaysthethreeleastandthreemostyellowhealthytadpolesforeach
conditionfrombatchB2byday3,asidentifiedbythealgorithmdetailedinSection5. Third,
hypomagnetictadpolestendtobelongerandaretypicallyatmoreadvanceddevelopmental
stages compared to control tadpoles. f)highlights this point by depicting the five shortest
and the five longest healthy tadpoles for each condition from batch B7 by day 3, after
segmentationbythealgorithmdescribedinSection6.
7 of 250

--- Page 8 ---

We then conducted the following gross morphological analysis, including positive control
runs, to quantify the qualitative differences observed. Throughout our study, we aimed to
minimize human intervention by ensuring that our image analysis is nearly fully automated
(withafewexceptionsdetailedinSupplementarySectionSI13). Inaddition,weproposethat
key morphological measures, derived from Nieuwkoop and Faber (NF) [15] stage-labeled
imagesfromreliablesourcessuchasXenbase[16],couldbeeffectivelyusedtocharacterize
embryo developmental stages; we provide select examples to support this approach in the
Supplementary Information (see Supplementary Figs. SI10, SI12, SI14, SI16, SI33, SI35,
and SI37). We also aimed to provide multiple objective measures to corroborate each
morphological observation. While the absolute magnitude of the effect depends on the
measure chosen (for example, in the data of Section 4, a 20% increase in eccentricity
correspondsroughlytoa1%decreaseinsolidity;bothmeasuresaregoodpredictorsofthe
same process of accelerated development, see Supplementary Figs. SI9 and SI15), we also
consistently calculated a range of effect-size and effect-change metrics; these metrics are
magnitude-insensitivebecausetheystandardizedifferences,beingmostlyreliablestatistical
indicatorsofthemorphologicaldistinctionsbetweenthecontrolandhypomagnetictadpole
populations, independent of absolute scale. Our confidence in the presented results thus
arises from a comprehensive analysis involving 19 distinct morphological measures, four
effect-size metrics, and four effect-change metrics, applied across three days of imaging
andtrackingover2,750individualtadpoles.
8 of 250

--- Page 9 ---

a) hypomagnetic chamber:
AC+DC shielding
mu-metal (outer layer)
mu-metal (inner layer)
copper shell
x coils
z coils
samples
0.5 m
b) temperature calibration
ºC DC shielding AC+DC shielding positive control
20.6
control box
20.4 0.25ºC hypomagnetic
chamber
0.45ºC
20.2
0.10ºC
20.0
3 6 12 24 12 24
hours hours hours
c) typical 3-day tadpole development
day 1 p.f.
day 2 p.f.
day 3 p.f.
9of 250

--- Page 10 ---

Fig. 1: Environmental conditions are well-controlled, and the differences between
control and hypomagnetic populations are qualitatively evident. a) The hypomagnetic
chamber is equipped with both AC (copper shell) and DC (mu-metal) shielding, and x
and z coils for positive control runs; the sample placement is shown. b) Temperature
calibration reveals nearly identical temperatures within the hypomagnetic chamber and
the control box, with a maximum temperature difference of 0.45oC during positive control
runs. c) Representative images depict the 3-day development of individually tracked
tadpoles, totaling over 2,750 individuals. d) Day 1 images of batch B2, ordered by
increasing eccentricity, show that the hypomagnetic population exhibits significantly higher
eccentricity. e) Least and most yellow tadpoles of batch B2 on day 3; those from the
hypomagnetic population exhibit noticeably less yellow pigmentation. f) Shortest and
longest tadpoles of batch B7 on day 3; the hypomagnetic population tends to be longer,
suggestingaccelerateddevelopmentalprogression.
10of 250

--- Page 11 ---

4. Thehypomagneticfieldincreasestheeccentricityofday1embryos
At day 1 p.f., we observed frog embryos at various developmental stages, which we
determinedtorangefromNFstages18to24withthehelpofastandardtable[15,16]. During
these stages, the embryos transition in shape from egg-like to bean-like and eventually to a
moreelongated,worm-likeform.
Toquantifyourqualitativeobservationthatfrogembryosinhypomagneticconditionsexhibit
accelerated development compared to control embryos already by this time point, we
calculatedmorphologicalmetricsassessingdeviationfromcircularity—namely,eccentricity,
elongation,roundness,andsolidity. Allfourmetricsconsistentlyconfirmourinitialqualitative
observationofadvanceddevelopmentunderhypomagneticconditions;theyaredetailedin
Supplementary Section SI17, with a particular focus on eccentricity in the main te√xt. Our
codefitsanellipsetoeachday1p.f.image,definingtheembryo’seccentricityase
≡
1
− b2
,
a2
whereb anda aretheminorandmajoraxesof thefittedellipse,respectively.
Results for the eccentricity of day 1 images are presented in Fig. 2. A detailed guide on
how to read the analysis plots is available in Supplementary Section SI74. Due to significant
batch-to-batch variability, we present the normalized plots in the main text, where each
batchisscaledrelativetotheaveragecontrolvalue. Thenon-normalizeddataarepresented
in the Supplementary Information. In the figure, batches B1–7 correspond to experimental
runs, while batches +1–3 represent positive control runs, where a magnetic field simulating
Earth’s is applied within the hypomagnetic chamber (see Supplementary Section SI11).
Throughout the plots, magnetic field conditions are denoted as C for control and H for
hypomagnetic. The plots alternate between results for all tadpoles and for those classified
ashealthybasedon thehumanscoringcriteriondescribedinSupplementary SectionSI7.
In the a) and b) violin plots, each tadpole’s value is represented by a horizontal line. The
violin width reflects the kernel density estimation of the data distribution at that value. It is
quantitatively evident that eccentricity is higher for tadpoles in hypomagnetic conditions,
indicating a more elongated shape. In the non-normalized version of these plots, available
in Supplementary Section SI19, we provide predicted tadpole stages based on elongation
11of 250

--- Page 12 ---

froma fewstage-labeledreferenceimagesfoundinXenbase[16].
The eccentricity in tadpoles exposed to hypomagnetic conditions exceeds that of control
tadpoles by nearly 20%. Plot c) illustrates the average eccentricity for both control and
hypomagnetic conditions across batches, along with their 95% confidence intervals (as
detailed in Supplementary Section SI16). The standard deviation of the mean plotted in
a) and b) reflects the variability or dispersion in the data; in contrast, the 95% confidence
interval in c) emphasizes the accuracy of the estimate, indicating the range within which
the true population mean is likely to fall with 95% confidence. The aggregate values for all
experimental runs (B1–7) and all positive control runs (+1–3) are also shown. For normalized
plots, each data point is adjusted relative to its corresponding control within the batch,
whilefornon-normalizedplots,therawdataisuseddespitebatch-to-batchvariability. Data
aggregationisperformedpriortostatisticalanalysis.
Ourdatasetisgenerallynon-parametric,sowealsoexaminethemedianasarobustmeasure
ofcentraltendency. Inplotd),weapplybootstrapping(explainedinSupplementarySection
SI16) to estimate the median difference in eccentricity between the control and
hypomagnetic groups. The median eccentricity for tadpoles exposed to hypomagnetic
conditionsexceedsthatof thecontrolgroupbyalsonearly20%.
In plots e) and f), we evaluate several measures of effect size (details in
Supplementary Section SI14). Notably, both Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ (shown in e) ), which
arecommonlyusedinbiostatistics[17],tendtoproducelargeandpotentiallyoverestimated
values in our dataset. In contrast, Binhi’s E (shown in f)), a metric specifically designed for
weakmagneticfieldeffectsinbiology[1],morecloselyalignswiththeneteffectsobservedin
plotsc)andd);itestimatesthattheeffectsizeofthehypomagneticconditiononeccentricity
inday1embryosisagainapproximately20%. Binhi’sEquantifiestheeffectsizebycomparing
the difference in the groups’ means relative to their combined variability, accounting for
both the magnitude and uncertainty of the measurements. We find that the visibility ν (also
shown in f)) reliably yields a conservative estimate of effect size. Visibility ν is analogous to
signal-to-noise,asitexpressestherelativedifferenceinthegroups’meansasapercentage
12 of 250

--- Page 13 ---

of their sum, providing a conservative estimate when the groups are close in magnitude.
Below each plot, we also display the p value of a statistical test comparing the control and
hypomagnetic populations (details in Supplementary Section SI74); points below the red
dashedlineindicatethatthedifferencesarestatisticallysignificantat the0.01 level.
Weprovideaquantitativecomparisonoftheobservedaccelerateddevelopmentintermsof
NFcanonicalstagenumbers[15]intheSupplementaryInformation,usingallday1measures
of deviation from circularity—namely, eccentricity, elongation, roundness, and solidity (see
Supplementary Figs. SI10, SI12, SI14, and SI16). These metrics were calculated from a few
NFstage-labeledimagessourcedfromXenbase[16],offeringanobjectivemethodtoassess
embryonicdevelopmentalstages.
The variability in major axis length for control embryos in day 1 p.f. images closely aligns
with the 38% maximum difference reported in [14] for over 2,000 similar stage embryos.
In contrast, the hypomagnetic embryos exhibit approximately 20% greater variability (see
discussioninSupplementary Section SI63).
13of 250

--- Page 14 ---

Fig. 2: At day 1 p.f., the eccentricity of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 20%
higherthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedeccentricitybybatchand
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support
the observed 20% increase in eccentricity. The abscissa points labeled B1–7 and +1–3
representtheaggregatevaluesfortheexperimentalandpositivecontrolruns,respectively.
e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibility
ν,confirma medium tolargeeffect,consistentlyreflectingthe20%leveldifference.
14 of 250

--- Page 15 ---

5. Thehypomagneticfielddecreasestheyellownessofday2tadpoles
We qualitatively observed a difference in the yellow coloration of tadpoles which were
exposed to hypomagnetic conditions. The yellow coloration in tadpoles is due to the
presenceofcarotenoidandpteridinepigments[18](onestudyalsocitesflavinpigments[19]),
whichabsorblightinthebluespectrumandreflectyellowandorangewavelengths,resulting
in the tadpoles’ characteristic yellow hue. After confirming that the ambient light
environmentwassimilarbetweenthehypomagneticandcontrolgroups(seeSupplementary
Fig.SI8forlightintensityandspectralcomparison),weinquiredwhetherthemagneticfield
itselfcouldbe directlyrelatedtotheseobserveddifferences.
Toquantifythecolordifferences,wecalculatedseveralcolormetricsrelatedtoyellowness:
L⋆a⋆b⋆yellowness,RGByellowness,theYellownessIndex,andHSVyellowness. Thesemetrics
are described in detail in Supplementary Section SI26, with a primary focus on L⋆a⋆b⋆
yellowness in the main text. All four metrics indicated distinct color development under
hypomagnetic conditions. Although color differences are quantitatively evident in both day
2andday3images,ouranalysisisexclusivelyforday2images. Thisisbecauseday3images
weretakenaftertadpolefixationwithformalin,a processknowntoaltertissuecolor.
The L⋆a⋆b⋆ color space [20] is designed for perceptual uniformity, meaning that small
changes in objective color correspond to similar perceived differences. Unlike traditional
colorspacessuchasRGBorCMYK,L⋆a⋆b⋆separatesluminancefromchromaticinformation,
making it widely used in image processing for more accurate color representation. The b⋆
channel,inparticular,capturestheblue-yellowaxis,withpositivevaluesindicatingincreased
yellowness. To simplify analysis, in Fig. 3 we present results for the b⋆ channel—referred to
as L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness—in normalized plots, with each batch scaled relative to the average
controlvalue;thenon-normalizeddataispresentedintheSupplementary Information.
The violin plots a) and b) consistently show lower L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness for tadpoles in
hypomagneticconditions. Thiseffect,observedatthe5%levelforday2images,isconfirmed
by both the average and bootstrapped median values plotted in c)and d), respectively, as
well as by the magnitude of Binhi’s E in f). Importantly, no color difference is seen in the
15of 250

--- Page 16 ---

positive control tadpoles, which were raised inside the hypomagnetic box with an applied
magnetic field mimicking Earth’s. This result supports a mechanism through which the
observedcolorchangeisdrivenprimarilybythealteredmagneticfieldconditions.
Toinvestigatethecauseofreducedyellowpigmentation,weexaminethesourcesofpteridine
andcarotenoidin Xenopusembryos.
TadpolesarecapableofsynthesizingpteridinesasearlyasNFstages39–40[21],whichoccur
well after the 2 day p.f. mark; therefore, synthesized pteridines could not account for the
observedcolorchangesalreadyvisibleinday2 p.f. images.
Carotenoids are either deposited in the egg during oogenesis or ingested from the diet
afterhatching. Sincetadpolesdonotbeginfeedinguntilwellafterday3p.f.,allcarotenoids
present at this stage must originate from the yolk. Carotenoid content is reduced in
amphibians that have undergone pituitary gland removal, leading to paler coloration [19].
In Xenopus tadpoles, the pituitary gland begins to form around NF stages 24–25 [15], i.e.,
before our day 2 images are captured. However, the gland only starts to secrete hormones
between stages NF 46–48 (5–6 days p.f.) [15], which is beyond the time frame of our study.
Consequently,wedo notbelievethecolordifferencesweobserveareof hormonalorigin.
Thevisiblechangesincolorduringearlydevelopmentmightthusreflectthemetabolicuseof
theyolk’scontents,includingthepigments[22]. Thespecificconcentrationsof carotenoids
andpteridinesinXenopusyolkarenotwell-documentedandcanvarydependingonfactors
like maternal diet, environmental conditions, and species [21]. The major yolk protein,
vitellogenin, is a lipoprotein that acts as a nutrient source for the developing embryo.
While vitellogenin itself lacks color, it often binds to carotenoids, which contribute to the
yellowish hue of the yolk [23]. As vitellogenin is processed into yolk proteins like lipovitellin
and phosvitin during embryogenesis, and the yolk is gradually consumed, the yellow color
fades due to the depletion of carotenoids. This process may explain the slightly decreased
yellow hue we observe in hypomagnetic tadpoles, which exhibit morphological markers
indicativeof acceleratedembryonicdevelopment.
16of 250

--- Page 17 ---

We did not assess the levels of the more commonly studied eumelanin pigment [24, 25].
At day 2 p.f., eumelanin levels remained low. While the binarization procedure detailed in
Supplementary Section SI26 improved the accuracy of yellow pigment assessment, it was
lessreliableasa gooddiscriminatorof darkpigmentslikeeumelanin.
17 of 250

--- Page 18 ---

Fig. 3: At day 2 p.f., the L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
5% lower than that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% decrease in L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness. The abscissa points labeled B1–7
and +1–3 represent the aggregate values for the experimental and positive control runs,
respectively. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E
and the visibility ν, confirm a small to medium effect, consistently reflecting the 5% level
difference.
18 of 250

--- Page 19 ---

6. Thehypomagneticfieldincreasesthelengthofday3tadpoles
The most striking evidence of accelerated development is the increased length of day 3
tadpolesexposedtohypomagneticfieldconditions.
Day 3 tadpole images were segmented, and their major axes were calculated (as detailed in
Supplementary Sections SI13 and SI35). The results are displayed in Fig. 4, with each batch
normalizedtotheaveragecontrolvalue. Weoptnottopresentnon-normalizeddatadueto
slightdifferencesinmagnificationacrossbatches.
Plotsa)andb)illustratethedistributionofmajoraxislengths,withb)showingadistinctand
quantitativelydifferentviolinshapeforthehypomagneticpopulation.
Themean,showninc),andthebootstrappedmedian,ind),bothindicateanapproximately
7.5% increase in major axis length for the hypomagnetic population. This result aligns with
Binhi’s E reported in f). Additionally, both Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, plotted in e), classify this
effectasmedium insize. Notably,thiseffectisabsentinthepositivecontroltadpoles.
Additional morphological measures, namely perimeter, area, total curvature, solidity,
elongation,androundness(thelatterreflectingtherelationshipbetweenareaandperimeter),
asdetailedinSupplementarySectionSI35,consistentlyindicatemoreelongatedandcomplex
shapesintadpolesexposedtothehypomagneticconditions. Thesefindingsfurtherreinforce
themajoraxisresultspresentedhere.
Wepresentaquantitativecomparisonoftheobservedaccelerateddevelopmentintermsof
NFcanonicalstagenumbers[15]intheSupplementaryInformation,usingallday3measures
thatcanbeaccuratelyreportedintheirnon-normalizedform(i.e.,withoutnormalizationby
thecontrolgroupaverage)—namely,solidity,elongation,androundness(seeSupplementary
Figs. SI33, SI35, and SI37). Using NF stage-labeled images from Xenbase [16], we once more
proposethisasanobjectiveapproachforassessingembryonicdevelopment.
19of 250

--- Page 20 ---

Noevidentdifferenceinmajoraxisisobservedinday2images,asdetailedinSupplementary
Section SI63. We hypothesize that this is due to the reduced robustness of segmentation
in day 2 images, likely caused by the pale coloration of the tadpoles, which may affect the
accuracy of the major axis analysis. Additionally, the imaging conditions on day 2 were less
controlled,withlivetadpolesthatwerenotmanipulated,potentiallyleadingtodistortionsor
tadpolesbeingoutofthefocalplane. Incontrast,onday3,thefixedtadpoleswerecarefully
positionedwithtweezerstolieflatandontheirsides,yieldingmorereliablemeasurements.
20of 250

--- Page 21 ---

Fig. 4: At day 3 p.f., the major axis of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 7.5%
higherthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)and b)Normalized major axis by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed7.5%increaseinmajoraxis. TheabscissapointslabeledB1–7and+1–3represent
theaggregatevaluesfortheexperimentalandpositivecontrolruns,respectively. e)andf)
Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibilityν,confirm
amedium effect,consistentlyreflectingthe7.5% leveldifference.
21 of 250

--- Page 22 ---

7. Thehypomagneticfieldaltersthemorphologicalprogressionof
tadpolesbetweendays2and3
In Fig. 5, we compare the day 2 to 3 progression of four key morphological properties
of tadpole development, namely major axis length, curvature, convexity, and solidity. A
Z-score metric for effect change normalizes the data by accounting for variability, allowing
us to quantify changes in each property in relation to the mean values for both days (see
Supplementary Section SI15). A positive Z-score difference indicates a greater deviation
from the mean on day 3 compared to day 2. Although Z-score differences are our primary
measure,additionalmetricssuchaseffectchangevisibility,percentagechange,andrelative
differencewerealsocalculated;theyaredescribedindetailinSupplementarySectionsSI15
and SI46, andcorroboratethetrendsobservedintheZ-scoreanalysis.
Plots a) and b) illustrate a predominantly positive Z-score difference for the major axis
in the hypomagnetic group compared to the control. Plots c) and d) similarly reveal an
overall positive Z-score difference for the total curvature, despite greater variability across
batches. In contrast, convexity and solidity Z-score differences, depicted, respectively, in
plotse)andf)andinplotsg)andh),arelowerforthehypomagneticpopulation. Acrossthe
fourmorphologicalpropertiesanalyzed,theZ-scoredifferencemetricrevealsadivergence
of approximately 0.5 units of standard deviation between the control and hypomagnetic
populations,indicatingasignificantshiftinthedataassociatedwiththehypomagneticgroup.
ThehigherZ-scoredifferencesformajoraxislengthandtotalcurvaturesuggestaccelerated
morphological development under hypomagnetic conditions (as qualitatively observed in
tadpole length and curvature differences between day 2 and 3 p.f. images in Fig. 1 c)). We
interprettheaveragedecreaseinconvexityandsolidityZ-scoredifferencesasanindication
of a faster increase in tadpole shape complexity. Lower convexity correlates with more
indentations and protrusions, while lower solidity points to a more fragmented or irregular
structure.
22 of 250

--- Page 23 ---

23of 250

--- Page 24 ---

Fig. 5: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the hypomagnetic conditions significantly influence the
morphological progression of the tadpoles. This progression is quantified, for each
population (control or hypomagnetic), through differences in Z-scores at days 2 and
3 p.f. For the progression of the four morphological properties studied, the control
and hypomagnetic populations differ by approximately 0.5 units of standard deviation,
indicating a significant shift in the hypomagnetic population’s data. The abscissa points
labeled B1–7 and +1–3 represent the aggregate values for the experimental and positive
control runs, respectively. a)and b)The major axis length in the hypomagnetic population
exhibits a Z-score difference of approximately 0.5 higher than that of the control
population. c)andd)AsimilarZ-scoredifferenceofabout0.5higherforthetotalcurvature
isfoundinthehypomagneticgroup. e)andf)Incontrast,theconvexityinthehypomagnetic
population shows a Z-score difference around 0.5 lower than in the control group. g)and
h)Solidity in the hypomagnetic population also has a Z-score difference nearly 0.5 lower
than in the control. The higher Z-scores for major axis length and total curvature suggest
accelerated morphological development under hypomagnetic conditions, while the lower
Z-scoresforconvexity andsolidity indicatea fasterincreaseinshapecomplexity.
24of 250

--- Page 25 ---

8. Discussion
After quantitatively analyzing over 8,000 images of nearly 3,000 viable tadpoles across 19
morphologicalmeasures,usingfoureffect-sizeandfoureffect-changemetrics,weconclude
that magnetic fields as weak as the Earth’s can have a macroscopic impact on biological
processessuchasembryodevelopment.
We have demonstrated the existence of a link between Earth’s minute DC magnetic field
andbasaltadpolephysiologyregulationthatispresentasearlyasonedayp.f.,forpurposes
likely not related to orientation, navigation, or homing. In the absence of the geomagnetic
field, embryo development accelerates, a trend we observed and tracked over a three-day
periodinour experiments.
Potentialinfluenceofmagneticfieldvariations. We cannot entirely dismiss the possibility
that variations in magnetic field strength—i.e., those occurring when plates are inserted or
removed fromthe hypomagneticchamber—may haveinfluenced thebaseline physiology of
the tadpoles, rather than the constant hypomagnetic environment. This unlikely scenario
wouldrequirea lastingbiologicalresponsetoshort-termmagneticfield variations.
Developmentalresponsetothehypomagneticfield. It remains unclear whether Xenopus
embryos sense Earth’s magnetic field for a specific developmental purpose, or if their
physiological response to hypomagnetic conditions simply reflects a deviation from an
evolutionary adaptation that is arguably optimal for the geophysical environment in which
thespeciesevolved. Nonetheless,itisstrikingthatintheabsenceofthegeomagneticfield,
the tadpoles consistently exhibit accelerated developmental speed, rather than a broad
or indiscriminate alteration in developmental rhythms. This uniform response suggests the
existence of a coordinated mechanism controlling the rate of development that includes
magnetic cues. In rare instances, our data might be better modeled as a two-state system,
which is consistent with responding and non-responding populations. These cases
correspond to plots of type b) in which the aggregate violin suggests two distinct peaks
inwidth,indicatinga bimodaldistribution.
Implications of accelerated embryogenesis. We speculate whether the observed
accelerated development under hypomagnetic conditions could, in principle, increase
25of 250

--- Page 26 ---

the incidence of embryo abnormalities and/or carcinogenesis. While no such effect has
been detected in our data, it is possible that faster growth inherently raises the risk of
developmentalerrors,asithasbeenpreviouslyreportedinstudiesonthebiologicaleffects
of hypomagnetic fields [1, 6, 26]. For example, hypomagnetic conditions have been linked
todisturbancesinthemitoticspindle[6],aligningwithpreviousfindingsthatweakmagnetic
fields alter cytoskeleton dynamics [1, 2, 7]. Consistent with our results, there are two
literaturereportsthatlinktheapplicationofaweakmagneticfield(ratherthantheelimination
of a weak magnetic field)—specifically, 25 µT and 2 mT, albeit at low AC frequencies—with
sloweddevelopment(ratherthanaccelerateddevelopment)inXenopus[27, 28].
Pigmentation changes and carotenoid depletion. There is one literature report linking
the exposure to a weak magnetic field (of strength 0.5 mT) to an increase in eumelanin
(dark)pigmentationintadpoles[29];whileourstudyfocusedonyellowpigments,thatresult
mirrors our own findings. We hypothesized that the depletion of yolk carotenoids could
explain the paler-yellow appearance observed in hypomagnetic tadpoles. Carotenoids
are known to be degraded by reactive oxygen species [30]. Overall levels of reactive
oxygenspecieshavebeendocumentedtoincreaseunderhypomagneticfieldenvironments
[31, 32]; an elevated reactive oxygen species concentration may thus have contributed to
theobservedreductionincarotenoidlevels.
The effects of weak magnetic fields in biology have often been overlooked, including in
studies of native organismal behavior, human health, and space exploration, as well as in
guidelines for electromagnetic exposure. The rationale has been that the biological effects
of weak magnetic fields are negligible because the field strengths are thought to be too
small to trigger a biophysical sensing mechanism. Given the results of this study, however,
this reasoning is flawed. Further investigation is therefore warranted, especially the use of
omicsandmoleculartechniques,toidentifythenatureofchangeslikelytobecausedbythe
presenceor absenceof weakmagneticfields.
Thefactthatlivingbeingscanrespondtomagneticfieldshiftsofthismagnitudethususually
comesasasurprise. Toexplainourfindings,wenotethatorganismsaretraditionallythought
tosenseweakDC magneticfieldsviathreemechanisms(seeSupplementary SectionSI77).
26of 250

--- Page 27 ---

In a small minority of cases, most notably in magnetotactic bacteria, cells contain biogenic
magnetite crystals, which allow the organism to respond to magnetic fields like a classical
compass [33]; these crystals must be large enough to overcome thermal motion and align
with Earth’s magnetic field [34, 35]. To date, there is only one report of ferrimagnetic
material found in an amphibian, specifically in the newt [36]. Given that Xenopus is one
of the most extensively studied biological model organisms worldwide, we find it unlikely,
but not impossible, that such a magnetite-based magnetosensing mechanism is at play in
thisspecies,ascellscontaininglargeparticlesofmagnetitewouldhavelikelybeenidentified
bynow.
In another minority of instances, organisms possess specialized organs that function as
conductive channels. When these channels intersect magnetic field lines, a voltage is
induced according to the classical law of electromagnetic induction; such a voltage is then
sensed by the organism. This is believed to explain how sharks and rays detect magnetic
fields [37]. Given the structural complexity involved, we find it very unlikely that similar
systems exist on day 1 p.f. Xenopus embryos, which contain fewer than 50,000 cells [38],
yet are already capable of detecting the absence of Earth’s magnetic field. In addition, the
detectionofDCmagneticfieldsthroughthismechanismrequirestheorganismtomoveand
crossmagneticfieldlines,and Xenopusembryosarenotmobileuntilat leastday2 p.f.
In most cases, however, scientists have been unable to explain how weak magnetic fields
impact biology, especially because the effects do not necessarily get larger when the
magnetic field strength is increased, and are broadly nonspecific, occurring across diverse
species andcelltypes [1, 2, 5, 8]. A chemical explanationthataligns withtheseobservations
exists but remains unverified microscopically and in living cells: electron spin-dependent
chemical reactions [9, 39–41]. These reactions bear striking similarities to the simplest
formofroom-temperaturetechnologicalquantumsensinginthesolid-state[42,43]and,at
least in vitro, can detect magnetic fields using electron spin superpositions—even at room
temperature[44]. Inthishypothesis,organisms‘senseamagneticfield’bydetectingchanges
in the physiological concentrations of reaction products, as the reaction rate responds to
themagneticfield.
27of 250

--- Page 28 ---

This hypothesis, which we favor, would itself be a surprise. If further experiments
demonstrate that these or similar findings [45, 46] are a result of quantum sensing-like
chemical reactions happening within living cells, the implications are major (see
Supplementary Section SI78 for details). This will mean, first, that electron spin
superpositions survive the strongly decohering environment of the cell for long enough
to be used for function (e.g., to sense and physiologically react to Earth’s weak magnetic
field);andsecond,thatweakmagneticfieldscould,inprinciple,bequantum-engineeredto
influence the endogenous spin physics of biological matter, thereby enabling the up- and
down-regulation of the machinery of the cell. While the effects reported so far remain
largely nonspecific, enough knowledge of the spin physics within the specific proteins
sustaining electron spin-dependent chemical reactions in vivo could, in principle, allow
the targeted and predictable manipulation of physiological processes with weak magnetic
fields.
28 of 250

--- Page 29 ---

9. Conclusion
We individually tracked the development of more than 2,750 Xenopus laevis embryos for
three days under extremely carefully controlled magnetic field conditions. It is our
assessmentthatotherenvironmentalfactorssuchastemperatureandlightwerecontrolled
to a level where their variation would not be the origin of the observed biological effects.
Throughrobuststatisticalanalysis,weobservedclearmorphologicalchangesinthetadpoles
during experimental runs under hypomagnetic conditions of less than 1 nT; these largely
disappearinthepositivecontrolruns.
We conclude that exposure to a hypomagnetic environment accelerates tadpole
development in a measurable way. Therefore, Xenopus laevis embryos can detect and
respondtotheabsenceofEarth’sminuteDCmagneticfieldofapproximately50µTasearly
asday1 p.f.
Ourdataispubliclyavailableandsufficientlyrobusttoadvancethescientificconsensusthat
weakmagneticfieldsindeedexert measurablebiologicaleffects.
29of 250

--- Page 30 ---

10. Authorcontribution
FollowingtheCRediTtaxonomy[47], eachauthorconfirmscontributionof:
1) Alessandro Lodesani: conceptualization; methodology; investigation; data curation;
validation; formal analysis; software; writing (original draft); writing (review and editing); and
visualization;
2) Geoff Anders: conceptualization; methodology; writing (original draft); writing (review and
editing);projectadministration;andfundingacquisition;
3) LykourgosBougas: investigation;datacuration;andformalanalysis;
4) TobiasLins: investigation;datacuration;andformalanalysis;
5) Dmitry Budker: conceptualization;supervision;andfundingacquisition;
6) PeterFierlinger: conceptualization;investigation;supervision;andfundingacquisition;
7) Clarice D. Aiello: conceptualization; methodology; data curation; validation; formal analysis;
software; writing (original draft); writing (review and editing); visualization; supervision;
projectadministration;andfundingacquisition.
30 of 250

--- Page 31 ---

11. Acknowledgements
We wholeheartedly thank: Michael Levin, from Tufts University, for suggesting the original
idea of the experiment to P. F.; Arielle Gabalski for help with initial lab setup; Gabriel E.
Bertolesi,fromtheUniversityofCalgary,forfirstbringingtoourattentionthedifferencesin
developmentalspeedbetweenthetwotadpolegroups;VeraD.Aiello,fromtheUniversityof
São Paulo, for first bringing to our attention the color differences between the two tadpole
groups; Marko Horb and Nikko-Ideen Shaidani, from the National Xenopus Resource at the
Marine Biological Laboratory, for early tadpole assessment and continuous frog husbandry
support; Gabriel E. Bertolesi, from the University of Calgary, Paul Blank, from the NIH,
Douglas Brash, from Yale University, Richard Fuisz, Maria Ingaramo and Andrew York, from
Calico,RodKunz,DivyaShastry,andAlexandraWrobel,fromMIT-LincolnLaboratory,Sergey
Polyakov, from NIST, and Graham Timmins, from the University of New Mexico, for their
valuable feedback on the manuscript; James Wiles, from the Wolfram Institute, for insights
intoimagesegmentation;andJennilynandBretGaitan,OliverCarefull,andMelindaBradley
forprojectsupport.
We acknowledge the use of ChatGPT for improving the readability of the text and assisting
withwritinganddebuggingpythoncode.
This experiment was partially funded by grants from the Faggin Foundation and Nevin
Freeman.
Two authors (C. D. A. and G. A.) partially funded the conducted research. The remaining
authorshaveno conflictsof interesttodeclare.
The Quantum Biology Institute is a California non-profit (501(c)(3) status pending) focused
research organization [48] that performs basic research underpinning the quantum biology
fieldinanopen-sciencefashion. It ispart of theQuantumBiology Ecosystem.
31of 250

--- Page 32 ---

Bibliography
[1] V. N. Binhi and F. S. Prato, Biological effects of the hypomagnetic field: An analytical review of
experimentsandtheories,PLoSONE12,e0179340(2017).
[2] Z.-H. Hadi and C. Simon, Magnetic field effects in biology from the perspective of the radical
pairmechanism,J.R.Soc.Interface.19,20220325(2022).
[3] T. J. Zwang, E. C. M. Tse, D. Zhong, and J. K. Barton, A compass at weak magnetic fields using
thyminedimerrepair,ACSCent.Sci.4,329(2018).
[4] R. J. Usselman, C. Chavarriaga, P. R. Castello, M. Procopio, T. Ritz, E. A. Dratz, D. J. Singel,
andC.F.Martino,Thequantumbiologyofreactiveoxygenspeciespartitioningimpactscellular
bioenergetics,Sci.Rep.6,38543(2016).
[5] H.WangandX.Zhang,Magneticfieldsandreactiveoxygenspecies,Int.J.Mol.Sci.18,2175(2017).
[6] W.-C. Mo, Y. Liu, H. M. Cooper, and R.-Q. He, Altered development of Xenopus embryos in a
hypogeomagneticfield,Bioelectromagnetics33,238(2012).
[7] A. Bahrami, L. Y. Tanaka, R. C. Massucatto, F. R. M. Laurindo, and C. D. Aiello, Automated 1D
Helmholtzcoildesignforcellbiology: Weakmagneticfieldsaltercytoskeletondynamics(2024),
arXiv:2406.19555.
[8] F.Bertagna,R.Lewis,S.R.P.Silva,J.McFadden,andK.Jeevaratnam,Effectsofelectromagnetic
fieldsonneuronalionchannels: Asystematicreview,Ann.N.Y.Acad.Sci.1499,82(2021).
[9] P. J. Hore and H. Mouritsen, The radical-pair mechanism of magnetoreception, Annu. Rev.
Biophys.45,299(2016).
[10] L.Zastko,L.Makinistian,A.Tvarožná,etal.,Mappingofstaticmagneticfieldsnearthesurfaceof
mobilephones,Sci.Rep.11,19002(2021).
[11] F. Hauksbee, An account of an experiment touching the production of light in vacuo, Philos.
Trans.R.Soc.Lond.26,149(1709).
[12] L. Landler and G. Gollmann, Magnetic orientation of the common toad: Establishing an arena
approachforadultanurans,Front.Zool.8,6(2011).
[13] M. K. Khokha, C. Chung, E. L. Bustamante, L. W. Gaw, K. A. Trott, J. Yeh, N. Lim, J. C. Lin,
N. Taverner, E. Amaya, and N. Papalopulu, Techniques and probes for the study of Xenopus
tropicalisdevelopment,Dev.Dyn.225,499(2002).
[14] A.Leibovich,T.Edri,S.L.Klein,S.A.Moody,andA.Fainsod,Naturalsizevariationamongembryos
32of 250

--- Page 33 ---

leadstothecorrespondingscalingingeneexpression,Dev.Biol.462,165(2020).
[15] P. D. Nieuwkoop and J. Faber, Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin): A Systematical and
ChronologicalSurveyoftheDevelopmentfromtheFertilizedEggtilltheEndofMetamorphosis,
2nded.(GarlandPub.,1994).
[16] Xenbase,XenbaseAnatomyandDevelopmentalStages(2024),accessed: October12,2024.
[17] J.H.Zar,BiostatisticalAnalysis,5thed.(Pearson,UpperSaddleRiver,NJ,2010).
[18] J. E. Mir, A. Nasrallah, N. Thézé, M. Cario, H. Fayyad-Kazan, P. Thiébaud, and H.-R. Rezvani,
Xenopus as a model system for studying pigmentation and pigmentary disorders, Pigment Cell
MelanomaRes.00,1(2024).
[19] J. T. Bagnara, M. E. Hadley, and J. H. Taylor, Regulation of bright-colored pigmentation of
amphibians,Gen.Comp.Endocrinol.2,425(1969).
[20] M.D.Fairchild,ColorAppearanceModels,3rded.(JohnWiley&Sons,2013).
[21] J.T.BagnaraandM.E.Hadley,ChromatophoresandColorChange: TheComparativePhysiology
ofAnimalPigmentation(PrenticeHall,EnglewoodCliffs,NJ,1973).
[22] P. Jorgensen, J. A. J. Steen, H. Steen, and M. W. Kirschner, The mechanism and pattern of yolk
consumptionprovideinsightintoembryonicnutritioninXenopus,Development136,1539(2009).
[23] J. D. Romano and T. R. Ziegler, Lipoproteins and carotenoids: Implications in embryogenesis
and tissue differentiation, in Carotenoids: Volume 4: Natural Functions, edited by G. Britton,
S.Liaaen-Jensen,andH.Pfander(BirkhäuserVerlag,2002).
[24] G.E.Bertolesi,N.Debnath,H.R.Malik,L.L.H.Man,andS.McFarlane,TypeIIopsinsintheeye,the
pinealcomplexandtheskinofXenopuslaevis: Usingchangesinskinpigmentationasareadout
ofvisualandcircadianactivity,Front.Neuroanat.15,784478(2021).
[25] H. Liedtke, K. Lopez-Hervas, I. Galván, and et al., Background matching through fast and
reversible melanin-based pigmentation plasticity in tadpoles comes with morphological and
antioxidantchanges,Sci.Rep.13,12064(2023).
[26] M. Asashima, K. Shimada, and C. J. Pfeiffer, Magnetic shielding induces early developmental
abnormalitiesinthenewt,Cynopspyrrhogaster,Bioelectromagnetics12,215(1991).
[27] S.Grimaldi,D.Pozzi,A.Lisi,S.Rieti,V.Manni,G.Ravagnan,L.Giuliani,T.Eremenko,andP.Volpe,
Influenceofthemagneticfieldonthetadpolemetamorphosis,Int.J.Radiat.Med.1,96(2000).
[28] M. Severini, A. M. Dattilo, and A. D. Gaetano, Sublethal effect of a weak intermittent magnetic
33of 250

--- Page 34 ---

fieldonthedevelopmentofXenopuslaevis(daudin)tadpoles,Int.J.Biometeorol.48,91(2003).
[29] H. Z. Haghighi, G. Bertolesi, C. Simon, and S. McFarlane, Weak magnetic field effects on
pigmentationintadpoles,inAPSMarchMeeting (AmericanPhysicalSociety,Minneapolis,2024)
SessionBB02: BiologicalPhysicsattheMolecularScale.
[30] G. Britton, S. Liaaen-Jensen, and H. Pfander, eds., Carotenoids: Volume 4: Natural Functions
(BirkhäuserVerlag,2008).
[31] R. Rishabh, H. Zadeh-Haghighi, D. Salahub, and C. Simon, Radical pairs may explain reactive
oxygen species-mediated effects of hypomagnetic field on neurogenesis, PLoS Comput. Biol.
18,e1010198(2022).
[32] L. Tian, Y. Luo, A. Zhan, J. Ren, H. Qin, and Y. Pan, Hypomagnetic field induces the production
ofreactiveoxygenspeciesandcognitivedeficitsinmicehippocampus,Int.J.Mol.Sci.23,3622
(2022).
[33] C. T. Lefevre and D. A. Bazylinski, Ecology, diversity, and evolution of magnetotactic bacteria,
Microbiol.Mol.Biol.Rev.77,497(2013).
[34] J.KirschvinkandM.Walker,Particlesizeconsiderationsformagnetite-basedmagnetoreceptors,
in Magnetite Biomineralization and Magnetoreception in Organisms: A New Biomagnetism,
TopicsinGeobiology, Vol.5,editedbyJ.Kirschvink, D.Jones,andB.McFadden(PlenumPress,
NewYork,1985).
[35] M.Meister,Physicallimitstomagnetogenetics,eLife5,e17210(2016).
[36] J.Brassart,J.L.Kirschvink,J.B.Phillips,andS.C.Borland,Ferromagneticmaterialintheeastern
red-spottednewtNotophthalmusviridescens,J.Exp.Biol.202,3155–(1999).
[37] S.JohnsenandK.J.Lohmann,Magnetoreceptioninanimals,Phys.Today61,29(2008).
[38] J. Cooke, Properties of the primary organization field in the embryo of Xenopus laevis. IV.
Patternformationandregulationfollowingearlyinhibitionofmitosis,J.Embryol.Exp.Morphol.
30,49(1973).
[39] K.Schulten,C.E.Swenberg,andA.Weller,Abiomagneticsensorymechanismbasedonmagnetic
fieldmodulatedcoherentelectronspinmotion,Z.Phys.Chem.111,1(1978).
[40] T.Ritz,S.Adem,andK.Schulten,Amodelforphotoreceptor-basedmagnetoreceptioninbirds,
Biophys.J.78,707(2000).
[41] A.R.Jones,Magneticfieldeffectsinproteins,Mol.Phys.114,1691(2016).
34 of 250

--- Page 35 ---

[42] J.R.Maze,P.L.Stanwix,J.S.Hodges,S.Hong,J.M.Taylor,P.Cappellaro,L.Jiang,M.V.G.Dutt,
E. Togan, A. S. Zibrov, A. Yacoby, R. L. Walsworth, and M. D. Lukin, Nanoscale magnetic sensing
withanindividualelectronicspinindiamond,Nature455,644(2008).
[43] J. M. Taylor, P. Cappellaro, L. Childress, L. Jiang, D. Budker, P. R. Hemmer, A. Yacoby,
R. Walsworth, and M. D. Lukin, High-sensitivity diamond magnetometer with nanoscale
resolution,Nat.Phys.7,270(2008).
[44] H.Lee,N.Yang,andA.E.Cohen,Mappingnanomagneticfieldsusingaradicalpairreaction,Nano
Lett.11,5367(2011).
[45] A.V.V.Huizen,J.M.Morton,L.J.Kinsey,D.G.V.Kannon,M.A.Saad,T.R.Birkholz,J.M.Czajka,
J. Cyrus, F. S. Barnes, and W. S. Beane, Weak magnetic fields alter stem cell–mediated growth,
Sci.Adv.5,eaau7201(2019).
[46] N. Ikeya and J. R. Woodward, Cellular autofluorescence is magnetic field sensitive, Proc. Natl.
Acad.Sci.U.S.A.118,e2018043118(2021).
[47] Contributorroletaxonomy(CRediT),https://credit.niso.org/(2024),accessed: October12,
2024.
[48] A.Marblestone,A.Gamick,T.Kalil,C.Martin,M.Cvitkovic,andS.G.Rodriques,Unblockresearch
bottleneckswithnon-profitstart-ups,Nature601,188(2022).
[49] S.Mcnamara,M.Wlizla,andM.E.Horb,Husbandry,generalcare,andtransportationofXenopus
laevisandXenopustropicalis,MethodsMol.Biol.1865,1(2018).
[50] M. Wlizla, S. McNamara, and M. E. Horb, Generation and care of Xenopus laevis and Xenopus
tropicalisembryos,MethodsMol.Biol.1865,19(2018).
[51] D.Budker,personalcommunication(2019).
[52] P.Fierlinger,personalcommunication(2019).
[53] A.E.RuarkandM.F.Peters,Helmholtzcoilsforproducinguniformmagneticfields,J.Opt.Soc.
Am.13,205(1926).
[54] C. Kindermann and J.-M. Hero, Pigment cell distribution in a rapid colour changing amphibian
(Litoriawilcoxii),Zoomorphology135,197(2016).
[55] C.T.Rueden,J.Schindelin,M.C.Hiner,B.E.DeZonia,A.E.Walter,E.T.Arena,andK.W.Eliceiri,
ImageJ2: ImageJ for the next generation of scientific image data, BMC Bioinformatics 18, 529
(2017).
35of 250

--- Page 36 ---

[56] J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed. (Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates,Hillsdale,NJ,1988).
[57] N. Cliff, Dominance statistics: Ordinal analyses to answer ordinal questions, Psychol. Bull. 114,
494(1993).
[58] J.Goedhart,Quantificationofdifferencesasanalternativetopvalues,BlogpostonTheNode
(2018),accessed: October12,2024.
[59] The American Society for Testing and Materials, Test method for yellowness index of plastics,
ASTMStandardsD1925-70(1970).
[60] A.R.Smith,Colorgamuttransformpairs,SIGGRAPHComput.Graph.12,12(1978).
[61] R.K.Adair,Constraintsofthermalnoiseontheeffectsofweak60-Hzmagneticfieldsactingon
biologicalmagnetite,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.91,2925(1994).
[62] D.J.Dunlop,Magnetite: Behaviornearthesingle-domainthreshold,Science176,41(1972).
[63] S. H. Eder, H. Cadiou, A. Muhamad, and M. Winklhofer, Magnetic characterization of isolated
candidatevertebratemagnetoreceptorcells,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.109,12022(2012).
[64] B.L.ClitesandJ.T.Pierce,Identifyingcellularandmolecularmechanismsformagnetosensation,
Annu.Rev.Neurosci.40,231(2017).
[65] J. L. Kirschvink and J. L. Gould, Biogenic magnetite as a basis for magnetic field detection in
animals,Biosystems13,181(1981).
[66] S. E. Greene and A. Komeili, Biogenesis and subcellular organization of the magnetosome
organellesofmagnetotacticbacteria,Curr.Opin.CellBiol.24,490(2012).
[67] O. Gorobets, S. Gorobets, and M. Koralewski, Physiological origin of biogenic magnetic
nanoparticles in health and disease: From bacteria to humans, Int. J. Nanomedicine 12, 4371
(2017).
[68] N. B. Edelman, T. Fritz, S. Nimpf, and D. A. Keays, No evidence for intracellular magnetite in
putative vertebrate magnetoreceptors identified by magnetic screening, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A.112,262(2015).
[69] G. Fleissner, B. Stahl, and P. Thalau, A novel concept of Fe-mineral-based magnetoreception:
Histological and physicochemical data from the upper beak of homing pigeons,
Naturwissenschaften94,631(2007).
[70] G. Falkenberg, K. Schuchardt, M. Kuehbacher, P. Thalau, H. Mouritsen, D. Heyers,
36of 250

--- Page 37 ---

G. Wellenreuther, and G. Fleissner, Avian magnetoreception: Elaborate iron mineral containing
dendritesintheupperbeakseemtobeacommonfeatureofbirds,PLoSONE5,e9231(2010).
[71] M. Walker, C. Diebel, and C. Haugh, Structure and function of the vertebrate magnetic sense,
Nature390,371–(1997).
[72] E.M.Pantelouris,B.Knox,andH.Wallace,Ironinamphibianoocytesandembryos,Exp.CellRes.
32,469(1963).
[73] T.Nomizu,K.H.Falchuk,B.L.Vallee,andB.L.Vallee,Zinc,iron,andcoppercontentsofXenopus
laevisoocytesandembryos,Mol.Reprod.Dev.36,419(1993).
[74] J. L. Kirschvink, J. Brassart, and M. H. Nesson, Magnetite-based biological effects in animals:
Biophysical,contamination,andsensoryaspects.EPRI,PaloAlto,CA.ReportTR–111901(1998).
[75] U. E. Steiner and T. Ulrich, Magnetic field effects in chemical kinetics and related phenomena,
Chem.Rev.89,51(1989).
[76] Z.Zeng,J.Wei,Y.Liu,W.Zhang,andT.Mabe,Magnetoreceptionofphotoactivatedcryptochrome
1inelectrochemistryandelectrontransfer,ACSOmega3,4752(2018).
[77] A. Ehrenberg, P.Hemmerich, F. Müller,andW. Pfleiderer, Electronspinresonanceof pteridine
radicalsandthestructureofhydropteridines,Eur.J.Biochem.16,584(1970).
[78] F.Müller,ed.,ChemistryandBiochemistryofFlavoenzymes(CRCPress,1991).
[79] M.J.Leask,Aphysico-chemicalmechanismformagneticfielddetectionbymigratorybirdsand
homingpigeons,Nature267,144(1977).
[80] W. W. Cochran, H. Mouritsen, and M. Wikelski, Migrating songbirds recalibrate their magnetic
compassdailyfromtwilightcues,Science304,405(2004).
[81] H.G.Hiscock,T.W.Hiscock,D.R.Kattnig,T.Scrivener,A.M.Lewis,D.E.Manolopoulos,andP.J.
Hore,Navigatingatnight: Fundamentallimitsonthesensitivityofradicalpairmagnetoreception
underdimlight,Q.Rev.Biophys.52,e9,1(2019).
[82] M. Cifra and P. Pospisil, Ultra-weak photon emission from biological samples: Definition,
mechanisms,properties,detectionandapplications,J.Photochem.Photobiol.B139,2(2014).
[83] R. van Wijk and C. G. J. van Wijk, Ultra-Weak Photon Emission: Characteristics, Origin, and
Application(Springer,2024).
[84] N.F.Ramsey,Amolecularbeamresonancemethodwithseparatedoscillatingfields,Phys.Rev.
78,695(1950).
37of 250

--- Page 38 ---

[85] C. D. Aiello, M. Hirose, and P. Cappellaro, Composite-pulse magnetometry with a solid-state
quantumsensor,Nat.Commun.4,1419(2013).
[86] E.D.Yorke,Apossiblemagnetictransducerinbirds,J.Theor.Biol.77,101(1979).
[87] J.Ashmore,Cochlearouterhaircellmotility,Physiol.Rev.88,173(2008).
[88] J.R.Woodward,T.J.Foster,A.R.Jones,A.T.Salaoru,andN.S.Scrutton,Time-resolvedstudies
ofradicalpairs,Biochem.Soc.Trans.37,358(2009).
38 of 250

--- Page 39 ---

Contents
1 Summary 2
2 Introduction 3
3 Theexperimentiswell-controlled,withmagneticfieldenvironmentastheonly
significantvariable 5
4 Thehypomagneticfieldincreasestheeccentricityofday1embryos 11
5 Thehypomagneticfielddecreasestheyellownessofday2tadpoles 15
6 Thehypomagneticfieldincreasesthelengthofday3tadpoles 19
7 Thehypomagneticfieldaltersthemorphologicalprogressionoftadpolesbetween
days2and3 22
8 Discussion 25
9 Conclusion 29
10 Authorcontribution 30
11 Acknowledgements 31
Bibliography 32
SI1 Froghusbandry 44
SI2 Eggharvestingandfertilizationprotocol 45
SI3 Eggrandomizationprocedure 47
SI4 Dailyimageacquisition 48
SI5 Eachbatchataglance 49
SI6 Control: Theeffectofaparticularfemalefrogaseggsourceisnotsignificant 50
SI7 Control: Theeffectofmagneticfieldconditionsontheoverallhealthscoresof
thetadpolesisnotsignificant 53
SI8 Control: The effect of magnetic field conditions on the mortality rates of
communallyraisedtadpolesisnotsignificant 56
SI9 Description: hypomagneticchamber 57
SI10 Description: controlbox 63
SI11 Positivecontrolrunprocedure 65
39of 250

--- Page 40 ---

SI12 Comparison: Environmentalconditionsinthehypomagneticchamberandthe
controlboxaresimilar 66
SI12.1 Temperature 66
SI12.2 Humidity 68
SI12.3 Pressure 70
SI12.4Lightintensityandspectrum 70
SI12.5 Airvolume 72
SI13 Imagesegmentation 75
SI14 Effectsizeanalysis 77
SI15 Effectchangeanalysis 80
SI16 Statisticalanalysis 82
SI16.1 Confidenceintervalcalculation 82
SI16.2Bootstrapping 82
SI16.3 Whywealsoreportpvalues 83
SI16.4T-testandMann-Whitneytest 83
SI16.5 Kruskal-WallistestandDunn'spost-hoctest 83
SI16.6ART-ANOVAtestandTukey'spost-hoctest 84
SI17 Day1morphologicalmeasures: eccentricity,elongation,roundness,andsolidity 86
SI18 Day1eccentricity(norm.) results 89
SI19 Day1eccentricityresults 91
SI20 Day1elongation(norm.) results 93
SI21 Day1elongationresults 95
SI22 Day1roundness(norm.) results 97
SI23 Day1roundnessresults 99
SI24 Day1solidity(norm.) results 101
SI25 Day1solidityresults 103
SI26 Day 2 color measures: L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness, RGB yellowness, Yellowness Index,
andHSVyellowness 106
SI27 Day2L⋆a⋆b⋆yellowness(norm.) results 110
40of 250

--- Page 41 ---

SI28 Day2L⋆a⋆b⋆yellownessresults 112
SI29 Day2RGByellowness(norm.) results 114
SI30 Day2RGByellownessresults 116
SI31 Day2YellownessIndex(norm.) results 118
SI32 Day2YellownessIndexresults 120
SI33 Day2HSVyellowness(norm.) results 122
SI34 Day2HSVyellownessresults 124
SI35 Day 3 morphological measures: major axis, perimeter, area, total curvature,
solidity,elongationandroundness 126
SI36 Day3majoraxis(norm.) results 129
SI37 Day3perimeter(norm.) results 131
SI38 Day3area(norm.) results 133
SI39 Day3curvature(norm.) results 135
SI40 Day3solidity(norm.) results 137
SI41 Day3solidityresults 139
SI42 Day3elongation(norm.) results 141
SI43 Day3elongationresults 143
SI44 Day3roundness(norm.) results 145
SI45 Day3roundnessresults 147
SI46 Day2to3measures: majoraxis,totalcurvature,convexityandsolidity 149
SI47 Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference 151
SI48 Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,visibility 153
SI49 Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,percentagechange 155
SI50 Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference 157
SI51 Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference 159
SI52 Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,visibility 161
SI53 Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,percentagechange 163
SI54 Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference 165
SI55 Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference 167
41 of 250

--- Page 42 ---

SI56 Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,visibility 169
SI57 Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,percentagechange 171
SI58 Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference 173
SI59 Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference 175
SI60 Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,visibility 177
SI61 Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,percentagechange 179
SI62 Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference 181
SI63 Additionalmorphologicalmeasures 183
SI64 Day1perimeter(norm.) results 185
SI65 Day1area(norm.) results 187
SI66 Day2majoraxis(norm.) results 189
SI67 Day2perimeter(norm.) results 191
SI68 Day2area(norm.) results 193
SI69 GuidetoGitHubrepository 196
SI70 Guidetorawdata 197
SI71 Guidetoplateposters 198
SI72 Guidetosegmentedimages 199
SI73 Guidetopythoncode 200
SI74 Guidetostatisticalanalysisplots 202
SI75 Guidetocalibrationdata 209
SI76 Statisticalcomparisonsacrosscontrolandhypomagneticpopulations 210
SI77 Discussion: Competing biological magnetic field sensing hypotheses favor
quantummechanisms 242
SI78 Quantumfeaturesofmagneticfieldsensingviaelectronspin-dependentchemical
reactions 248
SI78.1 Electronspin-dependentchemicalreactionsasquantumsensing 248
SI78.2Timeandenergyscales 248
SI78.3 Sensitivityconsiderations 249
SI78.4Magnitudeofeffectasafunctionoffieldstrength 250
42 of 250

--- Page 43 ---

Supplementary Information

--- Page 44 ---

SI1. Froghusbandry
Foreachbatch,twowild-typeXenopuslaevisadultfemalefrogswereusedforeggharvesting.
The frogs were sourced from the National Xenopus Resource at the Marine Biological
Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, and acclimated in the Los Angeles laboratory
foratleasttwoweeks. Theywerehousedinfishtanksequippedwithmechanical,chemical,
and biological filtration systems. The tanks were filled with tap water. The pH of the water
was adjusted to 7.4–7.8 using sodium bicarbonate, chlorine was neutralized with sodium
thiosulfate, and reef salts were added to optimize water hardness to an optimal value of
around 1600 (in units of mg/L of CaCO ). Nitrifying bacteria were used to maintain optimal
3
nitrate and nitrite levels. Water quality was monitored at least four times per week, and
partialortotalwaterchangeswereperformedperiodically. Thefrogswerefedtwiceweekly
withNascofrogbrittle.
No individual frog was used more than once to provide eggs for the experiment. Following
egg harvesting, the two females were euthanized using an anesthetic overdose, ensuring a
humane and efficient process, as described in [49]. The frogs were placed in a water bath
containing 0.5% MS222, buffered to pH 7.0, for 30 minutes. Afterward, unresponsiveness
wasconfirmedthrougha footpinchtest.
44of 250

--- Page 45 ---

SI2. Eggharvestingandfertilizationprotocol
Embryosweregeneratedusingtheinvitrofertilizationmethoddetailedin[50],summarized
here for convenience. Two days prior to fertilization, each adult female frog was primed
withaninjectionof50Uofpregnantmareserumgonadotropin(PMSG)in0.5mLphosphate
buffer saline (PBS, density of 100 U/mL). The following evening (after 5 pm), the frogs were
boosted with an injection of 500 U of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in 0.5 mL PBS
(density of 1000 U/mL). The next morning, eggs were collected in a Petri dish by physically
squeezingthefrogs.
AdultmalefrogtestesweresourcedweeklyfromtheNationalXenopusResourceandstored
◦
at4 C.
Before detailing the fertilization protocol, the required solutions and their preparation are
asfollows.
Marc’sModifiedRinger’s(MMR)solution:
Toprepare1 L of 10x MMR, mixthefollowingwith1 L of deionized(DI) water:
58.44g NaCl(1 M)
1.50g KCl(20mM)
·
2.50g MgSO 7H O (10 mM)
4 2
·
2.94g CaCl 2H O (20mM)
2 2
11.91g Hepes(50 mM)
Adjust the pH to 7.4–7.8 using NaOH. Dilute to 1x MMR and 0.1x MMR as needed (1:10 and
1:100ratioswithDI water).
2%L-cysteine:
∼
Dissolve2 g of L-cysteinein100 mL of 0.1x MMR andadjustthepH to 8.0withNaOH.
For each fertilization procedure, half a testis was crushed just before egg collection in 1 mL
of1x MMR solutionusinga 1.5 mL plasticcentrifugetube anda plasticpestle.
45of 250

--- Page 46 ---

Immediately after collection, the eggs were evenly spread as a single layer in a dish using
a plastic pipette, and the testis solution was applied uniformly before being gently mixed.
Afterallowingthemixturetositfor5minutes,thedishwasfloodedwith0.1xMMRandmixed
againtoensurethoroughcoverage.
Twenty minutes later, the 0.1x MMR solution was removed and the dish flooded with the 2%
L-cysteinesolution. Theeggswerelefttositfor5minutes,andwereperiodicallymixedwith
aplasticpipettetoremovethejellycoat. Oncetheeggsclumpedtogether,thecysteinewas
removed,andthedishwaswashed3–5timeswith0.1xMMRbeforebeingfloodedagainwith
fresh0.1x MMR.
46 of 250

--- Page 47 ---

SI3. Eggrandomizationprocedure
Afterfertilization,viableeggswereidentifiedusingastereomicroscope. Healthyeggsdisplay
a dark upper half and a small lighter dot indicating sperm entry. Poor-quality eggs appear
swollenandpale.
Eggs were sorted into 24- or 48-well plates, with each well containing 1 mL of 0.1x MMR for
the24-wellplatesand0.75mLforthe48-wellplates. Oneeggwasplacedperwelltoprevent
cross-contamination and to enable the tracking of individual tadpoles over the three days
oftheexperiment.
Two plates were filled simultaneously, alternating one egg per plate. Once filled, one plate
was immediately placed in the hypomagnetic chamber and the other in the control box,
both covered with plastic lids. This process continued until all viable eggs were sorted.
The embryos, then at the 1- or 2-cell stage, were left undisturbed for 24 hours until data
collectionon thefirstdayof theexperiment.
47of 250

--- Page 48 ---

SI4. Dailyimageacquisition
One image of each tadpole was captured daily for three days, approximately at every 24
hours post-fertilization, with control images always taken first. Imaging for all plates was
typically completed within one hour; the imaging time per plate was usually well under 10
minutes. Imaging was conducted one plate at a time, with only one plate removed from its
environment at any given moment; each plate was promptly returned to its environment
immediatelyaftertheimagingprocess.
While magnification was consistent for all images taken on a given day, slight variations
betweendayswerepossibledue totheanalogmagnificationcontrol.
Day 1 and day 2 images were taken from live tadpoles, whereas day 3 images were captured
after the tadpoles were euthanized in formalin and fixed. The exception to that are day 3
pictures from batches B1–3, which were also taken with live tadpoles. After day 3 imaging,
eachtadpolewasstoredindividuallyinlabeled1.5mLcentrifugetubesforpotentialfollow-up
work. Samplesareavailableupon request.
48of 250

--- Page 49 ---

SI5. Eachbatchataglance
Relevantparametersforeachbatchcanbe foundsummarizedinthetablebelow:
# Fertilization Temp. Shielding Res. field Day3formalin? Observation
B1 2024/05/01 ambient DC < ∼10nT no 0.30–0.50oC ↓ inhypo
B2 2024/05/19 ambient DC <1nT no 0.30–0.50oC ↓ inhypo
B3 2024/05/30 ambient DC <1nT no 0.30–0.50oC ↓ inhypo
B4 2024/07/08 labAC,70oF DC <1nT yes 0.30–0.50oC ↓ inhypo
B5 2024/07/24 labAC,70oF DC <1nT yes 0.30–0.50oC ↓ inhypo
B6 2024/08/05 labAC,70oF AC+DC <1nT yes 0.10–0.15oC ↑ inhypo
B7 2024/08/19 labAC,70oF AC+DC <1nT yes 0.10–0.15oC ↑ inhypo
+1 2024/08/27 labAC,70oF AC+DC ∼ 30µT yes 0.45oC ↑ inhypo
+2 2024/09/02 labAC,70oF AC+DC ∼ 30µT yes 0.45oC ↑ inhypo
+3 2024/09/09 labAC,70oF AC+DC ∼ 30µT yes 0.45oC ↑ inhypo
TableSI1: Detailsforeachbatch. B1–7areexperimentalruns;+1–3arepositivecontrolruns.
‘AC’ in the Temperature (‘Temp.’) column means ‘air conditioning’; ‘AC’ in the Shielding
column means ‘alternating current’. ‘Res. field’ stands for ‘residual field’ inside the
hypomagnetic chamber. The column ‘Day 3 formalin?’ refers to whether day 3 images
weretakenafterfixationwithformalin.
Batch B1 was run without active compensation inside the hypomagnetic chamber (see
<
Supplementary Section SI9),yieldinga residualmagneticfieldof ∼ 10nT.
Before installation of the AC shielding inside the hypomagnetic chamber, the temperature
wasuptohalfadegreelowerinthehypomagneticchamberthaninthecontrolbox. Afterthe
AC shielding was added, this temperature difference shifted slightly, with the hypomagnetic
chambernowbeingmarginallywarmer(detailsinSupplementary SectionSI12).
49 of 250

--- Page 50 ---

SI6. Control: Theeffectofaparticularfemalefrogaseggsourceisnot
significant
Toillustratethehighvariabilityintheexperiments,batchB6wasdesignedtocontrolforthe
influenceofeggsfromdifferentfemalesontheresults. Eggsfromtwodifferentfemaleswere
fertilizedusingspermfromthesamemalefrog,withapproximately100eggsfromeachfemale
placed under each magnetic field condition. This setup allows for a robust comparison, as
any differences observed are likely attributable to the female source, providing a strong
controlforthepotentialinfluenceof a particularfemaleon theresults.
The violin plots of Supplementary Fig. SI1 display kernel density estimates for various
morphologicalpropertiesoverthethreedaysoftheexperiment;dataobtainedfromembryos
ofeachfemaleareseparatedbythedashedblackline. Foreachfemale,aMann-Whitney[17]
pvalueisprovidedwhensignificant(here,psmallerthan0.01);otherwise,‘n.s.’ indicatesno
significance. Differences between eggs from different females in the control condition are
evaluated using the Kruskal-Wallis test [17], and the p value is displayed if it is smaller than
0.01. We only compare control groups across females, as it is not appropriate to compare
the hypomagnetic condition between females due to differing effects that might arise from
theenvironmentalconditionsthemselves.
Itisreassuringthatnearlyallmorphologicalpropertiesusedtodifferentiatethecontroland
hypomagnetic populations—except for roundness on day 1—show no statistically significant
differences within the control group based on the female frog. This consistency within the
controlconditionsuggeststhattheobserveddifferencesbetweencontrolandhypomagnetic
populationsarenotinfluencedbyvariability amongfemale frogs.
We hypothesize that eggs with either higher or lower overall health may exhibit varying
susceptibility to the hypomagnetic environment, potentially leading to differential
developmental effects. Further studies focusing on the initial health of the eggs and the
healthof themothercouldprovidevaluableinsightsintothisphenomenon.
50 of 250

--- Page 51 ---

51of 250

--- Page 52 ---

Fig.SI1: Maternalvariabilitydoesnotaccountforbatchvariability. Acrossthethreedays
oftheexperiment,nearlyallmorphologicalpropertiesexaminedaboveshownostatistically
significant differences within the control group, based on the female frog that provided
the eggs. This consistency suggests that the observed distinctions between control and
hypomagnetic populations are largely independent of maternal variability. Moreover, the
week-to-week variability between batches cannot be solely attributed to different females
providingtheeggs.
52of 250

--- Page 53 ---

SI7. Control: Theeffectofmagneticfieldconditionsontheoverallhealth
scoresofthetadpolesisnotsignificant
To evaluate the impact of the hypomagnetic condition on overall tadpole health, we
implementedtheonlyhuman-madescoringsystemusedinthisstudy. Eachtadpolereceived
a score: 1 for healthy, 2 for tadpoles with one morphological defect or adverse condition, 3
for those with multiple defects or adverse conditions, and 4 for tadpoles deceased by day
1 p.f. Descriptions of defects, if any are present, are provided above the tadpole images in
the publicly available plate posters, which can be found in the GitHub folder 10 Posters and
aredetailedinSupplementary SectionSI71.
Contrary to previous findings in the literature (e.g., [6]), our results described below do not
show that tadpoles raised under hypomagnetic conditions are statistically different from
control tadpoles in terms of overall health based on the scoring scale described above.
In other words, aside from an accelerated development, we do not observe that tadpoles
raisedinthehypomagneticchamberarelesshealthyorexhibitahigherrateofabnormalities
comparedtothecontrolgroup.
Based on the health scoring, the results displayed in Supplementary Fig. SI2 suggest that
control and hypomagnetic tadpole populations exhibit remarkably similar health levels.
Additionally, the positive control populations show better overall health compared to the
tadpolesintheexperimentalruns;weattributethispuzzlingfacttothehighvariabilityacross
batches.
We conducted χ2 tests on the health-scored tadpole populations. For the aggregated
data of experimental batches B1–7, the contingency Table SI2 yields a χ2 statistic of 4.52
and a non-significant p value of 0.21. For the aggregated positive control runs +1–3, the
contingency Table SI3 yields a χ2 statistic of 0.85 with a non-significant p value of 0.84.
Additionally,χ2 testsforindividualbatchesrevealednopvaluesbelow0.01. Alltheseresults
stronglysuggestthatthecontrolandhypomagneticpopulationsarenotstatisticallydifferent
intermsof healthscores.
53of 250

--- Page 54 ---

Wenowraisetwokeypoints. First,wespeculatewhetheraccelerateddevelopment,despite
our present observations, could in principle lead to an increased occurrence of
abnormalities. While we do not observe this effect in our current data, accelerated growth
might inherently increase the likelihood of developmental errors. Second, we consider the
potential influence of having disrupted chemical signaling among tadpoles by raising them
inisolationwithinseparatewells. Ourcontrolledexperimentalsetupcouldhavemaskedthe
emergence of developmental abnormalities whose cues are chemical in origin, or of toxic
chemicals that increase mortality. To address this second point, we performed additional
experimentswithtadpolesraisedcommunallyinPetridishes(seeSupplementarySectionSI8
below). Our findings, however, show that raising tadpoles together for three days did not
significantly alter the rate of abnormalities either. Further studies might explore whether
more extended periods of communal rearing or larger population sizes could reveal a
strongerroleforchemicalsignalingintadpoledevelopmentunderhypomagneticconditions.
healthscorevs.cond. control hypomagnetic healthscorevs.cond. control hypomagnetic
1 513 541 1 687 698
2 55 55 2 35 34
3 52 62 3 24 19
4 268 230 4 50 46
TableSI2: Contingencytablefor TableSI3: Contingencytableforpositive
experimentalbatchesB1–7. controlruns+1–3.
54of 250

--- Page 55 ---

Assessed status by batch
C H mean ± std
median
dead
2+ conds.
1 cond.
healthy
B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 +1 +2 +3
Fig. SI2: Magnetic field conditions do not significantly alter the health of the tadpoles.
Thehuman-madehealthscoringrevealsthatcontrolandhypomagnetictadpolepopulations
exhibit remarkably similar health levels. A score of 1 is given for healthy tadpoles; of 2 for
tadpoles with one morphological defect or adverse condition; of 3 for those with multiple
defectsor adverseconditions;andof 4 fortadpolesdeceasedbyday1 p.f.
55 of 250

--- Page 56 ---

SI8. Control: Theeffectofmagneticfieldconditionsonthemortality
ratesofcommunallyraisedtadpolesisnotsignificant
Weoptedtoraisethetadpolesindividuallyinseparatewellstomitigatethehighermortality
rate commonly observed in tadpoles raised communally. In shared environments,
contaminants produced by sick tadpoles or decomposing debris from dead tadpoles can
spread. By isolating each tadpole, we aimed to prevent cross-contamination and ensure
more controlled, consistent experimental conditions, which we believe were crucial for
obtainingreliabledatatosupport our conclusions.
ForbatchesB5andB6,inadditiontothetadpolesinthewellplates,wealsoraisedtadpoles
communallyinPetridishes. TheimagesforthesePetridishescanbefoundinGitHubfolder
10Posters,withthelabel‘PD’.
StatisticaltestscomparingmortalityratesbetweenthetwoconditionsinPetridishesrevealed
no significant differences. For instance, in batch B5, both the log-rank test [17] and the
Cox proportional hazards model analysis [17] showed no statistically significant differences
between the survival curves of the control and hypomagnetic groups, with p values of 0.81
and 0.84, respectively. Similar results were obtained when the health score described in
Supplementary Section SI7wasappliedtothePetridishpopulations.
Based on our findings, we conclude that raising tadpoles communally does not increase
themortalityrateintadpolesexposedtohypomagneticconditions. Thehigherabnormality
ratesreportedinpreviousstudiesforamphibiansraisedwithoutEarth’sgeomagneticfield[6,
26, 51, 52] thusremainunexplainedinlightof our data.
56of 250

--- Page 57 ---

SI9. Description: hypomagneticchamber
The hypomagnetic chamber was custom-designed by one of the authors (P. F.) and
manufacturedbyMagneticShieldsLtd. Itwasoriginallydeliveredwithtwolayersofmu-metal,
<
providingshieldingagainstlow-frequencyfields(∼100Hz)butbeinglesseffectiveatblocking
high-frequency electromagnetic radiation; we refer to this configuration as having ‘DC
shielding’,whichisdepictedinSupplementaryFig.SI3. DataforbatchesB1–5wereobtained
using this configuration. Between batches B5 and B6, an additional copper layer was
permanently installed to also shield against high-frequency electromagnetic radiation; we
refertothisconfigurationof thehypomagneticchamberashaving‘AC+DCshielding’.
The residual magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber was measured with the
tri-axialoptically-pumpedmagnetometerQuSpinQZFM.Thismagnetometerhasanintrinsic
offset from the absolute zero that can slowly drift over a period of weeks (we measured it
to shift by about 500 pT over the course of 6 weeks). For this reason, since our goal was to
getascloseaspossibletozeroresidualfield,themagnetometeroffsetwasmeasuredevery
two weeks and accounted for in the magnetic field calibration. The offset was calculated
by performing a field measurement several times (usually 8 to 12) in the center of the
hypomagnetic chamber, each time rotating the magnetometer by 180o. In this way, taking
the x axis as an example and calling B the actual residual magnetic field, we should be
x
measuring B and -B in an alternate fashion. Because of the intrinsic offset, the actual
x x
measurement will have a component B that does not depend on the direction the
offsetx
sensorisfacing. ThismakesthevaluereadbythemagnetometerB = B +B and
measx+ x offsetx
B = −B +B when measuring along +x and -x, respectively. After the field value
measx- x offsetx
was measured a few times, the offset was computed using the average values of B
measx+
and B ; assuming the true value B does not change, the offset is thus estimated as
measx- x
B = (B +B )/2. Once the offset was found, the final estimation of the
offsetx measx+avg measx-avg
magnetic field value was computed using B = B −B . The same procedure was
x measx+ offsetx
applied to find the offset for the other axes. In our case, the offsets were estimated to be
B = − 1492 pT, B = 257 pT and B = 3949 pT. In this work, whenever we
offsetx offsety offsetz √
mention a residual magnetic field B, it is calculated using the formula B = B2 +B2 +B2,
x y z
thusaccountingfortheintrinsicoffsetof themagnetometer.
57 of 250

--- Page 58 ---

To minimize the residual magnetic field, degaussing should in principle be performed each
time the hypomagnetic chamber is open and closed. This process involves applying a
large, low-frequency AC current to a cable that encircles the chamber’s edges. As the
currentisgraduallyreducedtozero,small,randomlyorientedmagneticdomainsformwithin
the mu-metal layers, ensuring a minimal net residual magnetic field inside the chamber.
Using this method, residual fields as low as 4 nT have been measured at the center of
the chamber. However, in our experiment, we chose not to degauss the chamber after
each opening to avoid exposing the tadpoles to the strong AC field generated during the
procedure. In addition, as shown in Supplementary Fig. SI4, the residual magnetic field
changes significantly after the hypomagnetic chamber is opened following degaussing;
opening and closing the chamber door is necessary whenever tadpoles are moved in or
out for imaging. This occurs mostly because the inner mu-metal layer becomes partially
magnetized by exposure to Earth’s magnetic field. However, we observed that, after 4
to 5 openings following degaussing, the magnetic field stabilized and no longer changed
significantly. Therefore, before each experimental run, we performed degaussing, followed
byseveraldoor openingsandclosings,beforeconductingthefinalfieldcalibration.
×
Theresidualfieldinsideofthehypomagneticchamberwascalibratedoveravolumeof16’
16’ × 16’,asrepresentedschematicallyinSupplementaryFig.SI5a). Theresultingfieldmapis
depictedinb);the3DinteractiveversionofthisplotisavailableasanHTMLfileintheGitHub
repositoryforthiswork(seeSupplementarySectionsSI69and SI75). Themeasurementwas
taken after opening the door of the hypomagnetic chamber several times after performing
degaussing. The calibration shows that, while the field is not very uniform over the large
volumeinspected,theareatowardsthecenterandbackofthewoodenshelfisveryuniform
overthesizerequiredfora fewplatestobe placed. Forthisreason,wedecidedtoposition
theplatesalwaysclosetothecenterof thewoodenshelfandslightlytowardstheback.
58 of 250

--- Page 59 ---

Asalaststepinthereductionoftheresidualmagneticfield,anactivecompensationsystem
wasdesignedandbuiltbyoneoftheauthors(A.L.). AsshowninSupplementaryFig.SI3,the
compensationfortheyaxisconsistsoffoursingle-turncoilsthattraveltheperimeterofthe
chamber(takenasasectionofthexzplane);thiscoilsystemwasinstalledbyMagneticShields
Ltd. Compensationalongthexandzaxeswasachievedbybuildingthecoilsdepictedinpanel
a) of Fig. 1. These coils have a Helmholtz geometry [53], ensuring good uniformity of the
produced field; their support was constructed entirely out of plastic, including the screws,
to ensure no stray magnetic field was introduced inside the hypomagnetic chamber. Each
coil support in this system holds both one single-turn coil used for active compensation of
theresidualnT-levelmagneticfield,andone10-turncoilusedtoreplicateEarth’smagnetic
field inside the hypomagnetic chamber for the positive control runs (see Supplementary
Section SI11).
ActivecompensationwasperformedusingaQuSpinLowNoiseCoilDriverandthesingle-turn
coil set. With this setup, it is possible to control the magnetic field value in each axis with
a precision of < 0.1 nT. However, due to the slight fluctuations in magnetic field inside the
hypomagnetic chamber caused by the opening and closing of the door, and the gradual
drift in the magnetometer intrinsic offset, we can only confidently state that the residual
magneticfieldremainedbelow1 nT throughouttheexperiment.
59of 250

--- Page 60 ---

Fig.SI3: HypomagneticchamberwithDCshieldingonly. Thisconfigurationhastwolayers
ofmu-metal. Alsoshownareycoilsformagneticfieldcompensation,andthewhitewooden
shelfwherethesamplesareplaced.
60 of 250

--- Page 61 ---

Magnetic field changes during degaussing (DG) and door openings (DO)
nT
10
9
8
7
6
5
G G G O G f f G G O O O O O
D D D D D o D D D D D D D
B e f o r e 1 st 2 n d A f t e r 1 st 3r d e r s u p pl y 4t h 5t h A f t e r 2 n d A f t e r 3r d A f t e r 4t h A f t e r 5t h A f t e r 6t h
w
o
P
Fig.SI4: Degaussinganddooropeninginfluenceontheresidualmagneticfieldinsidethe
hypomagneticchamber. Thefieldwasmeasuredat thecenterof thewoodenshelf.
61of 250

--- Page 62 ---

a) magnetic field mapping b) 3D magnetic field map nT
20
18
15
16
10
z
5 14
0
12
10
5 10
0
y 10 8
5
-5
0
-10 -5 x 6
-10
Fig. SI5: Residual field mapping and calibration. a) The magnetic field was mapped over
× ×
a volume of 16’ 16’ 16’ and the residual field was measured in each of the points
represented. b) The mapped field shows the field uniformity and can be inspected in the
3D interactive HTML plot available in the GitHub repository (see text for details). The photo
in a)istakenwiththesameperspectiveastheplotinb).
62of 250

--- Page 63 ---

SI10. Description: controlbox
We chose to use an inactive (i.e., switched off, but not unplugged) cell incubator (Forma
Scientific CO Water Jacketed Incubator) already available in the lab as the control
2
environment for this experiment, as shown in Supplementary Fig. SI6, which includes a
sampleplacementoverview. Theinternalglassdoorisalsoclosedwhenthecontrolsamples
are inside. This ‘control box’ exhibits similar environmental conditions to those of the
hypomagneticchamber,asconfirmedbythedatapresentedinSupplementary Fig.SI7.
Earth’s weak DC magnetic field, along with any ambient AC magnetic fields, are not blocked
by the control box. While the control box is switched off, it is positioned against a wall with
electrical connections and is approximately 1 m from the nearest switched on electronic
device. We find it unlikely that measurable stray AC magnetic fields were generated within
thecontrolboxduetotheminimalACcurrentdrawnfromthewallforthefollowingreason:
Our most sensitive magnetometer, the QuSpin QZFM, with a bandwidth that includes 60
Hz,detectednodifferencesatthenTlevelduringcalibrationofthehypomagneticchamber
whencurrentsourceswerealternatelypluggedintothewallorunpluggedwhileswitchedoff.
Thisstronglysuggeststhatthecontrolboxbeingpluggedindidnotintroduceanydetectable
ACmagneticfields.
TheDCmagneticfieldenvironmentinsidethecontrolboxwasmeasuredbyaLakeshoreF71
Teslametertobe30.2µTinmagnitude(within-planecomponentsof12.2and7.7µT,andan
axialcomponentof 26.6µT).
We do not believe that there were measurable stray AC fields from the fact that the control
box was plugged to the wall for the following reason. Our most sensitive magnetometer,
the QuSpin QZFM, has a bandwidth including 60 Hz; during calibration of the hypomagnetic
chamber magnetic field conditions, the QuSpin QZFM could not detect differences at the
nTlevelwhen our currentsourceswereplugged/unpluggedfromthewall.
63of 250

--- Page 64 ---

Fig. SI6: The control box is an incubator that is switched off, and that has a similar
environment to the hypomagnetic chamber. Also shown is the metallic shelf where the
samplesareplaced.
64 of 250

--- Page 65 ---

SI11. Positivecontrolrunprocedure
Inthepositivecontrolruns,themagneticfieldofthecontrolbox(detailedinSupplementary
Section SI10) was replicated inside the hypomagnetic chamber, maintaining the same
orientation relative to the plane in which the plates containing the tadpole embryos were
positioned. This ensures that any potential effects related to the direction of the magnetic
fieldareeliminated.
Two Jesverty SPS-3010 DC power supplies were used to drive current into a two-
dimensional, 10-turn Helmholtz coil system. The current intensities used for reproducing
Earth’s magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber were 0.62 A through the x coils,
and 1.28 A through the z coils shown in Fig. 1 a), for a total power consumption of 2.5 W.
The dissipated power is responsible for the slightly higher temperature measured in the
hypomagnetic chamber during the positive control runs, as discussed below in
Supplementary Section SI12.
65of 250

--- Page 66 ---

SI12. Comparison: Environmentalconditionsinthehypomagnetic
chamberandthecontrolboxaresimilar
SupplementaryFig.SI7presentsacomparisonofhumidityandpressureconditionsbetween
thehypomagneticchamberandthecontrolbox,alongsidethetemperaturecurvesfromthe
maintext. ThecurveswererecordedforthehypomagneticchamberwithonlyDCshielding
(shown in a)panels) and with both DC and AC shielding (shown in b)panels). As part of the
positivecontrolrunprocedure(describedinSupplementarySectionSI11),wealsocalibrated
humidity andpressurefortheseruns(showninc)panels).
The measurements shown in Supplementary Fig. SI7 were acquired simultaneously in both
the control box and the hypomagnetic chamber using a pair of Element-A sensors from
Elemental Machines. Placing sensors inside the environments during experimental runs
would have interfered with the magnetic field conditions. As a result, all calibrations for
temperature,humidity,pressure,andlightwereperformedseparatelyfromtheexperiments,
with careful replication of the experimental conditions. These calibration curves were
recordedafterthesensorshadbeeninsidetheirrespectiveenvironmentsforover24hours
withthedoorsclosed.
SI12.1. Temperature
Itcantakeuptoafulldayforthetemperaturetostabilizeafterthedoorshavebeenclosed;in
otherwords,startingwiththecontrolboxandthehypomagneticchamberinitiallyinthermal
equilibriumwiththelab,whosetemperatureismeasuredatapproximately20.15oCwhenthe
air conditioning is set to 70oF, it can take up to a full day for the temperatures to reach
the equilibrium conditions shown in Supplementary Fig. SI7. To minimize the temperature
difference between the environments, both the hypomagnetic chamber and the control
incubatorwereleftopenforatleastadaybeforeeachexperimentalrunbegan. Additionally,
the doors of both environments were opened multiple times daily to remove the plates
for measurement. Considering these factors, the actual temperature difference during the
experimentwaslikelylesspronouncedthanwhatisshown inthecalibrationcurves.
66of 250

--- Page 67 ---

In the first five batches of the experiment (B1–5), with only DC shielding, the temperature in
thehypomagneticchamberwasmeasuredtobe0.30–0.50oClowerthaninthecontrolbox.
Thisparticularcalibrationwasperformedwhenthelabairconditioningwasoff;thisexplains
why the control box’s temperature, at 20.6oC, is slightly higher than in the other calibration
curves, at 20.1oC, which were taken with the lab air conditioning on and set to 70oF. The
slightly higher temperature in the control box reinforces our argument that accelerated
development occurs in the hypomagnetic chamber, even when its temperature is slightly
lowerthanthatofthecontrolbox. Thiscalibrationwascutshortduetosensormalfunction,
lasting only 6 hours, and we were unable to conduct a more thorough calibration before
the permanent installation of the AC shielding. After the copper shell was added, the
temperatureinthehypomagneticchamberwasfoundtobeslightlyhigherthaninthecontrol
box by about 0.10–0.15oC. When simulating Earth’s magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic
chamberforthepositivecontrolruns,theheatgeneratedbythecoilsfurtherincreasedthe
temperature difference to approximately 0.45oC. This aggregate temperature trend could
nothaveinfluencedourresults,whichdemonstratefasterdevelopmentinthehypomagnetic
populationswithbothDCandAC+DCshielding,andnosignificantdifferenceinthepositive
controlruns. ThisfurthersupportsthehypothesisthattheabsenceofEarth’smagneticfield
accelerates Xenopuslaevis embryodevelopment.
AsimplisticQ modelissometimesusedtoprovidearoughestimateonhowembryogenesis
10
changes with temperature; the Q coefficient describes how the rate of a physiological
10
processisalteredupon a 10oC increaseintemperature:
Ratechangefactor = (Q 10 )
T2
1
−
0
T1
, (SI1)
with the temperatures T and T in oC. For amphibians, Q is typically between 2 and 3 [13].
1 2 10
A Q of 2 (respectively, of 3) means the development rate doubles (triples) with a 10oC
10
increase. Our temperature differential is at most approximately 0.50oC; for a Q of 2 (3),
10
thistranslatesintoapproximately50(144)minutesofaccelerateddevelopmentperdaythat
could be attributable to the temperature difference between the hypomagnetic chamber
andthecontrolbox. However,webelievethatadevelopmentspeed-upofonetotwohours
perdaycannotfullyexplainthesignificantdevelopmentalchangeswehaveobserved.
67of 250

--- Page 68 ---

Unfortunately, there is no published data that extends beyond the first 24 hours p.f. [13]
to provide a comparison of developmental stages as a function of time during Xenopus
embryogenesis; the existing tables are for up to 22 hours p.f. at 18oC and up to 24 hours at
22oC.Whenassessedfordevelopment,ourimagestakenat24hoursp.f.,fortadpolesraised
at the nominal lab temperature of approximately 20.15oC, fall within the expected range of
NFstages18 to24[15].
SI12.2. Humidity
Humidityinfluencesthemoisturecontentofthesurroundingair,whichinturnaffectswater
balance and gas exchange in embryos. For batches B1 through B5, the humidity in the
control box and in the hypomagnetic chamber differs by only approximately 1%, which is
negligible, with the hypomagnetic chamber being slightly more humid. For batches B6
and B7, however, humidity is approximately 7% higher in the control box, meaning that
evaporation inside the hypomagnetic chamber, at 60% RH, is nominally about 18% higher
than in the control box, at 67% RH (evaporation rate E ∝ (100 - RH); relative evaporation
RH
E ∼
increase 60 1.18). Condensation on the inner surfaces of the lids was rarely observed
E
67
when the plates were removed for imaging from either the hypomagnetic chamber or the
control box. While the plastic lids on the plates reduce overall evaporation, the relative
difference between the two humidity conditions should still persist. Lower humidity can
lead to faster heat loss due to evaporation, which acts as a cooling process by absorbing
heat and could effectively slow developmental processes by lowering the temperature in
the embryos’ immediate environment. This cooling effect would be expected to slow the
development of the tadpoles in the hypomagnetic chamber. Contrary to this expectation,
we observe accelerated development in that population. Overall, given the small humidity
difference in most batches, we expect these effects to be minimal, with the larger humidity
differenceinB6andB7potentiallyhavingamorenoticeableimpactondevelopment. During
positivecontrolruns,humidityis4%higherinthecontrolbox(equivalently,theevaporation
isnominally12% higherinthehypomagneticchamber).
To thoroughly test the effects of humidity, we prepared two 48-well plates with 0.75 mL
of 0.1x MMR following the same procedure used for the experiments. The plates were
68 of 250

--- Page 69 ---

left undisturbed with their lids on, one in the control box and one in the hypomagnetic
chamber (AC+DC shielding configuration, with active compensation) for three days; the
lab air conditioning was on and set to 70oF. The initial and final weights were compared
to assess the impact of humidity on evaporation. The initial weights of the plates, before
inserting them in the different environments, were m = 104.646 g and m = 105.064 g in
H,i C,i
theplategoingtothehypomagneticchamberandtothecontrolbox,respectively. Thefinal
weights after the plates were left untouched for three days were m = 104.216 g and m =
H,f C,f
104.636 g. By taking into account the initial weight of the empty plates, which were m =
H,p
69.820gandm =69.835g,wecanestimatethetotalandrelativeevaporatedsolution. For
C,p
theplateinthehypomagneticchamber,thetotalevaporatedvolumeism = m −m
H,evap H,i H,f
= 0.430 g, while the relative evaporated volume is m = 100 · m /(m − m ) =
H,evap% H,evap H,i H,p
1.23%. As a comparison, the total evaporated volume for the plate in the control condition
is m = m − m = 0.428 g, while the relative evaporated volume is m = 100
C,evap C,i C,f C,evap%
· m /(m − m ) = 1.21%. Thus, the measured percentage difference in evaporation
C,evap C,i C,p
(calculatedas(m −m )/m ∼ 0.4%)istwoordersofmagnitudesmallerthanthe
H,evap C,evap C,evap
expected nominal evaporation difference (18%). Similar to our argument for temperature,
this further supports the claim that the actual humidity differences during the experiment
werelikelylesssignificantthanindicatedbythecalibrationcurves.
For completeness, we also monitored pH changes. The 0.1x MMR solution used to fill the
plates in the weight test above had an initial pH of 7.27. After three days in the plates within
thedifferentenvironments,thepHwasmeasuredaspH =7.02andpH =7.01—onceagain,
H C
anegligibledifference.
Considering the minimal differences in evaporated mass and pH between the plates, it
is highly unlikely that variations in humidity had any significant impact on our biological
observations.
69of 250

--- Page 70 ---

SI12.3. Pressure
Pressure influences the partial pressure of gases such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, which
in turn affects gas exchange in embryos. The pressure difference between the control box
and the hypomagnetic chamber is approximately 1 hPa, relative to a baseline of around
1000 hPa, with the hypomagnetic chamber slightly higher. However, normal atmospheric
pressurefluctuations(e.g.,duetoweatherchanges),whichweobserveinour24-hourdata,
often exceed this difference. Therefore, a 1 hPa variation is unlikely to significantly affect
gas exchange, fluid dynamics, or other key developmental processes in our water-dwelling
embryos.
As the tadpoles are immersed in liquid and their plates are covered with lids, the slight
variationsinpressurereportedaboveareunlikelytohaveanysignificantimpact.
SI12.4. Lightintensityandspectrum
Although both the hypomagnetic chamber and the control box have small openings, all
24-hour light measurements taken with Element-A sensors (conducted concurrently with
themeasurementsshowninSupplementaryFig.SI7)consistentlyregistered0lux,indicating
that light levels were below the sensors’ nominal detection threshold of 0.01 lux. We then
used two identical Adafruit TSL2591 High Dynamic Range Digital Light Sensors (nominal
detectionthresholdof188µlux)tomeasuretheilluminancedepictedinpanelsa)throughc)
of Supplementary Fig. SI8; to mitigate potential bias from one of the sensors, we alternated
the sensors between the two environments and averaged the measurements. The control
±
box has an average measured illuminance of 0.0873 0.0003 lux, and the hypomagnetic
±
chamber an average measured illuminance of 0.0751 0.0002 lux; it is unclear why these
values were not detected by the Element-A sensors. We also note that the Adafruit sensor
readings remained nearly constant regardless of whether it is day or night, or whether the
lablightsareon or off.
For comparison, the illuminance from a full moon on a clear night is around 0.1–0.3 lux,
whereasstarlighton a clear,moonlessnightprovidesabout 0.0001 lux.
70of 250

--- Page 71 ---

To compare the spectral characteristics of the light in the hypomagnetic chamber and the
control box, we used the UV-sensitive Ocean Optics ST-UV-50 spectrometer, which covers
a range of 185–650 nm and offers a resolution of 3.7 nm (full width at half maximum). Each
spectrumwasgeneratedbyaveraging100measurements,eachwithamaximumintegration
time of 6 seconds. A dark spectrum was recorded with the spectrometer’s cap on for
reference. Since spectrometers are highly directional devices, it is noteworthy that the
spectra taken inside the control box were highly consistent, irrespective of the direction in
whichthespectrometerwaspointed. Incontrast,thehypomagneticchamber,whichhasa1’
holeverticallycenteredandpenetratingallshieldinglayers,presentedachallenge. Whenthe
spectrometerwasplacedcentrallyinsidethechamberandpointedupwardstowardthehole,
an exceptionally strong light signal was recorded—likely unrepresentative of the actual light
conditions within. To address this, we obtained two spectra by pointing the spectrometer
in different directions (towards the front and back of the closed hypomagnetic chamber)
and averaged the results to provide a more accurate depiction of the light environment.
Both the control box and hypomagnetic chamber spectra were corrected by subtracting
the dark spectrum. These results are shown in panel d) of Supplementary Fig. SI8. These
spectrawererecordedonthesamedaybetween2and4pm. Sinceourilluminancesensors
showednovariationbasedonthetimeofday,thetimingofthesespectralmeasurementsis
likelyirrelevant. Theoccasionalnegativevaluesinthespectraareduetothedarkspectrum
recording higher values than the bright spectrum, likely indicating minimal activity at that
wavelength and spectrometer orientation. The spectra are critical in illustrating that there
is no such a thing as complete darkness, which is important given that one hypothesis to
explain our findings involves the photoexcitation of chemical compounds. Many of these
compounds are excited by near-UV photons, which are captured in the spectra. This is
discussedfurtherinSupplementary Section SI77.
Pigmentation in Xenopus is well-documented to respond to the background color of its
environment,withmoststudiesfocusingontheregulationofeumelanin(dark)pigmentation
[24]. However, there is emerging evidence suggesting that other pigment cells, such as
thecarotenoid-andpteridine-containingxanthophores,mayalsoplayaroleinthisadaptive
71 of 250

--- Page 72 ---

response[54]. Atleastinsomefrogs,lighteningtakesuptosixtimesaslongasdarkening[25].
The plates inside the hypomagnetic chamber were placed against a white wooden
background, while those in the control box rested on a metallic grey surface. However,
webelievethisdifferenceisnegligibledue tothevery lowlightlevelsinbothenvironments.
Imaging was performed under ambient light and on a white surface; the imaging time per
plateisunder 10 minutes.
SI12.5. Airvolume
×
For completeness, the inner dimensions of the control box are roughly 48 cm 50 cm
× 67 cm (width × depth × height), for an air volume of approximately 0.16 m3. The inner
× ×
dimensions of the hypomagnetic chamber with only DC shielding were 100 cm 100 cm
100 cm, for an air volume of approximately 1.00 m3. After installation of the AC shielding,
the dimensions are 88 cm × 88 cm × 88 cm, for an air volume of approximately 0.68 m3.
However, the difference in air volume is inconsequential, as the tadpoles are housed in
small water-filled plates covered with plastic lids, isolating them from the surrounding air
environment.
72of 250

--- Page 73 ---

20.6
20.4
20.2
20.0
3 6
)C
º(
erutarepmet
a) DC shielding (B1 5) b) AC+DC shielding (B6 7) c) Positive control (+1 3)
20.6 20.6
control box
hypomagnetic chamber
20.4 20.4
20.2 20.2
20.0 20.0
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24
68
66
64
62
60
58
3 6
)HR
%(
ytidimuh
68 68
66 66
64 64
62 62
60 60
58 58
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24
1002
1000
998
3 6
hours
)APh(
erusserp
1002 1002
1000 1000
998 998
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24
hours hours
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9
2
0: 0
2
3: 0
0
2: 0
1
0: 0
1
3: 0
1
6: 0
1
9: 0
2
2: 0 01: 0
0
4: 0 07: 0
1
0: 0 07: 0
1
0: 0
1
3: 0
1
6: 0
1
9: 0
2
2: 0 01: 0
0
4: 0
0
6: 5
time of day on 2024/06/06 07 time of day on 2024/09/18 19 time of day on 2024/09/20 21
Fig. SI7: The temperature, humidity, and pressure levels are comparable between the
hypomagnetic chamber and the control box. a) The DC shielding configuration of the
hypomagnetic chamber was used for batches B1 through B5. a) The AC+DC shielding
configuration of the hypomagnetic chamber was used for batches B6 through B7. c) The
positive control runs +1 through +3 involved applying an artificial magnetic field inside the
hypomagneticchamber.
73of 250

--- Page 74 ---

0.095
0.085
0.075
0.065
0 0 0 3 3 3 0: 2: 0:
1 2 1
time of day on 2024/10/06 07
)xul(
ecnanimulli
a) light levels comparison 1st sensor config.
0.095
0.085
0.075
0.065
0 0 0 3 3 0 5: 3: 2:
1 0 1
time of day on 2024/10/07 08
)xul(
ecnanimulli
b) light levels comparison 2nd sensor config.
control box
hypomagnetic chamber (AC+DC shielding)
0.095
0.085
0.075
0.065
0 5 10 15 20
hours
)xul(
ecnanimulli
c) light levels comparison avg. sensor configs.
1500
1000
500
0
500
200 400 600
wavelength (nm)
ytisnetni
thgil
)stnuoc
detargetni(
d) spectral comparison
control box
hypomagnetic
chamber
(AC+DC shielding)
Fig. SI8: Light levels and spectra are comparable between the hypomagnetic chamber
andthecontrolbox. a)andb)Lightlevelmeasurementsweresimultaneouslytakeninboth
thehypomagneticchamberandthecontrolboxusingtwoidenticalsensors. Toaccountfor
potential differences between the sensors, calibration curves were recorded over a period
of approximately 24 hours, alternating the sensors between the two environments. c) The
averageilluminanceforbothenvironmentsisshown,basedontheaveragedrecordingsfrom
each sensor. d)A spectral comparison between the environments reveals the presence of
photonsevenintheUV range.
74of 250

--- Page 75 ---

SI13. Imagesegmentation
Raw .jpg images for the three days are automatically batch-segmented using Adobe
Photoshop’s AI-assisted Select Object tool with default settings, followed by
Select and Mask. This process isolates the object of interest against a transparent
background; we save thus segmented images as .png. Photoshop’s tools outperformed
both custom python code and ImageJ [55] plugins. The segmented images were then
manually inspected; in cases where glare or unwanted objects were mistakenly chosen
by the algorithm, they were cropped from the image and the Select Object action was
repeated.
Inafewinstanceswherethetadpoleeyewasmissedbythealgorithm,itwasmanuallyadded
to the selection mask. For exceptional images containing multiple embryos, the leftmost
onewasconsistentlychosen.
Inrarecaseswheretheprocedurefailedrepeatedly,imagesweremanuallysegmented. The
followingisanexhaustivelistof suchimages.
Day1 imagesthatrequiredsegmentationbyhand(9 out of 2764images):
1) B1CD1P3-13, glare
2) B1CD1P4-12, shadow
3) B1HD1P1-20, glare
4) B1HD1P2-23,glare
5) B2CD1P3-11,shadow
6) B2CD1P4-06,shadow
7) B2HD1P1-06,removebubble
8) B2HD1P5-08, differentiatefromdebris
9) B5CD1P2-21,differentiatefromdebris
75of 250

--- Page 76 ---

Day2 imagesthatrequiredsegmentationbyhand(8 out of 2771images):
1) B3CD2P4-14, shadow
2) B6HD2P1-24,glare
3) B6HD2P1-35,glare
4) B6HD2P2-24,glare
5) B6HD2P2-47, out of focus
6) B6HD2P5-44,out of focus
7) B7CD2P3-32,out of focus
8) B7CD2P4-14, out of focus
Day 3 images that required manual segmentation to accurately reflect their length (7 out of
2744images):
1) B3CD3P1-10, tadpolecolortoolightforcontrast
2) B3CD3P5-03,tadpole colortoolightforcontrast
3) B3HD3P2-09,glare
4) B3HD3P2-11,tadpolecolor toolightforcontrast
5) B3HD2P2-12, tadpolecolortoolightforcontrast
6) B3HD3P2-17, tadpolecolortoolightforcontrast
7) B3HD3P4-20, tadpolecolortoolightforcontrast
76of 250

--- Page 77 ---

SI14. Effectsizeanalysis
Throughout the manuscript, we use four different measures of effect size; each assesses
different aspects of the data. In the formulas for these measures, the following quantities
appear:
n isthenumber of controltadpoles;
C
n isthenumber of hypomagnetictadpoles;
H
{ C ,...,C } isthearrayof valuesof someproperty forcontroltadpoles;
1 nC
{ H ,...,H } isthearrayof valuesof someproperty forhypomagnetictadpoles;
1 nH
µ isthemeanvalueof someproperty forcontroltadpoles;
C
µ isthemeanvalueof someproperty forhypomagnetictadpoles;
H
σ isthestandarddeviationof someproperty forcontroltadpoles;
C
σ isthestandarddeviationof someproperty forhypomagnetictadpoles;
H
σ
σ = √C isthestandarderrorof themeanof someproperty forcontroltadpoles;and
µ
C n
C
σ
σ = √H isthestandarderrorof themeanof someproperty forhypomagnetictadpoles.
µ
H n
H
ThefirstmeasureisCohen’seffectsize d [56]:
µ −µ
d ≡ 100 · C H , (SI2)
σ
pooled
wherethepooled standarddeviation
√
(n − 1)·σ2 +(n − 1)·σ2
σ = C C H H (SI3)
pooled n +n − 2
C H
is a weighted average of the standard deviations of the two independent groups. Cohen’s
formula expresses the difference between the means of the two groups as a percentage
of the pooled standard deviation, which means it reflects how much the two distributions
overlap, and which allows for a standardized comparison. Effect sizes are roughly classified
assmall( |d| ∼ > 20%),medium( |d| ∼ > 50%)andlarge( |d| ∼ > 80%). Ifthevariancesofthecontrol
andhypomagneticpropertyunderconsiderationaresubstantiallydifferent,Cohen’sdmight
77of 250

--- Page 78 ---

not accurately reflect the magnitude of the effect, as it assumes equal variances between
groups. When variability within groups is small and means are far apart, d will report a large
effect size. However, even if the variance is low but the actual mean difference is small,
Cohen’sdwillstillreportarelativelylargeeffectsizeduetothecalculationbasedonpooled
standarddeviations.
The second measure is Cliff’s ∆ [57] which, unlike Cohen’s d, does not assume a normal
distributionofthedata. Itreflectsthedominanceofonegroupovertheother. Itiscalculated
as:
(number of pairswhereC > H)−(number of pairswhereC < H)
∆ ≡ 100 · i i i i . (SI 4)
·
n n
C H
Effectsizesareroughlyclassifiedassmall( |∆| ∼ > 15%),medium( |∆| ∼ > 33%)andlarge( |∆| ∼ >
47%).
The third measure E, also a percentage, was introduced by Binhi in the specific context of
weakmagneticfieldeffectsinbiology [1]:
µ −µ
E ≡ 100 · √ C H (SI 5)
µ2 +σ2 +σ2
C µ C µ H
It considers not only the difference between the means but also the uncertainty in those
means. Binhi’s E thus indicates how substantial the effect is relative to the combined
variability and magnitude of the two groups. By incorporating the standard errors of the
means, it accounts for the confidence in the observed differences. This measure is
particularly useful when comparing groups with different sample sizes, as it adjusts for the
reliability of theestimatedmeans.
Thefourthandfinalmeasureistheeffectvisibilityν,inpercent:
µ −µ
ν ≡ 100 · C H . (SI6)
µ +µ
C H
Effectvisibilitymeasurestherelativedifferencebetweentwomeansasapercentageoftheir
sum. This measure is intuitive and akin to signal-to-noise, as it expresses the effect size in
termsofhowmuchonegroupdeviatesfromtheotherrelativetothetotalmagnitudeofthe
78of 250

--- Page 79 ---

means. Ifthetwomeansarecloseinvalue,orifthemeansarebothlargecomparedtotheir
difference, the computed visibility will be smaller, regardless of the absolute difference.
This measure is thus more conservative, especially when the groups are relatively similar in
magnitude.
BothCohen’sdandCliff’s∆emphasizethedifferencebetweenthecentraltendenciesofthe
groups and downplay variability in the data, which is why they can yield strong effect sizes
when the groups are well separated. Differently from Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, Binhi’s E and
thevisibilityν aremoresensitivetothevariabilityorrelativesimilaritybetweengroups;they
aremoredirectcomparisonsofthemeandifferencerelativetothecombinedmagnitudesof
the means or their variability. These are less influenced by the variability within each group
and more by the relative difference in means. Taken together, these four measures reflect
differentaspectsof our data.
79of 250

--- Page 80 ---

SI15. Effectchangeanalysis
Tocomparetheprogressionofmorphologicalpropertiesfromday2today3,weuseseveral
measures. Foreachcondition(controlor hypomagnetic),wedefine:
D2 = { D2 ,...,D2 } isthearrayof valuesof someproperty forday2 images;
1 n
D3 = { D3 ,...,D3 } isthearrayof valuesof thesameproperty forday3 images;
1 n
µ isthemeanvalueof theproperty on day2;
D2
µ isthemeanvalueof theproperty on day3;
D3
σ isthestandarddeviationof theproperty on day2; and
D2
σ isthestandarddeviationof theproperty on day3.
D3
Thefirstmeasure,usedinthemaintext,istheZ-scoredifference. AZ-scorerepresentshow
manystandarddeviationsa datapointisfromthemean. It iscalculatedas:
Dx
−µ
≡ i Dx
Z (SI 7)
Dxi σ
Dx
where x = { 2, 3 } represents day 2 or day 3, and i denotes the individual data point.
The Z-score is unitless but should be understood as being expressed in units of standard
deviation. Itstandardizesvaluesbyremovingthemeanandscalingbythestandarddeviation,
allowingcomparisonsacrossdifferentdatasetsortimepoints. Toquantifyeffectchange,we
calculatetheZ-scoresforday2 andday3 datasetsandthencomputetheirdifference:
D3
−µ
D2
−µ
Z − Z = i D3 − i D2 . (SI 8)
D3i D2i σ σ
D3 D2
This comparison normalizes the differences between day 2 and day 3 by accounting for the
variability in each dataset. A positive Z-score difference indicates that the day 3 value is
further above the day 3 mean relative to the day 2 value’s distance from the day 2 mean,
suggesting an increase in the measured property. The Z-score difference is also unitless
andrepresentstherelativechangeintermsof standarddeviations.
The second measure is the effect change visibility ν, previously used to quantify effect size
(Supplementary Section SI14),anddefinedas:
−
D3 D2
ν ≡ 100 · . (SI9)
D3+D2
80 of 250

--- Page 81 ---

Thethirdmeasureisthepercentagechangedefinedas:
−
D3 D2
% change = 100 · . (SI10)
D2
Thefourthandfinalusedmeasureistherelativedifferenceinpercent,whichquantifieshow
differentthetwovaluesarerelativetotheirmaximum:
−
D3 D2
rel. diff. = 100 · . (SI11)
max(D2,D3)
81 of 250

--- Page 82 ---

SI16. Statisticalanalysis
SI16.1. Confidenceintervalcalculation
Given a dataset { X ,...,X } with sample size n, a mean µ, and a standard error of the mean
1 n
σ ,theconfidenceintervalCIforthemeaniscalculatedas:
µ
CI ≡ µ± tα,(n−1) ·σ
µ
, (SI12)
2
where tα,(n−1) is the critical value from Student’s T-distribution with (n − 1) degrees of
2
freedom, corresponding to the desired confidence level (1 − α) [17]. Throughout our
manuscript,weuseCI = 95 % (andhenceα = 0.05).
Confidence intervals for the mean are used in plots of type c), described in Supplementary
Section SI74.
SI16.2. Bootstrapping
Bootstrapping is a resampling technique. It involves repeatedly drawing samples with
replacementfromtheoriginaldatasetdistributiontocreatemultiple‘bootstrapsamples’. A
desired statistic (e.g., median) can then be calculated for the samples. Bootstrapping helps
estimate confidence intervals, standard errors, and other statistics when the underlying
distribution is unknown or when sample sizes are small; it is non-parametric and doesn’t
assumea specificdatadistribution.
Bootstrappingisutilizedinplotsoftyped)(seeSupplementarySectionSI74),closelyfollowing
the approach outlined in [58]. We employ 1000 bootstrap samples to estimate the 95%
confidenceintervalandthedistributionofthepercentagedifferencebetweenthemedians
of the control and hypomagnetic conditions. When the distribution of the observed
properties is non-normal, as is most typical in our dataset, the median provides a more
accuraterepresentationof thecentraltendencyof thesamplecomparedtothemean.
82 of 250

--- Page 83 ---

SI16.3. Whywealsoreportpvalues
In an effort to be as comprehensive as possible with our data analysis, we also report p
valuesinseveralplots,mostnotablyinplotsoftypese)andf)(foreffectsize)andg)through
j)(forstatisticaltests),seeSupplementary SectionSI74.
Whenconsideredalongsidetheotherevidencepresented,webelievepvaluesofferuseful,
complementary insight into whether the control and hypomagnetic populations are
significantly different. However, it is important to note that p values are influenced not
only by population differences but also by sample size: As sample size increases, precision
improves (though this does not necessarily lead to greater accuracy). This contrasts with
other metrics we report, such as effect size measures, which provide a more consistent
assessmentof populationdifferencesregardlessof samplesize.
SI16.4. T-testandMann-Whitneytest
Inthebottomplotofplotsoftypee)andf),wereportapvaluethatisobtainedasfollows.
AKolmogorov-Smirnovnormalitytest[17]checksifthecontrolandhypomagneticpopulations
are normally distributed. If both populations have p values greater than 0.01 (suggesting
normality), a T-test [17] is performed to compare the populations, and the obtained p value
is reported. If at least one population fails the normality test, which is usually the case
in our dataset, the Mann-Whitney test [17] is used instead, and its p value is reported. The
Mann-Whitneytestisanon-parametricmethodthatcomparesmedianswhenthedatadoes
notfollowa normaldistribution.
SI16.5. Kruskal-WallistestandDunn'spost-hoctest
TheKruskal-Wallistest[17]isanon-parametricstatisticaltestusedtocomparethreeormore
independentgroups. Inourcase,wecompareallbatcheswithinthesamecondition(control
or hypomagnetic). Kruskal-Wallis is an alternative to the one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) test [17] when the full data does not meet the assumption of normality, which is
83 of 250

--- Page 84 ---

always the case in our dataset. The test ranks the data and assesses whether the median
ranks across the groups are significantly different; it outputs a statistic (also known as
‘H-statistic’) and a p value. The H-statistic helps determine whether there are statistically
significant differences between the medians of the groups; if it is large enough, it suggests
thatatleastoneofthegroupsisdifferentfromtheothers. ThesignificanceoftheH-statistic
is assessed by comparing it to a χ2 distribution with (n − 1) degrees of freedom, where n
is the number of groups; a significant p value suggests that at least one group’s median is
different,but a post-hoctestisneeded topinpointexactlywhichgroupsdiffer.
If a significant difference is found (i.e., if the Kruskal Wallis p value is less than 0.01), we
use Dunn’s post-hoc test [17] to determine where the differences lie between groups. The
Dunn post-hoc test compares the ranks of data between all pairs of groups and adjusts
for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni correction. Notably, even though Dunn p
values are reported pairwise, our python statistical routine analyzes the entire dataset for
allbatchesforeachcondition,ensuringthatthecomparisonsaccountforallavailabledata.
The result of the Kruskal-Wallis test for the control and the hypomagnetic populations, in
addition to a visual representation of the Dunn p value between pairs of batches, are found
inplotsof type g)andh).
SI16.6. ART-ANOVAtestandTukey'spost-hoctest
The Kruskal-Wallis H-statistic described above tests for differences between group
distributions(specifically,ranksofthedata);incontrast,theART-ANOVAF-statisticexamines
theeffectsof factorson alignedandrankeddata,includingpotentialinteractioneffects.
ART-ANOVAstandsfor‘AlignedRankTransform-ANOVA’[17],anon-parametricmethodused
to analyze experiments when the normality assumption of traditional ANOVA is violated. It
works by aligning the data based on the factors being tested, then applying a rank
transformation before conducting an ANOVA. This approach allows for both main and
interactioneffectstobetested;here,weuseART-ANOVAteststoassesstheextenttowhich
both condition (control or hypomagnetic) and the individual batch have significant effects
84of 250

--- Page 85 ---

on the outcome of our experiments. A subset of the ART-ANOVA output are statistics (also
known as ‘F-statistics’) and corresponding p values. The F-statistics represent different
sources of variation in the data; in our data, the ‘condition’ F-statistic measures the effect
oftheprimaryfactor(i.e.,controlvs.hypomagnetic)ontheoutcomeoftheexperiment;the
‘batch’F-statisticassesseswhetherdifferentbatcheshaveasignificanteffectontheresults;
and finally, the ‘interaction condition:batch’ F-statistic evaluates whether the effect of the
conditiondependsonthespecificbatch,indicatinganinteractionbetweenthetwofactors.
To obtain the corresponding p values, the F-statistics are compared to the F-distribution,
which depends on the number of groups and on sample size. The F-distribution table
provides these critical values at various significance levels; we use the significance level of
0.01.
If one or more p values for the F-statistics is significant, a post-hoc test is used to identify
whichspecificpairsofgroupmeansdiffersignificantly. WeemployTukey’spost-hoctest[17],
which pinpoints the specific groups with differences while controlling for the overall Type I
error rate (the probability of finding a difference that does not exist). Notably, even though
Tukey’s adjusted p values are reported pairwise, our python statistical routine analyzes the
entire dataset for all batches and both conditions, ensuring that the comparisons account
forall availabledata.
The results of the ART-ANOVA test for the control and the hypomagnetic populations, in
addition to a visual representation of the adjusted p value between pairs of batches, are
foundinplotsof type i)and j).
85 of 250

--- Page 86 ---

SI17. Day1morphologicalmeasures: eccentricity,elongation,roundness,
andsolidity
At 1 day p.f., we observed frog embryos at a range of developmental stages, which we
assessed to be from 18 to 24 [16]. To quantify our qualitative observation that frog embryos
underhypomagneticconditionsaredevelopmentallyaheadofcontrolfrogembryosalready
in day 1 p.f., we turn to measures of morphological deviation from circularity. All the
quantitativemeasuresdescribedbelowsupport our qualitativeobservation.
The first of such measures, the one used in the main text, is eccentricity. Eccentricity
quantifies how much a shape deviates from being a perfect circle. Day 1 images were
segmented and automatically fit to an ellipse by our image processing algorithm. The
eccentricity of eachday1 imageisthencalculatedas:
√
b2
e ≡ 1 − , (SI13)
a2
where b (a) is the shortest (longest) radius of the fitted ellipse. A value of e = 0 denotes a
perfect circle; for 0 < e < 1, the increasing eccentricity indicates a more elongated shape.
Our normalized (non-normalized, with predicted stages) analysis for eccentricity in day 1
imagesisfoundinSupplementary Fig. SI9(Supplementary Fig. SI10).
The second of such measures is elongation, which quantifies how stretched out a shape is
alongitslongestaxis. The elongationof eachday1 imageiscalculatedas:
−
a b
ϵ ≡ . (SI 14)
a+b
This measure behaves similarly to a normalized ratio of the axis lengths, indicating how
stretched the ellipse is. The closer ϵ is to 1, the more elongated the shape becomes,
while ϵ closer to 0 suggests a more circular shape. Our normalized (non-normalized, with
predicted stages) analysis for elongation in day 1 images is found in Supplementary Fig. SI11
(Supplementary Fig. SI12).
86 of 250

--- Page 87 ---

The third measure of deviation from circularity is roundness, which compares the area of a
shapetotheareaof a circlewiththesameperimeter. It iscalculatedas:
·
4 Area
ρ ≡ . (SI15)
π ·(Perimeter)2
This formula is commonly used in image processing to quantify roundness, with values
of ρ closer to 1 indicating a shape that is more circular. As the shape becomes more
irregular or elongated, ρ decreases, indicating a deviation from circularity. Our normalized
(non-normalized, with predicted stages) analysis for roundness in day 1 images is found in
Supplementary Fig. SI13 (Supplementary Fig. SI14).
Finally, we use solidity, a measure of the compactness of a shape. It compares the area of
theshapetotheareaofitsconvexhull,whichisthesmallestconvexshapethatcanenclose
theshape. Solidity isdefinedas:
Areaof theshape
S ≡ . (SI16)
Areaof itsconvexhull
Solidityrangesfrom0to1,with1indicatingashapewithnoconcavities(i.e.,aconvexshape),
and lower values indicating that the shape is more irregular with more concavities. Our
normalized (non-normalized, with predicted stages) analysis for solidity in day 1 images is
foundinSupplementary Fig. SI15 (Supplementary Fig. SI16).
Eccentricity, elongation, and roundness focus on the relationship between the shape’s axes
or perimeter, while solidity involves the convex hull. All the above metrics compare the
shape to a perfect circle or a convex shape to determine how closely it resembles those
forms. Day 1 images, when ordered by decreasing solidity, show the strongest correlation
with increasing developmental stage. As an example, Supplementary Fig. SI17 presents this
ordering for all day 1 images in batch B2. In the main text, we selected eccentricity over
solidity asit isa moreintuitivemeasure.
The high variability of these measures across batches is noteworthy. Comparisons of the
hypomagneticenvironment’seffectaremoreeasilyinterpretedinthenormalizedversionof
ourplots,whereeachmeasureisadjustedrelativetothecontrolcondition’saverage.
87of 250

--- Page 88 ---

Thecodeoutputforday1imagesisidenticaltoFig.1d),witheachembryobeingannotated
withitsprogrammaticallydeterminedmajorandminoraxes.
88of 250

--- Page 89 ---

SI18. Day1eccentricity(norm.) results
89 of 250

--- Page 90 ---

Fig.SI9: At day 1 p.f., the eccentricity of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 20%
higherthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedeccentricitybybatchand
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed 20% higher eccentricity. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s d and
Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium to large effect, consistently
reflecting the 20% level difference. g) through j) Most statistically significant differences
arefoundinthepositivecontroltadpolepopulationsraisedinthehypomagneticchamber,
asexpected.
90 of 250

--- Page 91 ---

SI19. Day1eccentricityresults
91of 250

--- Page 92 ---

Fig. SI10: At day 1 p.f., the eccentricity of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
20% higher than that of the control population. a)and b)Non-normalized eccentricity
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond
to positive control runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic
chamber simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians
furthersupporttheobserved20%highereccentricity. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namely
Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibilityν,confirmamediumtolargeeffect,
consistentlyreflectingthe20%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariation
in eccentricity across batches, these plots may not provide an accurate representation
of our data. Finally, we propose to automate embryo stage classification according to
eccentricity,seepredictedstagesina)andb).
92of 250

--- Page 93 ---

SI20. Day1elongation(norm.) results
93of 250

--- Page 94 ---

Fig.SI11: At day 1 p.f., the elongation of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 45%
higherthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedelongationbybatchand
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed45%higherelongation. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s
∆,andBinhi’sEandthevisibilityν,confirmamediumtolargeeffect,consistentlyreflecting
the45%leveldifference. g)throughj)Moststatisticallysignificantdifferencesarefoundin
thepositivecontroltadpolepopulationsraisedinthehypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
94of 250

--- Page 95 ---

SI21. Day1elongationresults
95of 250

--- Page 96 ---

Fig. SI12: At day 1 p.f., the elongation of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
45% higher than that of the control population. a) and b) Non-normalized elongation
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond
to positive control runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic
chamber simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians
further support the observed 45% higher elongation. e)and f)Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibilityν,confirmamediumtolargeeffect,
consistentlyreflectingthe45%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariation
inelongationacrossbatches,theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentationofour
data. Finally,weproposetoautomateembryostageclassificationaccordingtoelongation,
seepredictedstagesina)and b).
96of 250

--- Page 97 ---

SI22. Day1roundness(norm.) results
97of 250

--- Page 98 ---

Fig. SI13: At day 1 p.f., the roundness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 3%
lower than that of the control population. a)and b)Normalized roundness by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed3%lowerroundness. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s∆,
and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium to large effect, consistently reflecting
the 3% level difference. g) through j) There is significant variability in roundness across
batches,eveninthenormalizeddata.
98 of 250

--- Page 99 ---

SI23. Day1roundnessresults
99of 250

--- Page 100 ---

Fig. SI14: At day 1 p.f., the roundness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 3%
lower than that of the control population. a) and b) Non-normalized roundness by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
supporttheobserved3%lowerroundness. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sd
andCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sEandthevisibilityν,confirmamediumtolargeeffect,consistently
reflectingthe3%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariationinroundness
acrossbatches,theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentationofourdata. Finally,
weproposetoautomateembryostageclassificationaccordingtoroundness,seepredicted
stagesin a)andb).
100of 250

--- Page 101 ---

SI24. Day1solidity(norm.) results
101of 250

--- Page 102 ---

Fig.SI15: At day 1 p.f., the solidity of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 1% lower
thanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedsoliditybybatchandaggregate
data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to positive control runs, in
which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates Earth’s. c)
and d)Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the observed 1%
lower solidity. e)and f)Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E
and the visibility ν, confirm a medium to large effect, consistently reflecting the 1% level
difference. g) through j) There is significant variability in solidity across batches, even in
thenormalizeddata.
102 of 250

--- Page 103 ---

SI25. Day1solidityresults
103of 250

--- Page 104 ---

Fig.SI16: Atday1p.f.,thesolidityofhypomagneticembryosisapproximately1%lower
than that of the control population. a) and b) Non-normalized solidity by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed1%lowersolidity. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s∆,and
Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium to large effect, consistently reflecting the
1% level difference. g)through j)Given the substantial variation in solidity across batches,
theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentationofourdata. Finally,weproposeto
automate embryo stage classification according to solidity, see predicted stages in a)and
b).
104 of 250

--- Page 105 ---

a) Day 1 solidity control vs. hypomagnetic
sorted by decreasing solidity all images same magnification
b) Day 1 solidity (hull) control vs. hypomagnetic
sorted by decreasing solidity all images same magnification
Fig. SI17: Batch B2 day 1 images ordered by decreasing solidity. a) Decreasing solidity
is strongly correlated with advanced developmental stages, as the embryos transition in
shape from egg-like to bean-like, and eventually to a more worm-like form. b) Solidity is
definedbytheareaoftheshapedividedbytheareaofitsconvexhull;bean-likeshapeswith
indentations have lower solidities than circles or ellipses. For illustration, we provide here
theconvexhull imagesof thetadpolesdepictedina).
105of 250

--- Page 106 ---

SI26. Day2colormeasures: L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness,RGByellowness,
YellownessIndex,andHSVyellowness
Fromday2p.f. onwards,weobservedaslightdifferenceincolorbetweenthetadpolesinthe
different conditions: Hypomagnetic condition tadpoles seemed to be paler in yellow color.
To quantify this qualitative observation for day 2 p.f. images, we employ four quantitative
measures of yellowness; each measure is calculated after the following binarization
procedure.
Day 2 RGB images from each separate batch are binarized using a global threshold value
based on their combined histogram, ensuring consistency across all images in the same
batch. To achieve this, a combined histogram of pixel intensities is created from all the
imagesinabatch. Themeanofthenon-zerovaluesinthecombinedhistogramiscalculated
toapproximatetheaveragepixelintensityacrossthebatch. Ifthehistogramshowsmultiple
peaks, the midpoint between the peaks is chosen as the global threshold. Otherwise, the
mean of the non-zero values is used. After binarization, the white pixels are considered
a better representation of the true tadpole color, as the darker pigmentation caused by
melanin is more likely to be binarized as black. Color measures are then applied only to the
whitepixelsinthebinary mask.
Thefirstofsuchyellownessmeasures,theoneusedinthemaintext,istheL⋆a⋆b⋆colorspace
yellowness. L⋆a⋆b⋆ [20] is a color space designed to be more perceptually uniform than the
traditional RGB or CMYK color spaces, meaning that small changes in color correspond to
similar changes in perceived color differences for humans. L⋆a⋆b⋆ is widely used in image
processingandcomputervisionbecauseitseparatescolorinformationfromluminanceand
offersamoreperceptuallyaccuraterepresentationofcolor. Thepixelsassignedtowhitein
thebinarymaskareconvertedfromRGBtoL⋆a⋆b⋆ colorspace;theb⋆ channel(rangingfrom
-128 to +127) represents the blue-yellow axis, with positive values corresponding to yellow.
Our normalized (non-normalized) analysis for L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness in day 2 images is found in
Supplementary Fig. SI19 (Supplementary Fig. SI20).
106of 250

--- Page 107 ---

ThesecondcolormeasureistheRGByellowness. ForeachRGBpixel,wecompute:
(R+G)
− B ; (SI 17)
2
inotherwords,weaveragetheredandgreenchannels(whichtogethercontributetoyellow,
since yellow in the RGB model is formed by mixing red and green) and subtract the blue
channel (since blue is complementary to yellow; the more blue there is, the less yellow a
±
pixel appears). This measure, ranging from 255, helps differentiate how yellow a pixel is
relativetoitsbluecomponent. ThemeanvalueofthisRGByellownessmeasureiscalculated
over the entire image. Positive values indicate more yellow (higher red and green values
compared to blue), and negative values indicate more blue (higher blue values relative to
redandgreen). Ournormalized(non-normalized)analysisforRGByellownessinday2images
isfoundinSupplementary Fig. SI21 (Supplementary Fig. SI22).
The third color measure we employ is the Yellowness Index [59]. This measure is used
to quantify the degree of yellowness in a material or an image, often in comparison to a
reference white point, typically under a specific light source such as D65 (daylight). The
formulabelowisspecificforcomparisonwiththeD65illuminantandinvolvesconvertingthe
RGB values to the XYZ color space, which better reflects how humans perceive color. After
conversion,wecomputeforeachpixel:
(1.28 · X)−(1.06 · Z)
100 · . (SI 18)
Y
X, Y, and Z are the color values in the XYZ color space, which is a perceptually uniform
colorspacedesignedtoseparateluminance(Y)fromchromaticinformation(X,representing
red-greencolors,andZ,representingbluecolors). 1.28and1.06areconstantstoemphasize
the balance between the X and Z components. The formula is structured to compare the
values on the blue-yellow spectrum, where positive values correspond to a yellowish hue.
Thismetricdoesnothavestrictpredefinedbounds;however,typicalvaluesareoftenfound
tobebetween0and100foryellowishmaterials. AftertheYellownessIndexiscomputedfor
each pixel, the image average is taken to describe the yellowness of the entire image under
theD65illuminant. Ournormalized(non-normalized)analysisfortheYellownessIndexinday
2imagesisfoundinSupplementary Fig. SI23 (Supplementary Fig. SI24).
107of 250

--- Page 108 ---

Finally,theHSVyellownessmeasureiscalculatedbyfirstconvertingtheRGBimagetotheHSV
color space [60]. The HSV color space separates color information into three components,
namely: the hue angle, H (representing the type of color; in this case, we are interested in
◦ ◦
yellow, which falls between 45 and 75 ); the saturation S (measuring the intensity or purity
ofthecolor,measuredinpercent);andthevalueV(representingthebrightnessofthecolor,
ranging from 0 to 1). Once the image is in the HSV color space, we filter for pixels that fall
withintheyellowhuerange;forthepixelsthatpassthisfilter,wecomputethebelowdefined
HSVyellownessmeasure:
S · V if 45 ◦ ≤ H ≤ 75 ◦ ; (SI19)
in other words, the HSV yellowness is the product of the saturation (how intense the yellow
is) and value (how bright the yellow is). This means the yellowness is higher if the yellow is
bothbrightandintense. Thisproductisaveragedoverallpixelsthatfallwithintheyellowhue
rangetogetthefinalyellownessvalueoftheimage. Ifnopixelsfallwithinthishuerange,the
HSV yellowness is set to zero. The bounds for the calculated HSV yellowness are between
0(noyellownessordesaturated/darkpixels)and1(maximumyellownesswithfullysaturated
and bright yellow pixels). Our normalized (non-normalized) analysis for HSV yellowness in
day2 imagesisfoundinSupplementary Fig. SI25 (Supplementary Fig. SI26).
Similarlytoday1images,thehighvariabilityofthesemeasuresacrossbatchesmakesitmore
straightforwardtoperformcomparisonsinthenormalizedversionof our plots.
Asamplecodeoutputforday2images(ofbatchB4,inthisexample)isfoundinSupplementary
Fig. SI18; only the programatically determined white pixels of the binary mask, shown, are
takenintoaccountinthecalculationof yellowness.
108 of 250

--- Page 109 ---

Fig.SI18: Sample code output for day 2 images. Day 2 images are binarized, and the light
pixelsareanalyzedtoassessvariousmeasuresofyellowpigmentation. Here,batchB4day2
imagesaresortedbyincreasingL⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness.
109of 250

--- Page 110 ---

SI27. Day2L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness(norm.) results
110of 250

--- Page 111 ---

Fig.SI19: Atday2p.f.,theL⋆a⋆b⋆yellownessofhypomagneticembryosisapproximately
5% lower than that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% lower L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a small to medium
effect, consistently reflecting the 5% level difference. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
111 of 250

--- Page 112 ---

SI28. Day2L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellownessresults
112 of 250

--- Page 113 ---

Fig.SI20: Atday2p.f.,theL⋆a⋆b⋆yellownessofhypomagneticembryosisapproximately
5%lowerthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Non-normalizedL⋆a⋆b⋆yellowness
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond
to positive control runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic
chamber simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians
further support the observed 5% lower L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness. e) and f) Effect size metrics,
namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibilityν,confirmasmalltomedium
effect, consistently reflecting the 5% level difference. g) through j)Given the substantial
variation in L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness across batches, these plots may not provide an accurate
representationof our data.
113 of 250

--- Page 114 ---

SI29. Day2RGByellowness(norm.) results
114of 250

--- Page 115 ---

Fig.SI21: At day 2 p.f., the RGB yellowness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
5% lower than that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized RGB yellowness
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% lower RGB yellowness. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a small to medium
effect, consistently reflecting the 5% level difference. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
115of 250

--- Page 116 ---

SI30. Day2RGByellownessresults
116 of 250

--- Page 117 ---

Fig.SI22: At day 2 p.f., the RGB yellowness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
5% lower than that of the control population. a)and b)Non-normalized RGB yellowness
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% lower RGB yellowness. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibilityν,confirmasmalltomediumeffect,
consistentlyreflectingthe5%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariation
inRGByellownessacrossbatches,theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentation
ofour data.
117of 250

--- Page 118 ---

SI31. Day2YellownessIndex(norm.) results
118of 250

--- Page 119 ---

Fig.SI23: Atday2p.f.,theYellownessIndexofhypomagneticembryosisapproximately
5% lower than that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized Yellowness Index
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% lower Yellowness Index. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a small to medium
effect, consistently reflecting the 5% level difference. g) through j) Some statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. Surprisingly,batchesB1andB5 arealsoanomalous.
119 of 250

--- Page 120 ---

SI32. Day2YellownessIndexresults
120of 250

--- Page 121 ---

Fig.SI24: Atday2p.f.,theYellownessIndexofhypomagneticembryosisapproximately
5%lowerthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Non-normalizedYellownessIndex
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% lower Yellowness Index. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibilityν,confirmasmalltomediumeffect,
consistentlyreflectingthe5%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariation
inYellownessIndexacrossbatches,theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentation
ofour data.
121 of 250

--- Page 122 ---

SI33. Day2HSVyellowness(norm.) results
122 of 250

--- Page 123 ---

Fig.SI25: At day 2 p.f., the HSV yellowness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
5% lower than that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized HSV yellowness
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% lower HSV yellowness. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a small to medium
effect, consistently reflecting the 5% level difference. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. Surprisingly,batchesB2 andB3 arealsoanomalous.
123 of 250

--- Page 124 ---

SI34. Day2HSVyellownessresults
124of 250

--- Page 125 ---

Fig.SI26: At day 2 p.f., the HSV yellowness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
5% lower than that of the control population. a)and b)Non-normalized HSV yellowness
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 5% lower HSV yellowness. e) and f) Effect size metrics, namely
Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE andthevisibilityν,confirmasmalltomediumeffect,
consistentlyreflectingthe5%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariation
inHSVyellownessacrossbatches,theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentation
ofour data.
125 of 250

--- Page 126 ---

SI35. Day3morphologicalmeasures: majoraxis,perimeter,area,total
curvature,solidity,elongationandroundness
For day 3 images, we continue to quantify the accelerated development of the tadpoles
underhypomagneticconditions.
The simplest and clearest measure is the length of the tadpoles’ major axis. Using python’s
skimage.measure package, the major axis is calculated by fitting an ellipse to the largest
region of the image and measuring its longest diameter. This axis represents the longest
straight line through the region and is typically aligned with its orientation. Specifically, the
major axis is the longest diameter of an ellipse that shares the same normalized second
centralmomentsastheregion.
The second and third measures showing a differential development for hypomagnetic
conditiontadpolesistheirperimeterandtheirarea,alsocalculatedwiththepythonpackage
skimage.measure.
The fourth measure used to quantify Day 3 images is the total image curvature. Using
skimage.measure,thetadpolecontourisextracted,andcurvatureisapproximatedthrough
numerical differentiation. First, we compute the first derivative of the contour points,
representing consecutive changes, followed by the second derivative, which captures the
rate of change. The Euclidean norm of the second derivatives gives the curvature at each
point. We report the absolute sum of these curvatures, reflecting the overall bending or
complexity of the contour, with higher values indicating more pronounced or frequent
bending. The use of the absolute values ensures that both concave and convex bends
contributepositivelytothetotal.
Day 3 images across different batches have similar, though not identical, magnifications. As
a result, to ensure comparability across batches, we only present the normalized results for
the major axis length (Supplementary Fig. SI28), perimeter (Supplementary Fig. SI29), area
(Supplementary Fig. SI30), andtotalcurvature(Supplementary Fig. SI31).
126of 250

--- Page 127 ---

The fifth, sixth and seventh measures have been used for day 1 images and were discussed
in Supplementary Section SI17. They are: solidity, elongation and roundness. Roundness
on day 3 is particularly significant as it highlights the relationship between tadpole area
and perimeter. With an approximate 7.5% increase in perimeter and a 5% increase in area,
the roundness is expected to decrease by roughly 9%, aligning closely with our numerically
calculatedvalues. Ouranalysisforthesemeasures,innormalizedform(notnormalizedform,
with stage predictions), are found respectively in Supplementary Fig. SI32 (Supplementary
Fig. SI33), Supplementary Fig. SI34 (Supplementary Fig. SI35) and Supplementary Fig. SI36
(Supplementary Fig. SI37).
Asamplecodeoutputforday3images(ofbatchB4,inthisexample)isfoundinSupplementary
Fig.SI27,witheachtadpolebeingannotatedwithitsprogrammaticallydeterminedmajorand
minoraxes.
127of 250

--- Page 128 ---

Fig. SI27: Sample code output for day 3 images. Day 3 images are segmented and
subsequently analyzed for major axis length and other morphological properties. Here, day
3 images from batch B4 are arranged in order of increasing major axis length, with each
tadpoledisplayingoverlaysof bothmajorandminoraxes.
128of 250

--- Page 129 ---

SI36. Day3majoraxis(norm.) results
129 of 250

--- Page 130 ---

Fig.SI28: At day 3 p.f., the major axis of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 7.5%
higherthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)and b)Normalized major axis by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed7.5%highermajoraxis. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s
∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium effect, consistently reflecting the
7.5% level difference. g) through j) Most statistically significant differences are found in
thepositivecontroltadpolepopulationsraisedinthehypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
BatchB2 isalsoanomalous.
130of 250

--- Page 131 ---

SI37. Day3perimeter(norm.) results
131of 250

--- Page 132 ---

Fig.SI29: At day 3 p.f., the perimeter of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 7.5%
higherthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalized perimeterbybatchand
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed7.5%higherperimeter. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s
∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium effect, consistently reflecting the
7.5% level difference. g) through j) Most statistically significant differences are found in
thepositivecontroltadpolepopulationsraisedinthehypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
BatchB2 isalsoanomalous.
132 of 250

--- Page 133 ---

SI38. Day3area(norm.) results
133 of 250

--- Page 134 ---

Fig.SI30: At day 3 p.f., the area of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 5% higher
than that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized area by batch and aggregate
data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to positive control runs, in
which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates Earth’s. c)
and d)Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the observed 5%
higherarea. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sE and
thevisibilityν,confirmamediumeffect,consistentlyreflectingthe5%leveldifference. g)
throughj)Moststatisticallysignificantdifferencesarefoundinthepositivecontroltadpole
populationsraisedinthehypomagneticchamber,asexpected. BatchB2isalsoanomalous.
134 of 250

--- Page 135 ---

SI39. Day3curvature(norm.) results
135of 250

--- Page 136 ---

Fig.SI31: At day 3 p.f., the total curvature of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately
7.5% higher than that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized total curvature
by batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond
to positive control runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic
chamber simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians
further support the observed 7.5% higher total curvature. e) and f) Effect size metrics,
namely Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium
effect, consistently reflecting the 7.5% level difference. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. BatchB2 isalsoanomalous.
136 of 250

--- Page 137 ---

SI40. Day3solidity(norm.) results
137of 250

--- Page 138 ---

Fig.SI32: Atday3p.f.,thesolidityofhypomagneticembryosisapproximately3%lower
thanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedsoliditybybatchandaggregate
data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to positive control runs, in
which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates Earth’s. c)
and d)Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the observed 3%
lowersolidity. e)andf)Effectsizemetrics,namelyCohen’sdandCliff’s∆,andBinhi’sEand
thevisibilityν,confirmamediumeffect,consistentlyreflectingthe3%leveldifference. g)
throughj)Moststatisticallysignificantdifferencesarefoundinthepositivecontroltadpole
populationsraisedinthehypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
138of 250

--- Page 139 ---

SI41. Day3solidityresults
139of 250

--- Page 140 ---

Fig.SI33: Atday3p.f.,thesolidityofhypomagneticembryosisapproximately3%lower
than that of the control population. a) and b) Non-normalized solidity by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed 3% lower solidity. e)and f)Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆,
and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium effect, consistently reflecting the 3%
level difference. g) through j) Given the substantial variation in solidity across batches,
these plots may not provide an accurate representation of our data. However, these plots
dorevealthatbatchesB1,B3 andB7areanomalousaccordingtothismetric.
140 of 250

--- Page 141 ---

SI42. Day3elongation(norm.) results
141of 250

--- Page 142 ---

Fig. SI34: At day 3 p.f., the elongation of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 1%
higherthanthatofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedelongationbybatchand
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed 1% higher elongation. e)and f)Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s d and Cliff’s
∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium effect, consistently reflecting the
1% level difference. g)through j)Some statistically significant differences are found in the
positive control tadpole populations raised in the hypomagnetic chamber, as expected.
BatchesB2 andB5 arealsoanomalous.
142of 250

--- Page 143 ---

SI43. Day3elongationresults
143 of 250

--- Page 144 ---

Fig. SI35: At day 3 p.f., the elongation of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 1%
higher than that of the control population. a) and b) Non-normalized elongation by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 1% higher elongation. e)and f)Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s
d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium effect, consistently
reflectingthe1%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariationinelongation
acrossbatches,theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentationof our data.
144 of 250

--- Page 145 ---

SI44. Day3roundness(norm.) results
145 of 250

--- Page 146 ---

Fig. SI36: At day 3 p.f., the roundness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 9%
lower than that of the control population. a)and b)Normalized roundness by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed 9% lower roundness. e)and f)Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s d and Cliff’s
∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium effect, consistently reflecting the
9% level difference. g)through j)Most statistically significant differences are found in the
positive control tadpole populations raised in the hypomagnetic chamber, as expected.
BatchesB2 andB5 arealsoanomalous.
146 of 250

--- Page 147 ---

SI45. Day3roundnessresults
147 of 250

--- Page 148 ---

Fig. SI37: At day 3 p.f., the roundness of hypomagnetic embryos is approximately 9%
lower than that of the control population. a) and b) Non-normalized roundness by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
support the observed 9% lower roundness. e)and f)Effect size metrics, namely Cohen’s
d and Cliff’s ∆, and Binhi’s E and the visibility ν, confirm a medium effect, consistently
reflectingthe9%leveldifference. g)throughj)Giventhesubstantialvariationinroundness
acrossbatches,theseplotsmaynotprovideanaccuraterepresentationof our data.
148 of 250

--- Page 149 ---

SI46. Day2to3measures: majoraxis,totalcurvature,convexityand
solidity
Wealsoquantifytheextenttowhichtheprogressionofmorphologicalparametersbetween
days 2 and 3 is different across control and hypomagnetic populations. For each particular
tadpole,wethustrackchangesinmajoraxis,curvature,convexity andsolidity.
From the above morphological parameters, the only that remains to be defined is the
convexity. Convexity quantifies how close a shape is to being convex. It compares the
perimeter of the shape to the perimeter of its convex hull, which is the smallest convex
shapethatcanfullyenclosetheshape. Convexity isdefinedas:
Perimeterof theshape
C ≡ . (SI 20)
Perimeterof itsconvexhull
Convexity values range from 1 (for perfectly convex shapes) to values less than 1 for shapes
withconcavities.
Our analysis of the progression of morphological parameters employs four distinct
comparison measures (explained in Supplementary Section SI15). All measures consistently
support the conclusion that the control and hypomagnetic tadpole populations evolve
differently from day 2 to day 3 in a statistically significant manner. The results for the
major axis are presented in Supplementary Figs. SI38 through SI41; for total curvature in
Supplementary Figs. SI42 through SI45; for convexity in Supplementary Figs. SI46 through
SI49;andforsolidity inSupplementary Figs.SI50 through SI53.
The data are normalized to the control group average, per batch. This normalization is
especiallyimportantforpropertieslikemajoraxisandcurvature,whereslightmagnification
changes occur between image acquisitions, ensuring a fair comparison. Although convexity
and solidity inherently do not require normalization, they are normalized to facilitate
consistentcomparisonsacrossbatchesandacrossthefourdifferenteffectchangemeasures.
149 of 250

--- Page 150 ---

We are unable to confidently explain why the control group during the positive control runs
(+1–3) exhibit an overall larger Z-score difference in convexity and solidity when compared
to the control group during the experimental runs (B1–7). This discrepancy may reflect
limitationsinthesespecificmeasureswhencapturingtadpoleshapechangesinourdataset.
However,itisimportanttonotethatthistrendisreversedintheexperimentalruns,further
highlighting the distinct morphological progression between tadpoles exposed to the
hypomagneticversusthecontrolmagneticfieldcondition.
Duringbootstrapping,thenormalizationoftheprogressiondataresultedinexcessivelylarge
sampledvaluesforallfourmeasures. Consequently,thebootstrappingplotsoftyped),from
Supplementary Fig. SI38 toSupplementary Fig. SI53, were generated usingnon-normalized
data as an exception. Despite this adjustment, unusually large sampled values persisted,
likely due to small denominators in the calculations. Additionally, some non-normalized
bootstrapping results contradict the normalized distributions; for example, in the convexity
resultsofSupplementaryFig.SI46,bootstrappedplotd)showsapositivemediandifference,
whereas b)suggests a decrease in convexity for day 3 under hypomagnetic conditions. This
inconsistency raises concerns about the reliability of these non-normalized bootstrapped
plots.
Finally,wehighlightthehighlyanomalousplotb)ofSupplementaryFig.SI44,whichshowsthe
aggregate violins for percentage change in curvature progression. Unlike the other effect-
changemeasures,percentagechangeusesonlytheday2propertyvalueinthedenominator.
If this value is small, the resulting percentage change can become disproportionately large.
Thisislikelyresponsiblefortheanomalyobservedintheplot.
150of 250

--- Page 151 ---

SI47. Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference
151of 250

--- Page 152 ---

Fig. SI38: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the major axis of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the Z-score difference, is approximately 0.5 higher than
that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized major axis Z-score difference by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
supporttheobserved0.5highervalue. e)Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆confirmamediumeffect.
f)Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g)through j)Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. BatchB1isalsoanomalous.
152 of 250

--- Page 153 ---

SI48. Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,visibility
153of 250

--- Page 154 ---

Fig. SI39: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the major axis of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the visibility, is approximately 3% higher than that of the
controlpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedmajoraxisvisibilitybybatchandaggregatedata;
B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to positive control runs, in which
an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates Earth’s. c)and d)
Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the observed 3% higher
value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f) Binhi’s E and the visibility
ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically significant differences are
found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the hypomagnetic chamber, as
expected. BatchB1isalsoanomalous.
154 of 250

--- Page 155 ---

SI49. Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,percentage
change
155of 250

--- Page 156 ---

Fig. SI40: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the major axis of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the percentage change, is approximately 5% higher than
that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized major axis percentage change by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
supporttheobserved5%highervalue. e)Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆confirmamediumeffect.
f)Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g)through j)Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. BatchB1isalsoanomalous.
156of 250

--- Page 157 ---

SI50. Day2to3majoraxisprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference
157 of 250

--- Page 158 ---

Fig. SI41: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the major axis of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the relative difference, is approximately 3% higher than that
ofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedmajoraxisrelativedifferencebybatchand
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed 3% higher value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f)
Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. BatchB1isalsoanomalous.
158 of 250

--- Page 159 ---

SI51. Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference
159of 250

--- Page 160 ---

Fig.SI42: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the total curvature of hypomagnetic
embryos,asmeasuredbytheZ-scoredifference,isapproximately0.4higherthanthat
of the control population. a) and b) Normalized total curvature Z-score difference by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
supporttheobserved0.4highervalue. e)Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆confirmamediumeffect.
f)Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g)through j)Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. BatchesB1,B2 andB6 arealsoanomalous.
160of 250

--- Page 161 ---

SI52. Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,visibility
161of 250

--- Page 162 ---

Fig.SI43: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the total curvature of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the visibility, is approximately 3% higher than that of the
control population. a)and b)Normalized total curvature visibility by batch and aggregate
data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to positive control runs, in
which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates Earth’s. c)
and d)Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the observed 3%
higher value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f) Binhi’s E and the
visibilityνoverestimatetheeffectsize. g)throughj)Moststatisticallysignificantdifferences
arefoundinthepositivecontroltadpolepopulationsraisedinthehypomagneticchamber,
asexpected. BatchesB1,B2 andB6 arealsoanomalous.
162of 250

--- Page 163 ---

SI53. Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,percentagechange
163 of 250

--- Page 164 ---

Fig.SI44: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the total curvature of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the percentage change, is approximately 25–50% higher
than that of the control population–reflecting the limitations of this metric. a) and b)
Normalized total curvature percentage change by batch and aggregate data. The highly
anomalous violin in b) is a reflection of the limitations of this metric (due to calculations
involving small denominators). c)and d)Analysis of the population averages and medians
further support the observed 25% value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium
effect. f) Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most
statistically significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations
raised in the hypomagnetic chamber, as expected. Batches B1, B2 and B6 are also
anomalous.
164 of 250

--- Page 165 ---

SI54. Day2to3curvatureprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference
165of 250

--- Page 166 ---

Fig.SI45: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the total curvature of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the relative difference, is approximately 5% higher than that
of the control population. a) and b) Normalized total curvature relative difference by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
supporttheobserved5%highervalue. e)Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆confirmamediumeffect.
f)Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g)through j)Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected. BatchesB1,B2 andB6 arealsoanomalous.
166 of 250

--- Page 167 ---

SI55. Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference
167of 250

--- Page 168 ---

Fig. SI46: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the convexity of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the Z-score difference, is approximately 0.4 lower than
that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized convexity Z-score difference by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
supporttheobserved0.4lowervalue. e)Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆confirmamediumeffect.
f)Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g)through j)Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
168of 250

--- Page 169 ---

SI56. Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,visibility
169of 250

--- Page 170 ---

Fig. SI47: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the convexity of hypomagnetic
embryos,asmeasuredbythevisibility,isapproximately1%lowerthanthatofthecontrol
population. a) and b) Normalized convexity visibility by batch and aggregate data; B1–7
represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to positive control runs, in which an
artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates Earth’s. c) and d)
Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the observed 1% lower
value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f) Binhi’s E and the visibility
ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically significant differences are
found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the hypomagnetic chamber, as
expected.
170of 250

--- Page 171 ---

SI57. Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,percentagechange
171of 250

--- Page 172 ---

Fig. SI48: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the convexity of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the percentage change, is approximately 2% lower than
that of the control population. a) and b) Normalized convexity percentage change by
batch and aggregate data; B1–7 represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to
positivecontrolruns,inwhichanartificialmagneticfieldinsidethehypomagneticchamber
simulates Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further
supporttheobserved2%lowervalue. e)Cohen’sdandCliff’s∆confirmamediumeffect.
f)Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g)through j)Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
172of 250

--- Page 173 ---

SI58. Day2to3convexityprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference
173of 250

--- Page 174 ---

Fig. SI49: From day 2 to 3 p.f., the progression of the convexity of hypomagnetic
embryos, as measured by the relative difference, is approximately 2% lower than that
ofthecontrolpopulation. a)andb)Normalizedconvexityrelativedifferencebybatchand
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support
the observed 2% lower value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f)
Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
174of 250

--- Page 175 ---

SI59. Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,Z-scoredifference
175of 250

--- Page 176 ---

Fig.SI50: Fromday2to3p.f.,theprogressionofthesolidityofhypomagneticembryos,
as measured by the Z-score difference, is approximately 0.4 lower than that of the
control population. a) and b) Normalized solidity Z-score difference by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed 0.4 lower value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f)
Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
176of 250

--- Page 177 ---

SI60. Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,visibility
177 of 250

--- Page 178 ---

Fig.SI51: Fromday2to3p.f.,theprogressionofthesolidityofhypomagneticembryos,
as measured by the visibility, is approximately 2% lower than that of the control
population. a) and b) Normalized solidity visibility by batch and aggregate data; B1–7
represent experimental runs, and +1–3 correspond to positive control runs, in which an
artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates Earth’s. c) and d)
Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the observed 2% lower
value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f) Binhi’s E and the visibility
ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically significant differences are
found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the hypomagnetic chamber, as
expected.
178of 250

--- Page 179 ---

SI61. Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,percentagechange
179of 250

--- Page 180 ---

Fig.SI52: Fromday2to3p.f.,theprogressionofthesolidityofhypomagneticembryos,
as measured by the percentage change, is approximately 2% lower than that of the
control population. a) and b) Normalized solidity percentage change by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support
the observed 2% lower value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f)
Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
180 of 250

--- Page 181 ---

SI62. Day2to3solidityprogression(norm.) results,relativedifference
181of 250

--- Page 182 ---

Fig.SI53: Fromday2to3p.f.,theprogressionofthesolidityofhypomagneticembryos,
as measured by the relative difference, is approximately 3% lower than that of the
control population. a) and b) Normalized solidity relative difference by batch and
aggregatedata;B1–7representexperimentalruns,and+1–3correspondtopositivecontrol
runs, in which an artificial magnetic field inside the hypomagnetic chamber simulates
Earth’s. c) and d) Analysis of the population averages and medians further support the
observed 3% lower value. e) Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆ confirm a medium effect. f)
Binhi’s E and the visibility ν overestimate the effect size. g) through j) Most statistically
significant differences are found in the positive control tadpole populations raised in the
hypomagneticchamber,asexpected.
182of 250

--- Page 183 ---

SI63. Additionalmorphologicalmeasures
For completeness, we display here our results for the normalized perimeter in day 1 and 2
images(respectively,inSupplementaryFigs.SI54andSI57);bothareoverallslightlylargerin
hypomagnetic tadpoles. The trend persists in the day 3 images, where the previous analysis
revealed a significantly larger perimeter for hypomagnetic tadpoles (see Supplementary
Fig. SI29).
In day 2 images, the major axis of hypomagnetic tadpoles is only marginally longer (as
depictedinSupplementaryFig.SI56),whereasinday3images,themajoraxisissignificantly
extendedforhypomagnetictadpoles(seeSection6). Wehypothesizethatthesegmentation
ofday2images,withtadpoleswithlesspigmentation,islessrobustandaworsepredictorof
truetadpolelength. Inaddition,theimagingconditionsonday2werelesscontrolled,asthe
livetadpoleswerenotmanipulated,potentiallyresultingindistortionsortadpolesbeingout
of the focal plane. In contrast, on day 3, the fixed tadpoles were carefully positioned with
tweezerstolieflaton theirsides,providingmorereliablemeasurements.
Therewasnostatisticalimpactfromthetadpoles’magneticfieldenvironmentoverthearea
forday1and2images;detailedanalysescanbefoundinSupplementaryFigs.SI55andSI58.
Segmentationforday1imagesishighlyrobust,whileforday2images,itmaybelessreliable,
potentiallyobscuringthetrueareameasurements.
We quantitatively compare our findings to the only study we found reporting size variability
inXenopusembryos[14]. IntheiranalysisofembryosbetweenNFstages10and15[15],they
demonstrate that natural size variations are compensated by a scaling mechanism in gene
expression, where larger embryos exhibit proportionally larger gene expression domains,
leading to proper tissue and organ development despite size differences. In their analysis
of over 2,000 early-stage embryos, they report a maximum 38% difference in major axis
length. As shown in the a)panel of Supplementary Fig. SI59, the day 1 p.f. images from our
dataset, which align closely with the stages they studied, exhibit a very similar variability in
major axis length for control embryos, calculated in our case as the difference between
the averages of the largest and smallest 5%. Specifically, for the control embryos in the
183of 250

--- Page 184 ---

aggregated data B1–7, this variability closely matches the 38% reported (denoted with a
red dashed line); in contrast, hypomagnetic embryos display significantly greater variability
(approximately 20% higher). In the b) and c) panels of Supplementary Fig. SI59, we plot
the major axis variability for day 2 and 3 p.f. images in our dataset. We consistently find a
highervariabilityinthehypomagnetictadpolepopulation;thisvariabilityismuchreducedin
tadpoles during the positive control runs. The comparison with the data from [14] in b)and
c) is an extrapolation, as the persistence of variability at similar magnitudes in later-stage
embryos remains unquantified by any other study than the present one. For all points in
theseplots,fullerrorpropagationwasdoneautomaticallyusingthepythonpackageunumpy.
184 of 250

--- Page 185 ---

SI64. Day1perimeter(norm.) results
185 of 250

--- Page 186 ---

Fig. SI54: Average day 1 perimeters are only slightly larger in hypomagnetic tadpoles.
This contributes to the observed reduced roundness in hypomagnetic tadpoles, as the
areasremainmostlyunaffectedacrosspopulations.
186of 250

--- Page 187 ---

SI65. Day1area(norm.) results
187of 250

--- Page 188 ---

Fig. SI55: Average day 1 areas are not statistically changed as a function of magnetic
field environment. However, the violin plots of b)do show a qualitatively different kernel
density distribution for control and hypomagnetic tadpoles; this qualitative difference in
distributionismostlygoneforthepositivecontrolruns.
188 of 250

--- Page 189 ---

SI66. Day2majoraxis(norm.) results
189of 250

--- Page 190 ---

Fig.SI56: Average day 2 major axes are only slightly longer in hypomagnetic tadpoles.
However, the violin plots in b) reveal a qualitatively distinct kernel density distribution
betweencontrolandhypomagnetictadpoles,withthehypomagneticpopulationexhibiting
notably longer tails at the higher end of the size spectrum. This qualitative difference in
distributionlargelydisappearsinthepositivecontrolruns.
190of 250

--- Page 191 ---

SI67. Day2perimeter(norm.) results
191 of 250

--- Page 192 ---

Fig. SI57: Average day 2 perimeters are only slightly larger in hypomagnetic tadpoles.
However, the violin plots of b)do show a qualitatively different kernel density distribution
for control and hypomagnetic tadpoles; this qualitative difference in distribution is gone
forthepositivecontrolruns.
192 of 250

--- Page 193 ---

SI68. Day2area(norm.) results
193of 250

--- Page 194 ---

Fig. SI58: Average day 2 areas are not statistically changed as a function of magnetic
field environment. Still, the violin plots of b) do show a qualitatively different kernel
density distribution for control and hypomagnetic tadpoles; this qualitative difference in
distributionis,however,stillpresentforthepositivecontrolruns.
194of 250

--- Page 195 ---

Fig.SI59: The variability in major axis length is always larger for hypomagnetic tadpoles.
a)The variability in major axis length for control embryos in day 1 p.f. images closely aligns
with the 38% maximum difference reported in [14] for similar stage embryos. In contrast,
the hypomagnetic embryos exhibit approximately 20% greater variability. b) and c) The
comparisonwiththedatafrom[14]isanextrapolation;however,weconsistentlyfindahigher
variability in the hypomagnetic tadpole population; this variability is considerably reduced
fortadpolesduringthepositivecontrolruns.
195of 250

--- Page 196 ---

SI69. GuidetoGitHubrepository
All our work is freely available in the GitHub repository for this work, found at
github.com/Quantum-Biology-Institute/Weak-magnetic-field-effects-in-biology-are-measurable.
Therepositorycontains13folders;theirnamesandtheSupplementarySectionwheretheir
descriptioncanbe foundareasfollows:
Foldername DescriptioninSupplementarySection
0Rawdata SI70
1Utilities SI73
2Experimentaloverview SI73
3D1quantification SI73
4D2quantification SI73
5D3quantification SI73
6DeltaD2D3 SI73
7D1images SI72
8D2images SI72
9D3images SI72
10Posters SI71
11Calibrationdata SI75
12Latexcode N/A(LATEX filesusedtobuildthisdocument)
TableSI4: GitHubfoldersandtheSupplementarySectionscontainingtheirdescriptions.
196of 250

--- Page 197 ---

SI70. Guidetorawdata
All raw data in .jpg format is available in the GitHub folder 0 Raw data. This folder contains
10 subfolders: Batches named B1–7 correspond to experimental runs, and batches named
B8–10 to positive control runs. The folder names include the fertilization date (in format
YYYY_MM_DD). Each batch folder contains three subfolders with raw images for days 1, 2,
and 3 p.f., named for the days the images were taken (also in format YYYY_MM_DD); the
images are organized in further subfolders by control or sample (meaning hypomagnetic)
conditionsandplatenumber.
Batch B1 includes images for up to 7 days p.f. Batch B5 also contains images for tadpoles
raised outside our control incubator, on a lab bench (folders labeled ‘outside’). Batches B5
and B6 have additional images for tadpoles raised together in Petri dishes, not in individual
wells(folderslabeled‘PD’).
197of 250

--- Page 198 ---

SI71. Guidetoplateposters
For each of the 111 well plates used in this work, along with the Petri dishes also used in
batches B5 and B6, we created posters illustrating the 3-day tadpole progression, available
in the GitHub folder 10 Posters. Plate posters display either 24 or 48 unique tadpoles,
dependingon whethera 24-or 48-wellplatewasusedintheexperiment.
Each plate poster is named by: batch number (with batches named B1–7 corresponding
to experimental runs, and batches named B8–10 to positive control runs); experimental
condition,control(C)orhypomagnetic(H);andplatenumber. Forexample,posterB3CP1.pdf
is for batch 3, control condition, first plate. For Batch B1, we also provide posters including
images for up to 7 days p.f. (named ‘B1XPY_7days.pdf’, with X = { C, H } the condition and Y
theplatenumber).
Within each poster, tadpole images are numbered by well number. The accompanying text
for each tadpole is color-coded based on the human assessment of tadpole health (see
details in Supplementary Section SI7): green (healthy), orange (one health condition), red
(more than one health condition), and black (dead by day 1 p.f.). If a health condition is
observed,it isnotedintheaccompanyingtext.
Missingimagesinthepostersarereplacedwiththecuteiconshownbelow. Ifthereasonfor
themissingimageisknown,it isnotedintheaccompanyingtext.
198of 250

--- Page 199 ---

SI72. Guidetosegmentedimages
Post-segmentation.pngimagesthatareusedintheautomatedanalysisarefoundinGitHub
folders7 D1 images, 8D2 images and9D3 images,fordays1, 2, and3 p.f.,respectively.
These images are separated by batches, conditions and plates. Batches B1 through B7
correspond to our experimental runs; batches B8 through B10 correspond to the positive
control runs. Inside each batch folder, images are subdivided and uniquely labeled into
controlorhypomagneticcondition(withaCoranH,respectively);thedayoftheimage(day
1,2,or3p.f.);theplatenumber;andfinallythewellnumberwithintheplate. Forexample,the
image B1CD1P3-08.png represents the tadpole image for batch B1, in the control condition,
at day 1 p.f., located in plate 3 and well 8. Wells are numbered sequentially by row: in a
48-well plate, A1 to A8 correspond to wells that we number 1 to 8, B1 to B8 to wells 9 to 16,
andsoforth. The samenumberingsystemappliesto24-wellplates.
199 of 250

--- Page 200 ---

SI73. Guidetopythoncode
All the used python code is available in the GitHub repository for this work, found at
github.com/Quantum-Biology-Institute/Weak-magnetic-field-effects-in-biology-are-measurable,
inmultiple folders.
WerecommendthatinterestedresearchersdownloadallGitHubfolderstoalocaldirectory
and then modify the base path in the python files (located at the first line of each script) to
matchthedirectory wherethefilesweredownloadedto.
Folder1Utilitiescontainsthecodefortheautomatedimageanalysis;mostauxiliaryfunctions
are found in the file utilities.py. Folder 2 Experimental overview contains the file Posters.py
thatisusedtobuild theposterwith3-dayimagesforeachwell-plate.
Themajoranalysisworkflowisasfollows:
1) Images from folders 7 D1 images, 8 D2 images and 9 D3 images are manually copied into
folders ‘(X+2) DX quantification/BY/BYC’ or ‘.../BYH’, with X in {1, 2, 3} and Y in {1, 2, ..., 10}.
For example, day 3 images for the first positive control run (i.e., B8) are copied from their
respective plate subfolders within 9 D3 images/B8 into folders 5 D3 quantification/B8/B8C
and 5 D3 quantification/B8/B8H.
2) Intheirnewfolders,theimagesareresizedtoacommonsizeforeachbatchusingResizeD1.py
forday1 or ResizeD2D3.pyfordays2 and3 p.f.;
3) The resized images are automatically analyzed using AnalysisAndPlot.py. This function
generates two output .txt files per batch, one per condition, with the relevant parameters
(e.g., major axis, eccentricity, area, perimeter, ...) for all images. These files are saved in
folder ‘(X+2) DX quantification/Results/BY/BYCDX_analysis.txt’ and ‘.../BYHDX_analysis.txt’.
For example, for day 2 quantification of batch B7, results for the hypomagnetic condition
analysisaresavedinfolder4 D2 quantification/Results/B7/B7HD2_analysis.txt;
4) Thestatisticalanalysisplotsofadesiredproperty,bydayandforallbatches,aregenerated
by the file StatsAndPlots.py. For the progression of the quantities between days 2 and 3,
200of 250

--- Page 201 ---

file StatsAndPlotsDeltaD2D3.py is used instead. The analysis of each desired property is
programatically set in the file SetupDays.py. If a plot-saving flag is set to True in one of the
analysisfunctions,resultsaresavedtofolder‘(X+2)DXquantification/Results/DX_{property
name}’. For example, for day 1 quantification of eccentricity, plots are saved to the folder
3 D1 quantification/Results/D1_eccentricity. Outputs .txt files with results of the statistical
testsarealwayssavedtotheabovedirectory.
201of 250

--- Page 202 ---

SI74. Guidetostatisticalanalysisplots
Our automated statistical analysis for each property, whose underlying code is described
in Supplementary Section SI73, produces 10 pairs of plots, labeled a)through j). Here, we
provideguidanceon howtounderstandeachplot.
Each plot title includes the following information: the day post-fertilization (1, 2, or 3)
corresponding to the analyzed images; the property under study (along with units, if
applicable); and a qualifier indicating the health status of the tadpoles (see details in
Supplementary Section SI7). The qualifier is either ‘all states’ for tadpoles in all assessed
healthconditions,or ‘onlyhealthy’ fortadpoleswithoutanyobservedhealthconditions.
Our7experimentalrunsarecalledbatchesandlabeledB1throughB7. Wehavethreepositive
control runs labeled +1 through +3 in these plots. Values obtained for the hypomagnetic
(respectively: control) condition tadpoles are labeled H (C). The label H in the positive
control runs (e.g., +2H) refers to tadpoles exposed to a field mimicking Earth’s generated
insidethehypomagneticchamber.
Detailsbyplotareprovidedbelow:
a) presentsthemeasuredvaluesofthepropertyunderstudy,groupedbybatchandcondition
(control or hypomagnetic). Each tadpole’s value is represented by a horizontal line, color-
coded as follows: green for healthy tadpoles, orange for tadpoles with one observed health
condition, red for tadpoles with two or more health conditions, and black for tadpoles that
were dead by day 1. The violin outlines display the kernel density estimation of the data
distributionforeachbatch,withthewidthoftheviolinindicatingthefrequencyofdatapoints
at corresponding values. For each batch, the control tadpoles are plotted in the leftmost
violin, and the tadpoles under hypomagnetic conditions are plotted in rightmost violin, as
indicated by the legend (C for control, H for hypomagnetic) in the top left, above the first
batch(B1). Averticaldashedblacklineseparatestheviolinpairsbetweendifferentbatches.
Within each violin: The circular marker indicates the mean value; vertical lines extending
from the mean show the standard deviation; and the median is denoted by an ‘x’ marker. In
202of 250

--- Page 203 ---

normalizedplots,themeanvalueofthecontrolviolinissetto1foreachbatch. Areddashed
horizontal line at 1 on the y-axis (ordinate) indicates this normalization. The labeled y-axis
valuesandthey-axisrangearemanuallychosen. Theplotcantogglebetweenshowingviolins
fortheentiretadpolepopulationoronlyforthehealthysubset,whereonlygreenhorizontal
lines(representinghealthytadpoles)aredisplayed.
b) presents two sets of violins comparing the aggregate values for control and hypomagnetic
conditions across the 7 experimental runs, labeled B1–7C for control and B1–7H for
hypomagnetic; each tadpole counts once. Additionally, two violins compare the aggregate
valuesforcontrolandpositivecontrolwithinthehypomagneticchamber,labeled+1–3Cfor
controland+1–3Hforpositivecontrol. Eachpairofviolinsisseparatedbyaverticaldashed
black line, and the total number of data points (one per tadpole) is displayed below each
violin label. Within each violin: The circular marker indicates the mean value; vertical lines
extending from the mean show the standard deviation; and the median is denoted by an ‘x’
marker. In normalized plots, the mean value of the control violin is set to 1 for each batch.
A red dashed horizontal line at 1 on the y-axis (ordinate) indicates this normalization. The
labeled y-axis values and the y-axis range are manually chosen, and correspond to those in
plot a). The plot can toggle between showing violins for the entire tadpole population or
onlyforthehealthysubset,whereonlygreenhorizontallines(representinghealthytadpoles)
aredisplayed.
c) illustrates the average value of the property under study for both the control and
hypomagnetic populations, along with a 95% confidence interval (calculated as described
in Supplementary Section SI16). The average for the control population is represented by
a circular marker, while that of the hypomagnetic population is represented by a square
marker. Theexperimentaldataandpositivecontroldataareseparatedbyaverticaldashed
blackline. Thedataispresentedbybatch,andafterbatchB7,theaggregatedaveragevalue,
withanequalweightforeachtadpole,anditscorrespondingconfidenceintervalareplotted
above the label B1–7. Similarly, to the right of the datasets for the three positive control
runs,wedisplaytheaggregatedaveragevalueandconfidenceintervalabovethelabel+1–3.
In normalized plots, the mean value for the control population across all health states is set
to1. Areddashedhorizontallineat1onthey-axisindicatesthisnormalization. Thelabeled
y-axisvaluesandthey-axisrangeareautomaticallychosenbyourcode. Theplotcantoggle
203of 250

--- Page 204 ---

between showing the average for the entire tadpole population and for the healthy subset
only. Blue markers are used for the entire population, and green markers are used for the
healthysubset.
d) shows the bootstrapped distribution (as explained in Supplementary Section SI16) of the
median difference between control and hypomagnetic populations, expressed as a
percentage of the control median. The violins for the resampled populations are plotted
by batch, with a circular marker indicating the bootstrapped median and a vertical line, its
95%confidenceinterval(calculatedasdescribedinSupplementarySectionSI16). Avertical
dashed black line separates the experimental data from the positive control data. After
batch B7, the aggregated median value, weighted equally for each tadpole, along with its
corresponding confidence interval, is plotted above the label B1–7. Similarly, to the right of
thedatasetsforthethreepositivecontrolruns,theaggregatedmedianvalueandconfidence
intervalareplottedabovethelabel+1–3. Thetotalnumberofdatapoints(onepertadpole)is
displayedbeloweachbatchlabel. Innormalizedplots,themedianofthecontrolpopulation
issetto0,andareddashedhorizontallineat0onthey-axisindicatesthisnormalization. The
labeledy-axisvaluesareautomaticallychosenbythecode,withthey-axisrangesetbetween
the minimum value and 80% of the maximum of all bootstrapped median differences. The
plot can toggle between displaying the results for the entire tadpole population or only the
healthy subset. Blue markers denote the entire population, while green markers represent
thehealthysubset.
e) is a dual plot. The top y-axis displays the absolute values of Cohen’s d (in orange diamond
markers) and Cliff’s ∆ (in purple triangle markers) by batch, representing two measures of
effect size (explained in Supplementary Section SI14). Three solid orange lines at 20%,
50%,and80%denotetheconventionalthresholdsforsmall,medium,andlargeeffectsizes,
accordingtoCohen’sd. Similarly,threedottedpurplelinesat15%,33%,and47%represent
the thresholds for small, medium, and large effects according to Cliff’s ∆. On the bottom
y-axis,thebase-10logarithmofthepvalueforeachbatchisdisplayedbycircularmarkerson
alogscale. Eachpvalueiscalculatedasfollows: AseparateKolmogorov-Smirnovnormality
test [17] is performed on both the control and hypomagnetic populations for each batch.
If the p value from the normality test is greater than 0.01 for both populations (i.e., both
populationsarenormallydistributed),thepvaluefromaT-test[17]betweenthepopulations
204of 250

--- Page 205 ---

is plotted. If at least one population is not normally distributed (which is usually the case),
the p value from a non-parametric Mann-Whitney test [17] is plotted instead. In the bottom
plot, a dashed red line at y = −2 corresponds to p = 0.01; points above this threshold
are not statistically significant at the 0.01 level. A vertical dashed black line separates the
experimental data from the positive control data. After batch B7, the aggregated median
value,equallyweightedforeachtadpole,alongwithitscorrespondingconfidenceinterval,is
plottedabovethelabelB1–7. Similarly,theaggregatedmedianvalueandconfidenceinterval
forthethreepositivecontrolrunsareplottedabovethelabel+1–3. Thetotalnumberofdata
points (one per tadpole) is displayed beneath each batch label. Both the y-axis labels and
rangesareautomaticallydeterminedbythecodeforbothplots. Theplotcantogglebetween
displaying data for the entire tadpole population andonly the healthy subset. While the top
plotremainsunchangedincolorfordifferentconditions,thebottomplotusesbluemarkers
fortheentirepopulationandgreenmarkersforthehealthysubset.
f) isadualplot. Thetopy-axisdisplaystheabsolutevaluesofBinhi’sE (insquaremarkers)and
the visibility ν (in ‘x’ markers) by batch, representing two measures of effect size (explained
inSupplementarySectionSI14). Onthebottomy-axis,thebase-10logarithmofthepvalue
for each batch is displayed by circular markers on a log scale. Each p value is calculated
as follows: A separate Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test [17] is performed on both the
controlandhypomagneticpopulationsforeachbatch. Ifthepvaluefromthenormalitytest
is greater than 0.01 for both populations (i.e., both populations are normally distributed),
the p value from a T-test [17] between the populations is plotted. If at least one population
is not normally distributed (which is usually the case), the p value from a non-parametric
Mann-Whitney test [17] is plotted instead. In the bottom plot, a dashed red line at y = −2
correspondstop=0.01;pointsabovethisthresholdarenotstatisticallysignificantatthe0.01
level. Averticaldashedblacklineseparatestheexperimentaldatafromthepositivecontrol
data. AfterbatchB7,theaggregatedmedianvalue,equallyweightedforeachtadpole,along
with its corresponding confidence interval, is plotted above the label B1–7. Similarly, the
aggregated median value and confidence interval for the three positive control runs are
plottedabovethelabel+1–3. Thetotalnumberofdatapoints(onepertadpole)isdisplayed
beneatheachbatchlabel. Boththey-axislabelsandrangesareautomaticallydeterminedby
the code for both plots. The plot can toggle between displaying data for the entire tadpole
205of 250

--- Page 206 ---

populationandonlythehealthysubset. Boththetopandbottomplotsusebluemarkersfor
the entire population and green markers for the healthy subset. The bottom log plot in plot
f)is identical to that in plot e). We chose to separate the plotting of Cohen’s d and Cliff’s ∆
from Binhi’sE andthevisibility ν because,inour data, weobservedthat eachpairof effect
size measures is more similar in magnitude within its pair, whereas the first pair (Cohen’s d
andCliff’s ∆)tendstobe largerinmagnitude.
g) presentsthegraphicalrepresentationoftheDunnpost-hoctestresultsfollowingaKruskal-
Wallis test which identified significant differences within the control or
hypomagnetic condition groups (as explained in Supplementary Section SI16) [17], for all
tadpole health states (represented by the blue color palette). The Kruskal-Wallis statistic
(‘K.-W.stat.’) andthecorrespondingpvalue(whichmustbelessthan0.01tojustifytheDunn
test) are displayed beneath the plot title. The numbers within the individual matrix entries
represent the base-10 logarithm of the p value between two different batches (within the
same condition). The darker the blue in a matrix entry, the greater the difference between
the two batches, for the same condition. For batch pairs with a Dunn p value less than 0.01
(i.e., matrix values less than -2), the corresponding matrix entries are framed with a black
border, indicating significant differences at the 0.01 level. This threshold is also visually
marked by a black line at log(Dunn p value) = -2 on the rightmost color scale. p values
smallerthanthecomputationalthresholdforzeroarerepresentedbyawhitesquarewitha
blackborder. Theplotcantogglebetweendisplayingdataforthecontrolandhypomagnetic
populations (with labels containing a C or an H, respectively). The first seven rows of the
matrix correspond to the experimental runs (labeled with a B), while the last three rows
representthepositivecontrolruns(labeledwitha +).
h) presentsthegraphicalrepresentationoftheDunnpost-hoctestresultsfollowingaKruskal-
Wallis test which identified significant differences within the control or
hypomagnetic condition groups (as explained in Supplementary Section SI16) [17], for the
healthy tadpole subset only (represented by the green color palette). The Kruskal-Wallis
statistic(‘K.-W.stat.’) andthecorrespondingpvalue(whichmustbelessthan0.01tojustify
theDunntest)aredisplayedbeneaththeplottitle. Thenumberswithintheindividualmatrix
entriesrepresentthebase-10logarithmofthepvaluebetweentwodifferentbatches(within
the same condition). The darker the green in a matrix entry, the greater the difference
206of 250

--- Page 207 ---

between the two batches, for the same condition. For batch pairs with a Dunn p value less
than0.01(i.e.,matrixvalueslessthan-2),thecorrespondingmatrixentriesareframedwitha
blackborder,indicatingsignificantdifferencesatthe0.01level. Thisthresholdisalsovisually
markedbyablacklineatlog(Dunnpvalue)=-2ontherightmostcolorscale. pvaluessmaller
than the computational threshold for zero are represented by a white square with a black
border. The plot can toggle between displaying data for the control and hypomagnetic
populations (with labels containing a C or an H, respectively). The first seven rows of the
matrix correspond to the experimental runs (labeled with a B), while the last three rows
representthepositivecontrolruns(labeledwitha +).
i) presents the graphical representation of the Tukey post-hoc test results following an ART-
ANOVAnon-parametrictest[17]whichidentifiedsignificantdifferenceswithinthecontrolor
hypomagneticconditiongroups(asexplainedinSupplementarySectionSI16),foralltadpole
health states (represented by the blue color palette). The ART-ANOVA statistics (‘ART-A.
stat.’) and the corresponding p values (which must all be less than 0.01 to justify the Tukey
test) are displayed beneath the plot title, for: the condition (control or hypomagnetic,
‘cond.’); the batch (‘batch’); and the interaction between the condition and the batch
(‘cond.:batch’). The numbers within the individual matrix entries represent the base-10
logarithmoftheadjustedpvaluebetweentwodifferentbatches(withinthesamecondition).
Thedarkertheblueinamatrixentry,thegreaterthedifferencebetweenthetwobatches,for
thesamecondition. Forbatchpairswithanadjustedpvaluelessthan0.01(i.e.,matrixvalues
less than -2), the corresponding matrix entries are framed with a black border, indicating
significantdifferencesatthe0.01level. Thisthresholdisalsovisuallymarkedbyablacklineat
log(p value adj.) = -2 on the rightmost color scale. p values smaller than the computational
threshold for zero are represented by a white square with a black border. The plot can
toggle between displaying data for the control and hypomagnetic populations (with labels
containing a C or an H, respectively). The first seven rows of the matrix correspond to the
experimentalruns(labeledwithaB),whilethelastthreerowsrepresentthepositivecontrol
runs(labeledwitha +).
j) presents the graphical representation of the Tukey post-hoc test results following an ART-
ANOVAnon-parametrictest[17]whichidentifiedsignificantdifferenceswithinthecontrolor
hypomagneticconditiongroups(asexplainedinSupplementarySectionSI16),forthehealthy
207of 250

--- Page 208 ---

tadpole subset only (represented by the green color palette). The ART-ANOVA statistics
(‘ART-A.stat.’) andthecorrespondingpvalues(whichmustallbelessthan0.01tojustifythe
Tukeytest)aredisplayedbeneaththeplottitle,for: thecondition(controlorhypomagnetic,
‘cond.’); the batch (‘batch’); and the interaction between the condition and the batch
(‘cond.:batch’). The numbers within the individual matrix entries represent the base-10
logarithmoftheadjustedpvaluebetweentwodifferentbatches(withinthesamecondition).
Thedarkerthegreeninamatrixentry,thegreaterthedifferencebetweenthetwobatches,
for the same condition. For batch pairs with an adjusted p value less than 0.01 (i.e., matrix
values less than -2), the corresponding matrix entries are framed with a black border,
indicating significant differences at the 0.01 level. This threshold is also visually marked by
a black line at log(p value adj.) = -2 on the rightmost color scale. p values smaller than the
computationalthresholdforzeroarerepresentedbyawhitesquarewithablackborder. The
plotcantogglebetweendisplayingdataforthecontrolandhypomagneticpopulations(with
labels containing a C or an H, respectively). The first seven rows of the matrix correspond
to the experimental runs (labeled with a B), while the last three rows represent the positive
controlruns(labeledwitha +).
208of 250

--- Page 209 ---

SI75. Guidetocalibrationdata
In this folder, we present the raw calibration data and the code used to plot calibration
curves.
Subfolder Degaussing door test contains data for the calibration of how magnetic fields
changeinsidethehypomagneticchamberasafunctionofitsdooropeningandclosing,and
ofthedegaussingprocedure,asplottedinSupplementary Fig. SI4.
Subfolder Field uniformity contains the 3D interactive HTML plot of mapped residual fields
insidethehypomagneticchamber,asplottedinSupplementaryFig.SI5. TheHTMLfileneeds
tobe downloadedandopened withaninternetbrowser.
SubfolderEnvironmentcalibrationcontainsdataforthecalibrationoftemperature,humidity,
pressure, and light levels (with a sensor of sensitivity 0.01 Lux) in both the hypomagnetic
chamberandthecontrolbox,asplottedinSupplementary Fig. SI7.
SubfolderSpectracontainsdataforthecalibrationofspectralpropertiesandlightintensity
levels (with a sensor of sensitivity 188 µlux) in both the hypomagnetic chamber and the
controlbox,asplottedinSupplementary Fig. SI8.
209of 250

--- Page 210 ---

SI76. Statisticalcomparisonsacrosscontrolandhypomagnetic
populations
Given the quantitatively established high variability between individual batches, we are
hesitant to include statistical comparisons across control and hypomagnetic conditions.
As a point of curiosity, we cautiously present the full Tukey post-hoc matrix of adjusted p
valuesfollowinganon-parametricART-ANOVAtestformanyofthepropertiesweinvestigate.
Theseplotsextendthestatisticalplotsoftypesi)andj),incorporatingtheadjustedpvalues
forcomparingcontrolandhypomagneticresults.
It is important to emphasize that many of the studied biological properties, when not
normalized by batch, exhibit statistically significant differences across batches, even within
thesamecondition.
Note that we cannot extend plots of types g) and h): Dunn’s post-hoc test is specifically
designed for pairwise comparisons between groups after a Kruskal-Wallis test and does
not account for interaction terms. This is because the Kruskal-Wallis and Dunn tests focus
on comparing group medians without modeling interactions between factors. Interaction
effects, such as those between control and hypomagnetic conditions across different
batches, require tests that support interaction terms, such as the non-parametric
ART-ANOVA.
210 of 250

--- Page 211 ---

Fig.SI60: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1eccentricity(norm.).
211 of 250

--- Page 212 ---

Fig.SI61: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1eccentricity.
212 of 250

--- Page 213 ---

Fig.SI62: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1elongation(norm.).
213 of 250

--- Page 214 ---

Fig.SI63: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1elongation.
214of 250

--- Page 215 ---

Fig.SI64: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1roundness(norm.).
215 of 250

--- Page 216 ---

Fig.SI65: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1roundness.
216 of 250

--- Page 217 ---

Fig.SI66: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1solidity(norm.).
217of 250

--- Page 218 ---

Fig.SI67: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1solidity.
218of 250

--- Page 219 ---

Fig.SI68: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1perimeter(norm.).
219 of 250

--- Page 220 ---

Fig.SI69: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday1area(norm.).
220of 250

--- Page 221 ---

Fig.SI70: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness(norm.).
221 of 250

--- Page 222 ---

Fig.SI71: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2L⋆a⋆b⋆ yellowness.
222 of 250

--- Page 223 ---

Fig.SI72: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2RGByellowness(norm.).
223 of 250

--- Page 224 ---

Fig.SI73: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2RGByellowness.
224of 250

--- Page 225 ---

Fig.SI74: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2YellownessIndex(norm.).
225 of 250

--- Page 226 ---

Fig.SI75: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2YellownessIndex.
226of 250

--- Page 227 ---

Fig.SI76: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2HSVyellowness(norm.).
227of 250

--- Page 228 ---

Fig.SI77: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2HSVyellowness.
228of 250

--- Page 229 ---

Fig.SI78: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2majoraxis(norm.).
229 of 250

--- Page 230 ---

Fig.SI79: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2perimeter(norm.).
230of 250

--- Page 231 ---

Fig.SI80: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday2area(norm.).
231of 250

--- Page 232 ---

Fig.SI81: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3majoraxis(norm.).
232 of 250

--- Page 233 ---

Fig.SI82: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3perimeter(norm.).
233 of 250

--- Page 234 ---

Fig.SI83: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3area(norm.).
234of 250

--- Page 235 ---

Fig.SI84: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3curvature(norm.).
235of 250

--- Page 236 ---

Fig.SI85: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3solidity(norm.).
236 of 250

--- Page 237 ---

Fig.SI86: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3solidity.
237of 250

--- Page 238 ---

Fig.SI87: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3elongation(norm.).
238of 250

--- Page 239 ---

Fig.SI88: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3elongation.
239of 250

--- Page 240 ---

Fig.SI89: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3roundness(norm.).
240of 250

--- Page 241 ---

Fig.SI90: Fullpost-hocmatrixofadjustedpvaluesforday3roundness.
241of 250

--- Page 242 ---

SI77. Discussion: Competingbiologicalmagneticfieldsensing
hypothesesfavorquantummechanisms
We have demonstrated that sensing Earth’s minute magnetic field regulates basal tadpole
physiology as early as one day p.f., for purposes likely not related to orientation, navigation,
and homing. To explain our findings, we note that, traditionally, organisms have been
proposed to sense weak DC magnetic fields through three different mechanisms (for less
discussedmodels,see[1]).
First, through electromagnetic induction [37]. Elasmobranchs such as sharks and rays have
a specialized organ, the ‘ampullae of Lorenzini’, schematically consisting of channels filled
with conductive material; upon crossing magnetic field lines, a voltage is induced according
to Faraday’s law. It has been estimated that said channels might be sensitive enough to
sense Earth’s magnetic field, but definitive proof is lacking. We find it unlikely that frog
embryos possess similar organs. In addition, the detection of DC magnetic fields through
this mechanism requires the organism to move and cross magnetic field lines—which is not
thecasefortadpoleembryosat leastuntilday2 p.f.
Second,throughbiogenicmagnetite(ormaghemite–whichisoxidatedmagnetite–,orgreigite)
clumps that act as ferrimagnetic compass needles. A key parameter in this model of
organismal magnetic field sensing is the size of the ferrimagnetic clumps, which need to
be large enough so that their magnetic energy (⃗µ · B ⃗ , where ⃗µ is the magnetic moment of
the ferrimagnetic domain) is significantly stronger than the randomizing effects of thermal
energy(k T,wherek istheBoltzmannconstant)[61]. Atroomtemperature,single-domain
B B
magnetitecrystalsneedtoberoughly35nmorlargerinsizetohaveapermanentmagnetic
moment [35, 62]; a 35 nm-diameter sphere of magnetite has a magnetic moment of
approximately0.01fA · m2,foratinyratioof⃗µ·B ⃗ /k T ∼ 0.1underthegeofieldandatroom
B
temperature. Modeling the magnetite crystal as a thermally-driven harmonic oscillator, its
⃗
magnetic moment ⃗µ will be scattered around the direction of B with a root-mean-square
√
angular deviation of ⟨θ⟩ = kBT; in this case, ⟨θ⟩ ∼ 159o. This means that biogenic
µ⃗·B⃗
magnetite that can correctly react to Earth’s magnetic field need occur as much bigger
single clumps, or as smaller clumps that are so densely packed in the cell so that spin
242of 250

--- Page 243 ---

exchange interactions are strong enough to align the moments of the different magnetic
domains; a ratio of ⃗µ · B ⃗ /k T ∼ 6 or larger, equivalently ⟨θ⟩ ∼ 23o or smaller, has been
B
suggested as sufficient [34, 37]. The classic example here are magnetotactic bacteria that
synthesize beads of single-domain magnetite enveloped by a lipid bilayer and positioned
in a string known as the magnetosome; the beads, together, can exert enough torque to
alignabacteriumwiththegeofield[33]. Thereportedmagneticmomentsofmagnetotactic
bacteria range from 0.2 to 60 fA · m2 [63], or ⃗µ · B ⃗ /k T ∼ 2.4 to 725, or ⟨θ⟩ ∼ 34 to 2o.
B
It is hypothesized, but not demonstrated, that magnetic signal transduction could also be
mediatedbymechanosensitiveionchannelsthatrespondtothebeads’changeinalignment
[64],orbytheincorporationofmagnetiteasanactivecomponentofthecells’electriccircuit
[65]. The genes used by magnetotactic bacteria to absorb iron from their surroundings
and synthesize magnetite seem to have few evident animal homologues [66, 67]. Biogenic
magnetic nanoparticles have, however, been putatively identified across the tree of life
[67]; some argue that, in the studies that use the Prussian Blue stain to label ferric iron,
iron-rich macrophages are conflated with magnetite [68]. There is one isolated report of
natural remanent magnetization consistent with magnetite in an amphibian, the newt [36].
A comprehensive study [68], enabled by an advance in instrumentation [63], performed
large-scalecellscreeningforbiogenicmagnetiteinover10millioncellsfromthepigeonand
the trout, organisms that had previously been singled-out through other methods [69–71]
as having cells rich in magnetite for migration-related geofield sensing; of these 10 million
cells,only1peralmosthalfamillionwerefoundtohavelargemagneticmomentsconsistent
withthepresenceofbiogenicmagnetite;thesmallestcellularmagneticmomentreportedin
[63],namely4fA · m2 foratroutcell,wouldcorrespondtoasphereofmagnetiteofroughly
250 nm in diameter, or equivalent magnetic material sufficiently packed, for a resulting
ratio ⃗µ · B ⃗ /k T ∼ 48 and angular deviation ⟨θ⟩ ∼ 6o; 250 nm is still below the diffraction
B
limit of most common optical microscopes, and hence such a particle could, if present,
evade simple optical detection. In tadpoles, iron, in addition to the endogenous quantity
of approximately 50 ng/embryo that is maternal in origin [72] and that remains constant
until developmental stage 50 [73], could come from contaminants. The MMR solution
in which the tadpoles are raised (see Supplementary Section SI1) contains no iron. Iron
contamination through laboratory plastics that are injection-molded into metal forms has
243of 250

--- Page 244 ---

beenreported[74];inourexperiments,wefinditimplausiblethatlargequantitiesofironcan
beobtainedthroughthisscenario,sincetheembryosmostlyjustsitinplasticwareafterbeing
manipulated with a plastic dropper, a practice that involves no agitation or centrifugation;
during our fertilization protocol, however, the testes are macerated using a plastic piston.
A Xenopus laevis embryo at stage 22 (roughly the stage at which our embryos are imaged
on day 1 p.f., when geofield sensing is already occurring) has approximately only 30,000
cells [38]; even if enough iron for biomineralization is available endogenously or through
contaminants, we argue that it is unlikely, but not impossible, that biogenic magnetite is
beingdeployedbythismostlynon-migratoryspeciestointeractwiththegeofieldsoearlyin
the embryo development and in such a nonspecific way, given that only 0.0002% of tested
cellsbelongingtotwomigratory specieswerepositiveforthepresenceof magnetite.
Third, organisms have been proposed to sense weak DC magnetic fields through electron
spin-dependent chemical reactions. In what follows, we explain the basic elements of this
hypothesis;arguethatourpresentdataisconsistentwithit;andexpoundonitsfeaturesand
limitations.
The net effect of a magnetic field is to change the macroscopic final products of electron
spin-dependentchemicalreactions[75],andthetheoreticalproposalisthatorganismscan
senseamagneticfieldtotheextentthattheycansensedifferentphysiologicalconcentrations
of such products [39]. On the one hand, in test-tube chemistry, such reactions have
been unambiguously established in liquids, gases, and solids alike; at room temperature;
for magnetic field strengths as weak as the Earth’s; and for a broad class of biologically
relevant compounds—the most researched of which, for historical reasons related to bird
magnetoreception studies, is a family of flavoproteins known as cryptochromes [9, 40]
(incidentally, human cryptochrome in solution is also magnetosensitive [76]). We stress
that many other proteins have also been observed to be magnetosensitive [41]; the yellow
pigments in the tadpoles themselves—carotenoids [30], pteridines [77], and possibly also
flavins [78]—all have rich spin-radical physics. As a general rule, magnetosensitive proteins
tend to be redox-active. Compounds that can sustain electron-spin dependent chemical
reactions are sensitive to varying magnetic field strengths and frequencies, even if
244of 250

--- Page 245 ---

isotropically tumbling; compounds that are, for example, anchored to a membrane could,
in addition, overcome thermal randomization and be sensitive to varying magnetic field
directions. Counter-intuitively,itiswell-understoodthatthemagneticfieldeffectsizedoes
notmonotonicallyincreasewithfieldstrength[9];fieldsthataremuchstrongerthantypical
∼
hyperfine interactions (which are quoted, for example in [9], to be 0.1–5 mT) will not
stronglychangetheoutcomeofthechemicalreactionsconsideredhere,whichmakethisa
good hypothesis to explain our findings of biological sensitivity to a field of Earth’s strength.
On the other hand, there is abundant correlative data that organisms react to magnetic
fields in a way that is consistent with such electron spin-dependent chemical reactions
beingactiveinsidetheircells. However,at presentthereisno directevidenceof thisfact.
Similarly to technological quantum sensing, e.g., with a spin in diamond [42, 43], in electron
spin-dependent chemical reactions the spins are almost always initialized (or optically
pumped[79])viaphotoexcitation(quantumdetailsofthemodelarefoundinSupplementary
Section SI78). (We do not believe thermally generated spin radicals could sense magnetic
fields in this way.) This means that this modality of magnetic sensing can only happen in the
presence of light of appropriate wavelengths and that, in biologically relevant compounds,
thesereactionsinvolvechromophores;notethatchromophores(e.g.,flavin)existinpossibly
most cells, also in those that are not in contact with external light stimuli (e.g., eye and
skin). The tadpoles in our experiments have been raised in the dark. We note, however,
thatthereisnosuchthingasabsolutedarkness: InSupplementaryFig.SI8wereportedthe
background light intensity and spectrum inside the hypomagnetic chamber and the control
± ±
box,foranaverageilluminanceof0.0751 0.0002luxand0.0873 0.0003lux,respectively.
For comparison, migratory birds, which have long been proposed to sense the geofield
through electron spin-dependent chemical reactions happening in their eyes, can orient
∼
themselvesatduskwithlightintensitiesof 0.0003lux[80];afterlossesandtheassumption
of uniform illumination of the visual field, this is estimated to correspond to just 1 photon/s
per bird cell involved in magnetoreception [81]. If one posits that birds are, indeed, sensing
magnetic fields in such a light-dependent way, an extraordinarily low photon flux could
be influencing physiological function. This begs the question, not typically considered,
of whether endogenous sources of photons could kick-start electron spin-dependent
245of 250

--- Page 246 ---

chemicalreactionsformagneticmodulationofbasalbiologicalfunction,i.e.,functionthatis
not related to migration and homing. Photons are, for example, emitted as by-products of
cellular oxidative metabolism and stress [82, 83]; in intensity, such ultra-weak, spontaneous
photon emissions are way above thermal background, having been recorded to range up to
severalthousandsofphotons/s/cm2(arguablymore,ifinefficienciesintheopticalcollection
apparatus are taken into account). They are, moreover, broad in wavelength, including the
blueportionofthespectrumthatphotoexcitesflavinchromophores(forexample,emissions
from triplet excited carbonyls and from singlet-excited melanin are found, respectively,
at 350 and 360 nm and higher wavelengths). Our background spectra, positively, and
endogenous ultra-weak photon emission, perhaps, could thus provide a photon flux that
warrants spin-based magnetic field sensing in both the hypomagnetic chamber and the
controlbox.
Thus, in this model, magnetic sensing in biology has features matching decades of
experimental observations across the tree of life. In particular, magnetic sensing: should
not have biological specificity (unless spin physics information is used to perform magnetic
engineering),whichisconsistentwitheffectsthathavebeenindiscriminatelyreportedacross
organisms and cell types; should, instead, be widespread across a vast gamut of biological
compounds that are magnetosensitive; should present a low correlation between effect
magnitudes and magnetic field strengths or exposure durations, as it is indeed reported
across many experiments [1]; and should not require a dedicated sensory organ (except
maybe in migratory species). One important shortfall of the hypothesis is that the size of
magnetic field effects on electron spin-dependent chemical reactions is typically small (at
most a single-digit percent change of final products); moreover, it is at present unknown
how magnetic signals could be amplified and/or transduced into statistically significant
physiologicalandphenotypicaldifferencesasseeninour dataandelsewhere.
If a subset of all observed weak magnetic field effects in biology are a result of the above
describedquantumsensing-likechemicalreactionshappeninginsidecells,theimplications
will be tremendous. This will mean, first, that electron spin superpositions survive the
strongly decohering environment of the cell forlongenoughto be usedforfunction (i.e., to
246of 250

--- Page 247 ---

senseandphysiologicallyreacttoamagneticfield;seetimescaleestimatesinSupplementary
Section SI78); and second, that knowledge of the endogenous spin physics properties of
biological matter can be used to engineer weak magnetic fields to up- and down-regulate
thewhole machinery of thecell.
247of 250

--- Page 248 ---

SI78. Quantumfeaturesofmagneticfieldsensingviaelectron
spin-dependentchemicalreactions
SI78.1. Electronspin-dependentchemicalreactionsasquantumsensing
Electron spin-dependent chemical reactions should be understood as bona fide quantum
sensing processes: In them, an electron spin radical or, more commonly, pairs of spin
radicalsaredrivenintoasuperpositionbyacombinationoftheexternallyappliedmagnetic
field and the internal magnetic field due to hyperfine couplings to nearby nuclear spins.
The superposition performs the magnetic field sensing—similarly to the simplest modality
of technological quantum sensing known to physicists, namely magnetic field sensing via
Ramsey interferometry [84] with, e.g., an electron spin in diamond [85]. Different magnetic
fieldsalterthetimeevolutionofthesuperposition,thusalsoalteringthedynamicprobability
thattheelectronspinsbemeasuredbytheenvironmentineachsuperpositionstate. Toeach
collapsedelectronspinstatetherecorrespondsonechemicalpathwaytaken;inpractice,it
is believed that different electron spin states influence chemical conformation or electron
transport rates.
SI78.2. Timeandenergyscales
Magnetic fields affect the electron spin superposition. Even after the superposition is
long decohered, its magnetosensing effects can still be macroscopically relevant, since,
on average (for many compounds concomitantly sensing the magnetic field, or for one
compound sensing the magnetic field repeated times), the superposition determined how
often each diverging chemical pathway was taken. Here, thermal energies k T are indeed
B
much larger than typical magnetic energies involved (for example, the energy difference
between the electron spin superposition states); the crux of the issue is that quantum-
assisted magnetic sensing only occurs before thermalization: The argument relies on
timescales, not energy scales. For a conservative estimate, a single electron spin in a
superposition can be understood to sense a magnetic field if it can Larmor precess around
said field once before undergoing decoherence. The Larmor period of a free electron
aroundEarth’smagneticfieldis 2π ∼ 714ns,withγ thegyromagneticratiooftheelectron;
γeB e
248of 250

--- Page 249 ---

inthisestimate,theelectronspinsuperpositioncoherencetime(analogoustoT⋆ inRamsey
2
interferometry [84, 85]) needs to be at least τ ∼ 714 ns in order for it to sense the geofield.
Using the Nyquist criterion instead yields a less conservative estimate τ ≥ 2 ∼ 227 ns.
γeB
That such coherence times are relatively long and have never been directly measured for
biocompounds inside the wet, warm environment of a single cell are the main contention
pointsforthishypothesis,forwhichcorroborating,butnotcausal,biologicaldataabound. If
further experimentation suggests that our present results are indeed explained through
this hypothesis, the profound implication of that eventuality will be that electron spin
superpositions are maintained inside the tadpoles’ cells for at least the above estimated
coherencetimes.
SI78.3. Sensitivityconsiderations
For the magnetite hypothesis, the sensitivity η (in magnetic field resolution per unit time) is
givenby [65, 86]:
√ √ ( )
√ √ √
2k Tr 6v T
η ≡ ∆B Nτ = B B = B √ , (SI21)
M M s Hz
where Nτ is the total sensing time; r = 3vV is the characteristic rotational response time
kBT
of the magnetite particle; v is the dynamic viscosity of the medium; V is the volume of the
magnetitegrain;M = M V isthemagneticmomentofthesphere;andM ∼ 4.46 · 105 A/m
s s
is the saturation magnetization of magnetite. We assume here that the cellular cytoplasm is
about 5.5 more viscous than water, as suggested elsewhere [87]. This yields η ∼ 5.7 · 10 −2
√
T/ Hz fora grainof magnetite.
In contrast, a freely evolving single-electron spin superposition can sense a magnetic field
witha (Ramsey-like)sensitivity [85]
1
η ∼ √ , (SI 22)
γ τ
e
where γ ∼ 1.7 · 1011 rad/(s · T) for the electron, assumed uncoupled, and τ is the sensing
e
∼
time. To sense Earth’s magnetic field with an electron spin superposition, a time of 714
√
ns is required as roughly estimated above; this yields η ∼ 8.0 · 10 −6 T/ Hz, a sensitivity
improvementbyseveralordersof magnitudecomparedtothemagnetitemodel.
249of 250

--- Page 250 ---

SI78.4. Magnitudeofeffectasafunctionoffieldstrength
Differentlyfromquantumsensingwithasingleelectronspin,quantumsensingwithapairof
electronspinspresentsthecounter-intuitivefeaturethatexternallyappliedmagneticfields
alter the final products of the chemical reaction by a proportion that is not monotonically
increasingwithfieldstrength. Thereisawell-understoodcompetitionbetweentheexternal
magneticfieldandtheendogenoushyperfinefield;fieldsthataremuchstrongerthantypical
hyperfineinteractionswill notstronglychangetheoutcomeof thechemicalreaction.
Asaruleofthumb,externalmagneticfieldslargerthantensofmTwillnotinfluenceelectron
spin-dependent chemical reactions. However, very strong external magnetic fields (usually
greater than a few tesla) can trigger another spin mechanism, known as ‘delta g’, to once
againinfluencethedistributionof chemicalreactionproducts[88].
250of 250