

--- Page 1 ---

RADICALSINCHEMICALBIOLOGY 703
doi:10.2533/chimia.2008.703 CHIMIA2008,62,No.9
EDITORIAL
Free Radicals in Chemical Biology
The continuous increase in interest in free radicals associated with
life sciences is motivated by the discovery of numerous processes in
biology that make use of these species as key intermediates in their
mechanisms. Important links have also been found with medicine
since many physiopathological conditions and aging processes are
correlated with free radical formation and reactivity.
In the last decade, it became clear that for an in-depth understand-
ingofbiologicalprocesses,amolecularapproach,basedonchemical
principles and tools, was necessary. Therefore, the discipline of chemical biology was born with the scope of
creatinganinterfacebetweenchemistryandbiology,interms,notonlyofmethodologies,butoflanguageand
mutual comprehension as well.
The interface between free radicals and chemical biology became valuable in view of the fact that several free
radical-based processes are known from the molecular point of view, and which have allowed biomarkers as
well as pharmacological and biological tools to be identified. Examples include lipid peroxidation and oxida-
tive damage to DNA and proteins; processes that are currently recognized as the molecular basis of several
diseases and of aging.
Nevertheless, there is still a wide gap between chemical and mechanistic knowledge and their use for the in-
vestigationofbiologicalproblems.Thereisaneedtointegratemethodologiesinchemistryandbiologyinorder
to apply chemical tools to the complexity of living organisms. In addition, sharing a common language among
scientists with different backgrounds has proven difficult.
TheCOSTAction‘FreeRadicalsinChemicalBiology’intendstofillthesegaps,withfourworkinggroupsdeal-
ing with the main radical processes in biomolecules such as lipids, proteins, nucleic acids and the effects of
small, biologically relevant free radicals. Radical species are considered either as part of the normal metabolic
functioning, or as responsible for the attack on molecules, thereby causing the onset of biological damage.
Preventiveandrepairstrategiesagainstradical-baseddamagearealsoincludedinthescenarioofthebiological
effects.TheActionisopentoavarietyofscientistsspanningfromchemistrytomedicine,whohavecontributed
to the articles in this issue of CHIMIA, providing an overview of the main subjects and tasks of the Action. The
general aim is to address physiologically and pathologically relevant processes based on free radicals, in an
effort to improve quality of life and health.
IhopethatthefieldofFreeRadicalsinChemicalBiologyinauguratedbyourCOSTActionwillalsorepresentthe
ideal scientific environment for the new generation of researchers and an important opportunity for achieving
excellence of European science in the direction of multidisciplinarity and basic and applied research.
I wish to thank all authors and the Editor-in-Chief for making this special issue possible.
Chryssostomos Chatgilialoglu
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Bologna
ItiswithgreatpleasurethattheEditorialBoardofCHIMIAthanksProfDr.ChryssostomosChatgilialogluforhis
efforts in the planning and realization of this issue on ‘Radicals in Chemical Biology’.