

--- Page 1 ---



--- Page 2 ---

Table of Contents
Volume 1
Chapter 1. The Scene of Action 1
Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins 39
Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells 95
Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins 161
Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids 199
Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria 281
Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate 325
Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats 379
Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells 455
Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism 505
Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism 535
Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions 589
Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation,
and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation
Intermediates 677
Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents 719
Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation – Reduction Reactions 765
Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport 837

--- Page 3 ---

Table of Contents
Volume 2
Chapter 17. The Organization of Metabolism 938
Chapter 18. Electron Transport, Oxidative Phosphorylation,
and Hydroxylation 1012
Chapter 19. The Chemistry of Movement 1088
Chapter 20. Some Pathways of Carbohydrate Metabolism 1128
Chapter 21. Specific Aspects of Lipid Metabolism 1180
Chapter 22. Polyprenyl (Isoprenoid) Compounds 1226
Chapter 23. Light and Life1272
Chapter 24. The Metabolism of Nitrogen and Amino Acids 1358
Chapter 25. Metabolism of Aromatic Compounds and Nucleic
Acid Bases1420
Chapter 26. Biochemical Genetics1472
Chapter 27. Organization, Replication, Transposition, and Repair
of DNA 1528
Chapter 28. The Transcription of Genes 1602
Chapter 29. Ribosomes and the Synthesis of Proteins 1668
Chapter 30. Chemical Communication Between Cells1740
Chapter 31. Biochemical Defense Mechanisms1830
Chapter 32. Growth and Development 1878
Front matter Vol 2 10 2/14/03, 3:03 PM

--- Page 4 ---

Left: Cells of the pathogenic O157:H7 strain of Escherichia coli attached to the surface epithelium of the
cecum of a neonatal piglet. Electron-dense filaments (presumably polymerized actin) in the host
cytoplasm can be seen subjacent to attached bacteria. The bacteria have effaced most micro-villi but
some remain between the bacterial cells. Courtesy of Evelyn A. Dean-Nystrom, National Animal
Disease Center, USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Ames, IA. Center: Many unicellular organisms
such as these Vorticella inhabit wet and moist environments throughout the biosphere. Invertebrates
have evolved as long as humans and have complex specializations such as the contractile stem of these
protozoa. Courtesy of Ralph Buchsbaum. Right: Although 97% of animals are invertebrates, ~ 3%
of the several million known species have backbones. Giraffe: © M. P. Kahl, Photo Researchers
Contents
2 A. The Simplest Living Things Boxes
3 1. Escherichia coli 2 Box 1-A About Measurements
3 2. The Bacterial Genome 4 Box 1-B Relative Molecular Mass, M, and Daltons
r
5 3. Ribonucleic Acids (RNA) and the Transcription 9 Box 1-C In the Beginning
and Translation of Genetic Information 16 Box 1-D Inherited Metabolic Diseases
5 4. Membranes and Cell Walls 25 Box 1-E Errors, Misconceptions, and Speculation
6 5. Flagella and Pili 32 Box 1-F About the References
6 6. Classification and Evolution of Bacteria
8 7. Nutrition and Growth of Bacteria Tables
9 8. Photosynthetic and Nitrogen-Fixing Prokaryotes 7 Table 1-1 A Systematic Classification Scheme for
11 B. Eukaryotic Cells Bacteria
11 1. The Nucleus 11 Table 1-2 Approximate Sizes of Some Cells
11 2. The Plasma Membrane 12 Table 1-3 Haploid Genome Sizes for Several
12 3. Vacuoles, Endocytosis, and Lysosomes Organisms
13 4. The Endoplasmic Reticulum and Golgi Membranes 31 Table 1-4 Approximate Composition of
14 5. Mitochondria, Plastids, and Peroxisomes Metabolically Active Cells and Tissues
15 6. Centrioles, Cilia, Flagella, and Microtubules
15 7. Cell Coats, Walls, and Shells
15 C. Inheritance, Metabolic Variation, and Evolution of
Eukaryotes
17 1. A Changing Genome
17 2. Genetic Recombination, Sex, and Chromosomes
18 3. Haploid and Diploid Phases
18 D. Survey of the Protists
18 1. Protozoa
20 2. Fungi
20 3. Algae
23 E. The Variety of Animal Forms
23 1. Major Groups of Multicellular Animals
25 2. Cell Types and Tissues
26 Tissues
26 Blood cells
26 Cell culture
26 3. Communication
28 Cell contacts and junctions
29 Cell recognition
29 F. Higher Plants and Plant Tissues
30 G. The Chemical Composition of Cells
34 References
36 Study Questions

--- Page 5 ---

1
1
The Scene of Action
This book is about the chemistry of living cells synthesize compounds that the human body requires
with special emphasis on the trillions of cells that make but cannot make. Microorganisms cause decay of
up your own body. Every aspect of life depends upon organic matter and convert it into forms usable by
the chemical makeup of cells and on the chemical plants. This book deals with the chemical reactions
properties of the remarkable molecules found within occurring in all of these organisms. We’ll look at
the cells. The information presented here will give strange and unusual reactions, along with those meta-
the reader a solid foundation for understanding not bolic sequences common to most living things.
only the chemical basis of life but also the revolution- Each one of the thousands of chemical reactions
ary developments in molecular biology, biochemical of metabolism is catalyzed by an enzyme. Most of
genetics, medicine, and agriculture which dominate these enzymes are proteins, but others are made from
today’s scientific news and which will play an increas- RNA (ribonucleic acid). In both cases enzymes are
ingly important role in our lives. very large molecules with precise three-dimensional
The first theme of the book is biomolecular structures. Thestudy of the properties of enzymes
structure. We’ll look carefully at the complex struc- and of enzymatic catalysis is a third theme of the
tures of proteins, carbohydrates, RNA, DNA, and book. Not only are the chemical mechanisms by
many other substances. We’ll not only examine in- which enzymes act of interest but also enzymes are
depth their molecular architecture but also study the often targets for useful drugs. Incorrectly formed en-
chemical properties that make life possible. zymes can result in serious diseases.
A second theme is metabolism, the unceasing, The sequences of the amino acids in the chains
complex network of thousands of chemical reactions from which proteins are constructed are encoded in
by which cells grow and reproduce, take up foods and the nucleotide sequences of DNA (deoxyribonucleic
excrete wastes, move, and communicate with each acid). The coding sequence for a protein in the DNA
other. Within cells we have a steady state, a condi- is found in the structural gene for that protein. The
tion in which the complex chemical constituents of RNA enzymes are also encoded by DNA genes. A
cells are continuously being synthesized in one series fourth major theme of the book deals with the nature
of reactions and degraded in another. The result is a of the genetic code used in DNAand with the pro-
marvelous system of self-renewal or “turnover” of cesses by which cells read and interpret the code. It
tissues. We’ll examine the chemical reactions involved also includes study of the methods by which thousands
in these processes as well as the ways in which they of genes have been mapped to specific positions in
are controlled. We will consider both the reaction chromosomes, isolated, cloned, and sequenced.
sequences and the techniques such as cloning of genes, A large number of proteins present in the outer
isotopic labeling, X-ray diffraction, and nuclear mag- surfaces of cells serve as receptors that receive chemi-
netic resonance spectroscopy, which are used today to cal messages and other signals from outside the cell.
study metabolism. The receptors, which are sometimes enzymes, respond
Human beings are surrounded by many other living by generating internal signals that control metabolism
creatures whose activities are important to us. Photo- and cell growth. Such molecular signaling is another
synthetic organisms obtain energy from sunlight and major area of contemporary biochemistry.

--- Page 6 ---

2 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
Biologists have described over a million species, biological approach. These molecular biologists also
and several millions of others probably exist.1 Many emphasize structure and function but may have a goal
of these organisms have very specialized ways of life. of understanding biological relationships more than
However, they all have much chemistry in common. chemical details. Biophysics, a closely related science,
The same 20 amino acids can be isolated from proteins encompasses the application of physical and mathe-
of plants, animals, and microorganisms. Formation of matical tools to the study of life.
lactic acid in both bacteria and human muscle requires
the same enzymes. Except for some small variations,
the genetic code is universal—the same for all organ- A. The Simplest Living Things
isms. Thus, there is a unity of life and we can study
metabolism as the entirety of chemical transformations The simplest organisms are the bacteria.2–5 Their
going on in all living things. However, the differences cells are called prokaryotic (or procaryotic) because
among species are also impressive. Each species has no membrane-enclosed nucleus is present. Cells of all
its own gene for almost every protein. other organisms contain nuclei separated from the
When the enzyme that catalyzes a particular meta- cytoplasm by membranes. They are called eukaryotic.
bolic reaction is isolated from a number of different While viruses (Chapter 5) are sometimes regarded as
organisms, it is usually found to have similar proper- living beings, these amazing parasitic objects are not
ties and a similar mechanism of catalysis, regardless of complete organisms and have little or no metabolism of
the source. However, the exact sequence of amino acids their own. The smallest bacteria are the mycoplasmas.6–8
in the enzyme will be almost unique to the organism They do not have the rigid cell wall characteristic of
that produced it. When the three-dimensional struc- most bacteria. For this reason they are easily deformed
tures are compared it is found that differences between and often pass through filters designed to stop bacteria.
species often affect only the peripheral parts of an They are nutritionally fussy and are usually, if not
enzyme molecule. The interior structure of the protein, always, parasitic. Some live harmlessly in mucous
including the catalytic machinery, is highly conserved. membranes of people, but others cause diseases.
However, the surface regions, which often interact with
other macromolecules, vary greatly. Such interactions
help to control metabolism and may account for many
BOX 1-A ABOUT MEASUREMENTS
differences in the metabolism among living beings.
Variations in protein structures are not limited to
differences between species. Individuals differ from In 1960 the International General Conference
one another. Serious genetic diseases sometimes result on Weights and Measures adopted an improved
from the replacement of a single amino acid unit in a form of the metric system, The International
protein by a different amino acid. Genetic deviations System of Units (SI). The units of mass, length,
from the “normal” structure of a protein result from and time are the kilogram (kg), meter (m), and
mutations. Many mutations, whether they occurred second (s). The following prefixes are used for
initially in our own cells or in those of our ancestors, fractions and multiples:
are detrimental.
However, such mutations also account for variation 10–18,atto (a) 10–6,micro ((cid:1)) 109,giga (G)
among individuals of a species and allow for evolution. 10–15,femto (f) 10–3,milli (m) 1012, tera (T)
The chemical nature and consequences of mutations 10–12,pico (p) 103,kilo (k) 1015,peta (P)
and their significance to health, medicine, and agricul- 10–9,nano (n) 106,mega (M) 1018,exa (E)
ture are dealt with throughout the book. We now have
reliable methods for inducing in the laboratory muta- There is an inconsistency in that the prefixes are
tions at any specific place in a protein sequence and applied to the gram (g) rather than to the basic
also for synthesizing new DNA sequences. These unit, the kilogram.
techniques of genetic engineering have given bio- SI units have been used throughout the book
chemists the ability to modify protein structures freely, whenever possible. There are no feet, microns,
to create entirely new proteins, and to provide a basis miles, or tons. Molecular dimensions are given
for the rapidly developing field of genetic therapy. uniformly in nanometers rather than in angstrom
It should be clear from this introduction that units (Å; 1Å = 0.1 nm). Likewise the calorie and
biochemistry deals with virtually every aspect of life. kilocalorie have been replaced by the SI unit of
The distinguishing feature of the science is that it energy, the joule (J; 1 calorie = 4.184 J).
approaches biological questions in terms of the under- Throughout the book frequent use is made of
lying chemistry. The term molecular biology is often the following symbols:
regarded as synonymous with biochemistry. ,“approximately equal to”
However, some scientists use it to imply a more ~,“approximately” or “about”

--- Page 7 ---

A. The Simplest Living Things 3
For example, Mycoplasma pneumoniae is responsible for proteins, but there is room for a total of only about
primary atypical pneumonia. 50,000 protein molecules. Several types of RNA as
Cells of mycoplasmas sometimes grow as filaments well as many smaller molecules are also present.
but are often spherical and as small as 0.3 micrometer Although we don’t know what minimum quantities
(µm) in diameter. Their outer surface consists of a thin of proteins, DNA, and other materials are needed to
cell membrane about 8 nanometers (nm) thick. This make a living cell, it is clear that they must all fit into
membrane encloses the cytoplasm, a fluid material the tiny cell of the mycoplasma.
containing many dissolved substances as well as sub-
microscopic particles. At the center of each cell is a
single, highly folded molecule of DNA, which consti- 1. Escherichia coli
tutes the bacterial chromosome. Besides the DNA
there may be, in a small spherical mycoplasma, about The biochemist’s best friend is Escherichia coli, an
1000 particles ~20 nm in diameter, the ribosomes. ordinarily harmless inhabitant of our intestinal tract.
These ribosomes are the centers of protein synthesis. This bacterium is easy to grow in the laboratory and
Included in the cytoplasm are many different kinds of has become the best understood organism at the mo-
lecular level.4,9 It may be regarded as a
typical true bacterium or eubacterium.
The cell of E. coli (Figs. 1-1, 1-2) is a
A pilus. Some E. coli are covered with rod ~2 µm long and 0.8 µm in diameter
0.5µm
hundreds of pili of various lengths with a volume of ~1 µm3 and a density
of ~1.1 g/cm3. The mass is ~1 x 10–12 g,
Cell membrane, ~8 nm i.e., 1 picogram (pg) or ~0.7 x 1012
daltons (Da) (see Box 1-B).4 It is about
Cell wall, ~10 nm
100 times bigger than the smallest
mycoplasma but the internal structure,
E. coli
~0.8× 0.8 × 2.0µm as revealed by the electron microscope,
Ribosomes resembles that of a mycoplasma.
~20 nm diameter Each cell of E. coli contains from
DNA, 1.4 mm long.
Only 1% of the total one to four identical DNA molecules,
Ribosomes attached is drawn here depending upon how fast the cell is
to thread of mRNA growing, and ~15,000–30,000 ribosomes.
Other particles that are sometimes seen
Some strains of E. coli within bacteria include food stores such
have flagella—as many
as fat droplets and granules (Fig. 1-3).
as 8, but often fewer
13–14 nm diameter The granules often consist of poly-(cid:1)-
hydroxybutyric acid10 accounting
for up to 25% of the weight of Bacillus
megaterium. Polymetaphosphate, a
highly polymerized phosphoric acid,
The lengths of the flagella
is sometimes stored in “metachromatic
vary but are often ~4× longer
than the cell proper granules.” In addition, there may be
Bdellovibrio, a parasite that lives droplets of a separate aqueous phase,
withinE. coli [see picture by J.C. known as vacuoles.
Sheathed
Burnham, T. Hashimoto, and S.F.
flagellum,
Conti,J. Bacteriol.96, 1366 (1968)]
28 nm
2. The Bacterial Genome
The genetic instructions for a cell
are found in the DNA molecules. All
DNA is derived from four different
A small kinds of monomers, which we call
mycoplasma
nucleotides. DNA molecules are
double-stranded: two polymer chains
are coiled together, their nucleotide
units being associated as nucleotide
pairs (see Fig. 5-7). The genetic mes-
Figure 1-1 Escherichia coli and some smaller bacteria.
sages in the DNA are in the form of

--- Page 8 ---

4 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
sequences of nucleotides. These sequences usually Assume that a typical protein molecule consists of
consist of a series of code “words” or codons. Each a folded chain of 400 amino acids. Its structural gene
codon is composed of three successive nucleotides and will therefore be a sequence of 1200 nucleotide pairs.
specifies which one of the 20 different kinds of amino Allowing a few more nucleotides to form spacer regions
acids will be used at a particular location in a protein. between genes we can take ~1300 as the number of
The sequence of codons in the DNA tells a cell how to nucleotide pairs in a typical bacterial gene. However,
order the amino acids for construction of its many some genes may be longer and some may be much
different proteins. shorter. The genome is the quantity of DNA that carries
a complete set of genetic instructions for an organism.
In bacteria, the genome is a single chromosome con-
sisting of one double-stranded DNA molecule. Myco-
1µm plasma genitalium is the smallest organism for which
the DNA sequence is known.11 Its genome is a double-
helical DNA circle of 580,070 nucleotide pairs and
appears to contain about 480 genes (an average of ~1200
nucleotides per gene).
The average mass of a nucleotide pair (as the
disodium salt) is 664 Da. It follows that the DNA of
M. genitalium has a mass of ~385 x 106 Da. The relative
molecular mass (M) is 0.385 x 109 (See Box 1-B for
r
definitions of dalton and M). The DNA of E.coli is
r
about seven times larger with a mass of ~2.7 x 109 Da.
It contains ~4.2 x 106 nucleotide pairs and encodes
over 4000 different proteins (see Table 1-3).
Each nucleotide pair contributes 0.34 nm to the
length of the DNA molecule; thus, the total length of
DNA of an E. coli chromosome is 1.4 mm. This is
about 700 times the length of the cell which contains it.
Clearly, the molecules of DNA are highly folded, a fact
Figure 1-2 Transmission electron micrograph of a dividing
cell of Escherichia coli O157:H7 attached to the intestinal that accounts for their appearance in the electron micro-
epithelium of a neonatal calf. These bacteria, which are able scope as dense aggregates called nucleoids, which
to efface the intestinal microvilli, form characteristic attach- occupy about one-fifth of the cell volume (Fig. 1-4).
ments, and secrete shiga toxins, are responsible for ~73,000
illnesses and 60 deaths per year in the U. S.10aAfter embed-
ding, the glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue section was immuno-
stained with goat anti-O157 IgG followed by protein A con-
BOX 1-B RELATIVE MOLECULAR MASS,
jugated to 10-nm gold particles. These are seen around the
M , AND DALTONS
periphery of the cell bound to the O-antigen (see Fig. 8-28). r
Notice the two microvilli of the epithelium. Courtesy of
Evelyn A. Dean-Nystrom, National Animal Disease Center, Atomic and molecular masses are assigned
USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Ames, IA. relative to the mass of the carbon isotope, 12C,
whose atomic weight is defined as exactly 12.
The actual mass of a single atom of 12C is defined
as 12 daltons, one dalton being 1.661 x 10–24 g.
The mass of a molecule can be given in daltons
(Da) or kilodaltons (kDa). Thismolecularmass
in daltons is numerically equivalent to the relative
molecular mass (M ) or molecular weight (MW)a
r
and also to the molar mass (g/mol). However, it
1µm is not correct to use the dalton for the unitless
quantityM. Masses of structures such as chro-
r
mosomes, ribosomes, mitochondria, viruses, and
whole cells as well as macromolecules can be
Figure 1-3 A cell of a Spirillum negatively stained with given in daltons.b
phosphotungstic acid. Note the tufts of flagella at the ends,
the rough appearance of the outer surface, the dark granules
a The Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry renamed
of poly-(cid:2)-hydroxybutyric acid and the light-colored gran- molecular weight as relativemolecular mass with the
ules of unknown nature. Courtesy of F. D. Williams, Gail E. symbolM;M = MW.
r r
VanderMolen, and C. F. Amstein. b J. T. Edsall (1970) Nature (London)228, 888.

--- Page 9 ---

A. The Simplest Living Things 5
Each bacterial nucleoid contains a complete set of
3. Ribonucleic Acids (RNA) and the
genetic“blueprints” and functions independently.
Transcription and Translation of Genetic
Each nucleoid is haploid, meaning that it contains
Information
only a single complete set of genes. In addition to
their chromosome, bacteria often contain smaller
The genetic information in the DNA is not utilized
DNA molecules known as plasmids. These plasmids
directly by the protein-synthesizing machinery of cells.
also carry genetic information that may be useful to
Instead, molecules of ribonucleic acid (RNA) are syn-
bacteria. For example, they often encode proteins that
thesized according to the instructions encoded in the
confer resistance to antibiotics. The ability to acquire
DNA, a process called transcription. Although they
new genes from plasmids is one mechanism that
differ from DNA significantly in their structure, these
allows bacteria to adapt readily to new environments.12
RNA molecules carry the same coded information as
Plasmids are also used in the laboratory in the cloning
is found in a length of DNA that contains one or a few
of genes and in genetic engineering (Chapter 26).
genes. If DNA is regarded as the “master blueprint” of
the cell, molecules of RNA are “secondary blueprints.”
This concept is embodied in the name messenger
A RNA (mRNA) which is applied to a small, short-lived
fraction of RNA that carries information specifying
amino acid sequences of proteins. Each molecule of
mRNA carries the genetic message from one or more
genes to the ribosomes where the proteins are made.
Ribosomes are extraordinarily complex little
protein-synthesizing machines. Each ribosome of
E. coli has a mass of 2.7 x 106 Da and contains 65% of
a stable ribosomalRNA and ~35% protein. About
50 different kinds of protein molecules are present as
parts of the ribosomal structure. Working together
with a variety of transfer RNA molecules and enzymes,
the ribosomes are able to read the genetic messages
0.25µm from mRNA and to accurately assemble any kind of
protein molecule that a gene may specify. This process
is called translation of the genetic message.
B
4. Membranes and Cell Walls
Like the mycoplasma, the E. coli cell is bounded
by an 8-nm membrane which consists of ~50% protein
and 50% lipid. When “stained” (e.g., with perman-
ganate) for electron microscopy, this single membrane
appears as two very thin (2.0 nm) dark lines separated
by an unstained center band (~3.5 nm) (Fig. 1-4; see
also Fig. 8-4). Single membranes of approximately the
same thickness and staining behavior occur in all cells,
both of bacteria and of eukaryotes.
A cell membrane is much more than just a sack.
It serves to control the passage of small molecules into
Figure 1-4 (A) Thin (~60 nm) section of an aquatic gram- and out of the cell. Its outer surface carries receptors
negative bacterium, Aquaspirillum fasciculus. Note the light- for recognition of various materials. The inside surface
colored DNA, the dark ribosomes, the double membrane of bacterial membranes contains enzymes that catalyze
characteristics of gram-negative bacteria (Chapter 8, Section
most of the oxidative metabolism of the cells. Bacterial
E), and the cell wall. In addition, an internal “polar mem-
cell membranes are sometimes folded inward to form
brane” is seen at the end. It may be involved in some way in
internal structures involved in photosynthesis or other
the action of the flagella. (B) A thin section of dividing cell
specialized reactions of metabolism such as oxidation
ofStreptococcus, a gram-positive organism. Note the DNA
(light-stranded material). A portion of a mesosome is seen of ammonia to nitrate.2 InE. coli replication of DNA
in the center and septum can be seen forming between the seems to occur on certain parts of the membrane sur-
cells. Micrographs courtesy of F. D. Williams, Gail E. face, probably under the control of membrane-bound
VanderMolen, and C. F. Amstein. enzymes. The formation of the new membrane which

--- Page 10 ---

6 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
divides multiplying cells proceeds synchronously with
6. Classification and Evolution of Bacteria
the synthesis of DNA.
A characteristic of true bacteria (eubacteria) is a
Bacteria vary greatly in their chemistry and meta-
rigidcell wall which surrounds the cell membrane.
bolism, and it is difficult to classify them in a rational
The 40-nm-thick wall of E. coli is a complex, layered
way. In higher organisms species are often defined as
structure five times thicker than the cell membrane.
forms that cannot interbreed and produce fertile off-
Its chemical makeup is considered in Chapter 8. One
spring, but such a criterion is meaningless for bacteria
of the layers is often referred to as the outer mem-
whose reproduction is largely asexual and which are
brane. In some bacteria the wall may be as much as
able readily to accept “visiting genes” from other
80 nm thick and may be further surrounded by a thick
bacteria.12 The classification into species and genera
capsule or glycocalyx (slime layer).13 The main
is therefore somewhat arbitrary. A currently used
function of the wall seems to be to prevent osmotic
scheme (Table 1-1)20 classifies the prokaryotes into 35
swellingand bursting of the bacterial cell when the
groups on the basis of many characteristics including
surrounding medium is hypotonic.
shape, staining behavior, and chemical activities. Table
If the osmotic pressure of the medium is not too
1-1 also includes genus names of most of the bacteria
low, bacterial cell walls can sometimes be dissolved,
discussed in this book.
leaving living cells bounded only by their membranes.
Bacteria may have the shape of spheres or straight
Suchprotoplasts can be produced by action of the
or curved rods. Some, such as the actinomycetes,
enzyme lysozyme on gram-positive bacteria such as
grow in a branching filamentous form. Words used to
Bacillusmegaterium. Treatment of cells of gram-negative
describe bacteria often refer to these shapes: a coccus
bacteria with penicillin (Box 20-G) produces sphero-
is a sphere, a bacillus a rod, and a vibrio a curved rod
plasts, cells with partially disrupted walls. Sphero-
with a flagellum at one end. A spirillum is screw-
plasts and protoplasts are useful in biochemical studies
shaped. These same words are frequently used to
because substances enter cells more readily when the
name particular genera or families. Other names are
cell wall is absent. Strains of bacteria lacking rigid
derived from some chemical activity of the bacterium
walls are known as L forms.
being described.
Thegram stain provides an important criterion
of classification that depends upon differences in the
5. Flagella and Pili
structure of the cell wall (see Chapter 20). Bacterial
cells are described as gram-positive or gram-negative
Many bacteria swim at speeds of 20–60µm/s, ten
according to their ability to retain the basic dye crystal
or more body lengths per second! Very thin thread-
violet as an iodine complex. This difference distinguishes
likeflagella of diameter 13–20 nm coiled into a helical
two of four large categories of bacteria.20 Most actino-
form are rotated by the world’s smallest “electric
mycetes, the spore-forming bacilli, and most cocci are
motors” to provide the motion.14 While some bacteria
gram-positive, while E. coli, other enterobacteria, and
have a single flagellum, the corkscrew-like Spirillum
pseudomonads are gram-negative. A third category
(Fig. 1-3) synchronously moves tufts of flagella at both
consists of eubacteria that lack cell walls, e.g. the
ends. Some strains of E. coli have no flagella, but
mycoplasma.
others contain as many as eight flagella per cell dis-
Comparisons of amino acid sequences of proteins
tributed over the surface. The flagella stream out
and the nucleotide sequences of DNA and RNA have
behind in a bundle when the bacterium swims. The
provided a new approach to classification of bacteria.21–28
flagella of the helical spirochetes are located inside
Although the origins of life are obscure, we can easily
the outer membrane.15,16
observe that the genome changes with time through
In addition to flagella, extremely thin, long,
mutation and through the enzyme-catalyzed process
straight filaments known as pili or fimbriae (Fig. 1-2)
ofgenetic recombination. The latter gives rise to the
project from the surfaces of many bacteria.14 The “sex
deletion of some nucleotides and the insertion of others
pili” (F pili and I pili) of E. coli have a specific role in
into a DNA chain. When we examine sequences of
sexual conjugation. The similar but more numerous
closely related species, such as E. coli and Salmonella
common pili or fimbriae range in thickness from 3 to
typhimurium, we find that the sequences are very similar.
25 nm and in length from 0.2 to 2 (cid:1)m. Pili are involved
However, they differ greatly from those of many other
in adhesion of bacteria to surrounding materials or to
bacteria. Consider the 23S ribosomal RNA, a molecule
other bacteria and facilitate bacterial infections.17–19
found in the ribosomes of all bacteria. It contains ~3300
A typical E. coli cell has 100–300 pili.5
nucleotides in a single highly folded chain. The basic
structure is highly conserved but between any two
species of bacteria there are many nucleotide substitu-
tions caused by mutations as well as deletions and
insertions. By asking what is the minimum number of

--- Page 11 ---

A. The Simplest Living Things 7
mutations that could have converted one 23S RNA gens together with the cell wall-less Thermoplasma,28
into another and by assuming a more or less constant some salt-loving halobacteria, and some thermo-
rate of mutation over millions of years it is possible to philic (heat-loving) sulfur bacteria form a fourth major
construct a phylogenetic tree such as that shown in category. They are often regarded as a separate king-
Fig. 1-5. dom, the archaeobacteria,25 which together with the
One conclusion from these comparisons is that the kingdom of the eubacteria form the superkingdom
methane-producing bacteria, the methanogens,24are prokaryota. Certain archaeobacteria have biochemical
only distantly related to most other bacteria. Methano- characteristics resembling those of eukaryotes and
TABLE 1-1
A Systematic Classification Scheme for Bacteriaa,b
Kingdom Procaryotae
The bacteria are classified according to the following 35 11. Oxygenic photosynthetic bacteria. Cyanobacteria (blue-
groups. Within these groups many genera are classified into green algae): Synechocystis; Anabaena,Nostoc; Oscillatoria
subgroups or families. A few genera, most of which are 12. Aerobic, chemolithotrophic bacteria. Colorless sulfur
mentioned elsewhere in this book, are listed here by name. bacteria: Thiobacillus;iron or manganese-oxidizing
Members of a single subgroup are placed together and are bacteria, magnetotactic bacteria; nitrifying bacteria:
separated by semicolons from members of other subgroups. Nitrobacter,Nitrosomonas
13. Budding and/or appendaged bacteria. Caulobacter
1. The spirochetes (long bacteria, up to 500 µm, that are 14. Sheathed bacteria
propelled by the action of filaments wrapped around 15. Nonphotosynthetic, nonfruiting gliding bacteria.
the cell between the membrane and wall). Borrelia (B. Beggiatoa (a filamentous bacterium containing sulfur
burgdorferi, Lyme disease), Leptospira,Treponema (T. granules)
pallidum, syphilis) 16. Fruiting, gliding bacteria. Myxococcus
2. Aerobic spiral and curved motile gram-negative 17. Gram-positive cocci. Leuconostoc,Micrococcus,
bacteria. Bdellovibrio,Campylobacter (C. jejuni, diarrhea), Peptococcus, Staphylococcus (S. aureus, boils, infections),
Helicobacter(H. pylori, gastric ulcers), Spirillum Streptococcus (S. pyogenes, scarlet fever, throat infections,
3. Nonmotile gram-negative curved bacteria S. pneumoniae, pneumonia)
4. Gram-negative, aerobic rods and cocci. 18. Endospore-forming gram-positive rods and cocci.
Acetobacter, Agrobacterium, Azotobacter, Brucella Aerobic: Bacillus (B. anthracis, anthrax), anaerobic:
(B. abortus, brucellosis), Flavobacterium, Gluconobacter, Clostridium (C. tetani, tetanus; C. botulinum,
Legionella (L. pneumophila, Legionnaire’s disease), botulism)
Methylomonas,Neisseria (N. gonorrhea, gonorrhea), 19. Regular nonsporing gram-positive rods.
Pseudomonas,Rhizobium,Thermus,Xanthomonas, Lactobacillus
Rochalimaea (R. henselae, cat scratch disease) 20. Irregular nonsporing gram-positive rods.
5. Gram-negative, facultatively anaerobic rods. Actinomyces,Bifidobacterium, Corynebacterium
Enterobacter,c Proteus,Yersinia (Y. pestis, plague), Escheri- (C. diphtheriae, diphtheria), Propionibacterium
chia,Klebsiella, Salmonella (S. typhi, typhoid fever), 21. Mycobacteria. Mycobacterium (M. tuberculosis,
Serratia,Shigella (S. dysenteriae, bacterial dysentery), tuberculosis; M. leprae, leprosy)
Haemophilus;Vibrio (V. cholerae, Asiatic cholera); 22-29. Actinomycetes
Zymomonas 30. Mycoplasmas. Acholeplasma, Mycoplasma
6. Gram-negative, anaerobic bacteria. Butyrivibrio 31. Methanogens. Methanobacterium; Methanosarcina;
7. Dissimilatory sulfate- or sulfur-reducing bacteria. Methanospirillum
Desulfovibrio 32. Archaeal sulfate reducers
8. Anaerobic gram-negative cocci. Veillonella 33. Halobacteria. Halobacterium
9. The rickettsias (parasitic bacteria with exacting nutri- 34. Cell wall-less archaeobacteria. Thermoplasma
tional requirements and small genome sizes) and 35. Very thermophilic S0-Metabolizers. Sulfolobus;
chlamydias. Chlamydia (C. trachomatis, trachoma), Thermococcus
Rickettsia (R. rickettsii, Rocky Mountain spotted fever)
10. Anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria. Green sulfur
bacteria. Chlorobium,Prosthecochloris; purple nonsulfur
bacteria: Rhodopseudomonas,Rhodospirillum; purple
sulfur bacteria: Chromatium,Thiospirillum
a From Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, 9th ed. J. G. Holt, N. R. Krieg, P. H. A. Sneath, J. T. Staley and S. T. Williams, Eds. (1994)
Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland. For another recent list see http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
b The human diseases caused by some species are also listed.
c FormerlyAerobacter.

--- Page 12 ---

8 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
Figure 1-5 Universal phylogenetic tree. From Wheelis et 29
some biologists therefore classify them as archaea and
rank their kingdom as equal to that of the bacteria and
the eukaryotes (Fig. 1-5).27,29,30,30a,30b Others disagree.31
In Table 1-1, the archaeobacteria are found in groups
31–35. Most bacteria are very small in size but there are
species large enough to be confused with eukaryotic
protozoa. The record for bacteria seems to be held by
Epulopiscium fishelsoni, a parasite of the surgeonfish
intestinal tract. A single cell measured > 600 (cid:1)m by
80(cid:1)m diameter, over 106 times larger in volume than
a cell of E. coli.32 The organism is a gram-positive
bacterium as judged by analysis of its cloned ribo-
somal RNA genes.
7. Nutrition and Growth of Bacteria
Autotrophic (self-nourishing) bacteria can synthe-
size all of their organic cell constituents from carbon
dioxide, water, and inorganic forms of nitrogen and
sulfur. The photoautotrophs extract their energy
from sunlight, while the chemoautotrophs obtain
energy from inorganic chemical reactions. For example,
the hydrogen bacteria oxidize H to H O and sulfur
2 2
bacteria oxidize H S to H SO . Like the fungi and
2 2 4
animals, most bacteria are chemoheterotrophic; they
obtain energy from the breakdown of organic com-
pounds. Some of these heterotrophic bacteria are
anaerobes which live without O . Many of them
2
metabolize complex organic substances such as sugars
in the absence of oxygen, a process called fermentation.
Others oxidize organic compounds with an inorganic
oxidant such as nitrite or sulfate. Members of the
genusClostridium are poisoned by oxygen and are
known as obligate anaerobes. Others, including
E. coli, are facultative anaerobes, able to grow either
E u r y a r c h a e o t a Green non-sulfur bacteria
Gram positives
Purple bacteria
Thermoproteus
T. celer Pyrodictium
Cyanobacteria
Flavobacteria Cren-
archaeota
Thermotogales
M eth an ob acteriu m
M eth an o-
coccu s
Eucharya
Archaea Animals
Bacteria Entamoebae Slime
molds
Fungi
Methanosarcina Halophiles Plants
Ciliates
Flagellates
Trichomonads
Microsporidia
Diplomonads
al.
in the presence or in the absence of oxygen. Obligate
aerobes depend for energy upon combustion of or-
ganic compounds with oxygen.
One of the largest groups of strictly aerobic hetero-
trophic bacteria, the pseudomonads (Pseudomonas and
related genera), are of interest to biochemists because
of their ability to oxidize organic compounds, such as
alkanes, aromatic hydrocarbons, and steroids, which
are not attacked by most other bacteria. Often, the
number of oxidative reactions used by any one species
of bacteria is limited. For example, the acetic acid
bacteria that live in wine and beer obtain all of their
energy by oxidation of ethanol to acetic acid:
CH CH OH + O → CH COOH + H O
3 2 2 3 2
Bacteria can grow incredibly fast. Under some
conditions, it takes a bacterial cell only 10–20 min to
double its size and to divide to form two cells.4 An
animal cell may take 24 h for the same process. Equally
impressive are the rates at which bacteria transform
their foods into other materials. One factor contributing
to the high rate of bacterial metabolism may be the
large surface to volume ratio. For a small spherical
bacterium (coccus) of diameter 0.5 (cid:1)m, the ratio of the
surface area to the volume is 12 x 106 m–1, while for an
ameba of diameter 150 (cid:1)m the ratio is only 4 x 104 m–1
(the ameba can increase this by sticking out some
pseudopods). Thimann33 estimated that for a 90-kg
human, the ratio is only 30 m–1.
When food is limited, some bacteria such as the
Bacillus form spores. These are compact little cells
that form inside the vegetative cell and are therefore
calledendospores. They sometimes have only 1/10
the volume of the parent cell. Their water content is
very low, their metabolic rate is near zero, and they are

--- Page 13 ---

A. The Simplest Living Things 9
extremely resistant to heat and further desiccation. photosynthetic bacteria may be related to organisms
Under suitable conditions, the spores can “germinate” that developed at a second stage of evolution: those
and renew their vegetative growth. Spore formation is able to capture energy from sunlight. Most of these
one of several examples of the development of special- gram-negative photosynthetic bacteria are strict anaer-
ized cells or differentiation among prokaryotes. obes. None can make oxygen as do higher plants.
Rather, the hydrogen needed to carry out the reduction
of carbon dioxide in the photosynthetic process is
8. Photosynthetic and Nitrogen-Fixing obtained by the splitting of inorganic compounds, such
Prokaryotes as H S, thiosulfate, or H , or is taken from organic
2 2
compounds. Today, photosynthetic bacteria are found
It is likely that the earth was once a completely principally in sulfur springs and in deep lakes, but at
anaerobic place containing water, ammonia, methane, one time they were probably far more abundant and
formaldehyde, and more complicated organic com- the only photosynthetic organisms on earth.
pounds. Perhaps the first forms of life, which may Before organisms could produce oxygen a second
have originated about 3.5 x 109 years ago, resembled complete photosynthetic system, which could cleave
present-day anaerobic bacteria. The purple and green H O to O , had to be developed. The simplest oxygen-
2 2
BOX 1-C IN THE BEGINNING
No one knows how life began. Theories ranging published a book on the “origin of life” in 1924.
from the biblical accounts to recent ideas about the Oparin and J. B. S. Haldane, independently, proposed
role of RNA are plentiful but largely unsatisfying. In that early life was anaerobic and that energy was
the 1800s the great physical chemist Arrhenius was provided by fermentation. In 1951 Stanley Miller
among scientists that preferred the idea held by built an apparatus that circulated CH , NH , H O,
4 3 2
some scientists today that a “seed” came from outer and H , compounds thought to be present in a
2
space. Until recently the only concrete data came primitive atmosphere, past an electric discharge.
from fossils. Making use of a variety of isotopic He found glycine, alanine, β-alanine, and other amino
dating methods it can be concluded that cyanobac- acids among the products formed.h Schrödinger
teria were present 2.2 × 109 years ago and eukaryotes pointed out that a flux of energy through a system
1.4× 109 years ago. About 0.5 × 109 years ago the will tend to organize the system. The solar energy
“Cambrian explosion” led to the appearance of vir- passing through the biosphere induces atmospheric
tually all known animal phyla. Many of these then circulation and patterns of weather and ocean
became extinct about 0.2 × 109 years ago. currents.i,j Perhaps in the primordeal oceans organic
New insights published in 1859a were provided compounds arose from the action of light and light-
by Charles Darwin. However, his ideas were only ning discharges. These compounds became catalysts
put into a context of biochemical data after 1950 when for other reactions which eventually evolved into a
sequencing of proteins and later nucleic acids began. rudimentary cell-less metabolism. It is a large jump
From an astonishingly large library of sequence data from this to a cell! Among other problems is the lack
available now we can draw one firm conclusion: of any explanation for the development of individual
Evolution can be observed;bit does involve mutation of cells or of their genomes. However, because it helps
DNA. Comparisons of sequences among many to correlate much information we will always take an
species allow evolutionary relationships to be evolutionary approach in this book and will discuss the
proposed.c-e In general these are very similar to “beginnings” a little more in later chapters.
those deduced from the fossil record. They support
the idea that evolution occurs by natural selection a Maynard-Smith, J. (1982) Nature (London)296, 599–601
and that duplication of genes and movements of b Lenski, R. E., and Travisano, M. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A.91, 6808–6814
large pieces of DNA within the genome have oc-
c Wilson, A. C. (1985) Sci. Am.253(Oct), 164–173
curred often. As many as 900 “ancient conserved d Eigen, M., Gardiner, W., Schuster, P., and Winkler-Oswatitsch, R.
regions” of DNA in the E. coli genome correspond- (1981)Sci. Am.244(Apr), 88–118
ing to those in human, nematode, and yeast DNA e Doolittle, R. F. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 191–200
are thought to date back perhaps 3.5 × 109 years.f f Green, P., Lipman, D., Hillier, L., Waterston, R., States, D., and
Claverie, J.-M. (1993) Science259, 1711–1716
However, nobody has explained how life evolved g Broda, E. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, IV–V
before there was DNA. h Miller, S. L. (1953) Science117, 528–529
One of the first scientists to devote his career to i Mason, S. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 230–231
biochemical evolution was I. V. Oparin,g who j Welch, G. R. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 452

--- Page 14 ---

10 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
producing creatures existing today are the cyano- development of the ability to convert N into organic
2
bacteria,34 also known as blue-green algae. Many nitrogen compounds represents another important
cyanobacteria are unicellular, but others such as Oscil- evolutionary step. Because they can both fix nitrogen
latoria, a slimy “plant” that often coats the inside walls and carry out photosynthesis, the blue-green algae
of household aquaria, consist of long filaments about 6 have the simplest nutritional requirements of any
(cid:1)m in diameter (see Fig. 1-11). All cyanobacteria contain organisms. They need only N , CO , water, light,
2 2
two groups of pigments not found in other prokaryotes: and minerals for growth.
chlorophyll a and (cid:1)-carotene, pigments that are also Evolution of the photosynthetic cleavage of water
found in the chloroplasts of true algae and in higher to oxygen was doubtless a major event with far-
plants. A recently discovered group of bacteria, the reaching consequences. Biologists generally believe
prochlorophytes, are even closer to chloroplasts in that as oxygen accumulated in the earth’s atmosphere,
their pigment composition.35 the obligate anaerobes, which are poisoned by oxygen,
In addition to pigmented cells, some cyanobacteria became limited to strictly anaerobic environments.
contain paler cells known as heterocysts. They have a Meanwhile, a new group of bacteria, the aerobes,
specialized function of fixing molecular nitrogen. The appeared with mechanisms for detoxifying oxygen
0 1 2 3 4 5µm Abbreviations:
E. coli
BM, basement membrane
BM
ER, rough endoplasmic reticulum
(with ribosomes attached; smooth
ER is depicted nearer the nucleus
and on the right side of the cell.)
DI, deep indentation of plasma
ER St
membrane
GI, glycogen granules
Gap, space ~10-20 nm thick
Cp between adjacent cells
DI M, mitochondrion
Mb, microbody
L, lysosome
Gl
Nu D, desmosome
TJ, tight junction
Mv, microvilli
N C, cillium
Gap SG, secretion granule
V, vacuole
P
Nu, nucleolus
M G, Golgi apparatus
M
Ct CW, cell wall (of a plant)
Ct, centrioles
P, plasmodesmata
Mb
N, nucleus
Cp, chloroplast
G
St, starch granule
L
D
V
CW
TJ
SG
Mv
C
Figure 1-6 The “average” eukaryotic cell. This composite drawing shows the principal organelles of both animal and plant
cells approximately to the correct scale. (Adapted from a drawing by Michael Metzler.)

--- Page 15 ---

B. Eukaryotic Cells 11
and for using oxygen to oxidize complex organic attain a length of a meter. Muscle cells fuse to give
compounds to obtain energy. very long multinucleate fibers.
B. Eukaryotic Cells
1. The Nucleus
Cells of the eukaryotes contain true nuclei and
are much larger and more complex internally than are In a typical animal cell the nucleus has a diameter
those of prokaryotes. The nucleus of a cell contains of ~5 µm and a volume of 65 µm3. Except at the time
most of its DNA and is separated from the cytoplasm of cell division, it is densely and almost uniformly
by membranes. Within the cytoplasm are various packed with DNA. The amount of DNA present is
organelles with characteristic structures. These larger than that in bacteria as is indicated in Table 1-3.
includemitochondria,lysosomes,peroxisomes, Yeast contains about three times as much genetic
andcentrioles. Eukaryotic cells come in so many matter as E. coli and a human being or a mouse about
sizes and shapes and with so many specialized features 700 times as much. However, genes are sometimes
that it is impossible to say what is typical. Nevertheless, duplicated in higher organisms and large amounts of
Fig. 1-6 is an attempt to portray some sort of “average” repetitive DNA of uncertain significance are often
cell, partly plant and partly animal. present. Some amphibians have 25 times more DNA
As can be seen from Table 1-2, which lists the per cell than do humans. The fruit fly Drosophila
diameters and volumes of several roughly spherical contains about 13,600 functioning genes and a human
cells, there is a great variation in size. However, a being perhaps 50,000.37
diameter of 10–20µm may be regarded as typical for Because of its acidic character, DNA is stained by
both plants and animals. For growth of a large cell such basic dyes. Long before the days of modern biochem-
as the ovum, many adjacent cells assist in synthesis of istry, the name chromatin was given to the material in
foodstuffs which are transferred to the developing egg the nucleus that was colored by basic dyes. At the time
cell. Plant cells are often large but usually 90% or more of cell division, the chromatin is consolidated into
of the cell is filled with a vacuole or tonoplast,36 distinctchromosomes which contain, in addition to
which is drawn unrealistically small in Fig. 1-6. The 15% DNA, about 10% RNA and 75% protein.
metabolically active protoplasm of plant cells often Nearly all of the RNA of the cell is synthesized
lies in a thin layer at their peripheries. (transcribed) in the nucleus, according to the instruc-
Many cells are far from spherical; for example, tions encoded in the DNA. Some of the RNA then
human red blood cells are discs 8 x 8 x 1 to 2 µm with moves out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm where it
a volume of 80 µm3. Plant fiber cells may be several functions in protein synthesis and in some other ways.
millimeters in length. Nerve cells of animals have long Many eukaryotic genes consist of several sequences
extensions, the axons, which in the human sometimes that may be separated in the DNA of a chromosome by
intervening sequences of hundreds or thousands of
base pairs. The long RNA transcripts made from these
TABLE 1-2
split genes must be cut and spliced in the nucleus to
Approximate Sizes of Some Cells
form the correct messenger RNA molecules which are
then sent out to the ribosomes in the cytoplasm.
Diameter Approximate Each cell nucleus contains one or more dense
Cell ((cid:1)m) volume ((cid:1)m3) nucleoli, regions that are rich in RNA and may contain
10–20% of the total RNA of cells. Nucleoli are sites
E. coli 1 1.0 of synthesis and of temporary storage of ribosomal
RNA, which is needed for assembly of ribosomes. The
Small thymus cell 6 120
nuclear envelope is a pair of membranes, usually a
Liver cell 20 4,000 few tens of nanometers apart, that surround the nucleus.
The two membranes of the pair separate off a thin
Human ovum (mature) 120 500,000 perinuclear space (Fig. 1-7). The membranes contain
“pores” ~130 nm in diameter with a complex structure
Hen’s egg (white excluded) 20,000 4 × 1012
(see Fig. 27-8).38,39 There is a central channel ~42 nm in
Yeast cell 10 500 diameter, which provides a route for controlled passage
of RNA and other large molecules from the nucleus
Onion root (meristematic cell) 17 2,600 into the cytoplasm and also from the cytoplasm to the
nucleus. Smaller ~10 nm channels allow passive
Parenchyma cell of a fruit 1,000 1 × 108
diffusion of ions and small molecules.

--- Page 16 ---

12 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
TABLE 1-3
2. The Plasma Membrane
Haploid Genome Sizes for Several Organisms
The thin (8 nm) outer cell mem-
Millions of Number Estimated
Organism; see footnotes nucleotide of number brane or“plasma-lemma” (Fig. 1-7)
for sequence information base pairs chromosomes of controls the flow of materials into
(Mb) (haploid) genes
and out of cells, conducts impulses
Mycoplasma genitaliuma–c 0.580 1 482 in nerve cells and along muscle
Rickettsia prowazekiid 1.11 1 834 fibrils, and participates in chemical
Haemophilus influenzaec,e–g 1.83 1 1,709 communication with other cells.
Deep infoldings of the outer mem-
Methanococcus janaschii (an archaeon)h 1.66 1 1,738
brane sometimes run into the cyto-
Bacillus subtilisi 4.16 1
plasm. An example, is the “T system”
Escherichia colij,k 4.64 1 4,288
of tubules which functions in excita-
Myxococcus xanthisf 9.2 1 tion of muscle contraction (Figs. 19-7,
Synechocystissp.(a cyanobacterium)l 3.57 1 3,169 19-21). Surfaces of cells designated
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (a yeast)k,m-p,t 13.5 17 6,241 to secrete materials or to absorb
Giardia lamblia (a protozoan)q 12 substances from the surrounding
Plasmodium falciparum (malaria parasite)v 25-30 14 fluid, such as the cells lining kidney
tubules and pancreatic secretory
Dictyostelium discoideum (a slime mold)r 34
cells, are often covered with very
Caenorhabditis elegans (a nematode)s,t 97 6 18,424
fine projections or microvilli which
Sea Urchin 900
greatly increase the surface area.
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)u,t 180 4 13,601 In other cases projections from one
Danio rerio (zebrafish)w 1,700 2.5 cell interdigitate with those of an
Fugu rubripes (pufferfish)x 400 60,000 adjacent cell to give more intimate
S. African lungfishy 102,000 19 contact.
Mus musculus (mouse)z ∼3,000 20 80,000
Bos (cow)aa ~3,000 30 80,000
3. Vacuoles, Endocytosis, and
Homo sapiens (human)bb,cc ~3,000 23 50,000–
Lysosomes
150,000
Arabidopsis thaliana (green plant)dd,ee 115.4 5 25,498 Cells often contain vacuoles or
Riceff-hh 450 12 smaller vesicles that are separated
Maizeiior Wheatff ~2,700 from the cytosol by a single mem-
Lilyjj >100,000 brane. Their content is often quite
aFraser, C. M., and 28 other authors (1995) Science270, 397–403 sTheC. elegans Sequencing Consortium (1998) Science282, 2012–2018
bGoffeau, A. (1995) Science270, 445–446 (See this article for list of authors.)
cBrosius, J., Robison, K., Gilbert, W., Church, G. M., and Venter, J. C. (1996) tRubin, G. M., and 54 other authors. (2000) Science287, 2204 –2215
Science271, 1302–1304 uAdams, M. D., and 194 other authors. (2000) Science287, 2185 – 2195
dAndersson, S. G. E., Zomorodipour, A., Andersson, J. O., Sicheritz-Pontén, vSu, X.-z, Ferdig, M. T., Huang, Y., Huynh, C. Q., Liu, A., You, J., Wootton, J. C.,
T., Alsmark, U. C. M., Podowski, R. M., Näslund, A. K., Eriksson, A.-S., and Wellems, T. E. (1999) Science286, 1351–1353
Winkler, H. H., and Kurland, C. G. (1998) Nature (London)396, 133–140 wPostlethwait, J. H., Johnson, S. L., Midson, C. N., Talbot, W. S., Gates, M.,
eFleischmann, R. D., and 39 other authors (1995) Science269, 496–512 Ballinger, E. W., Africa, D., Andrews, R., Carl, T., Eisen, J. S., Horne, S.,
fHe, Q., Chen, H., Kupsa, A., Cheng, Y., Kaiser, D., and Shimkets, L. J. (1994) Kimmel, C. B., Hutchinson, M., Johnson, M., and Rodriguez, A. (1994)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 9584–9587 Science264, 699–703
gMrázek, J., and Karlin, S. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 201–202 xFishman, M. C. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 10554 –10556
hBult, C. J., and 39 other authors; corresponding author Venter, J. C. (1996) yKornberg, A., and Baker, T. A. (1992) DNA Replication, 2nd ed., pp. 19–21,
Science273, 1058–1073 Freeman, New York
iAzevedo, V., Alvarez, E., Zumstein, E., Damiani, G., Sgaramella, V., Ehrlich, zDietrich, W. F., Copeland, N. G., Gilbert, D. J., Miller, J. C., Jenkins, N. A.,
S. D., and Serror, P. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90, 6047–6051 and Lander, E. S. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 10849–10853
jBlattner, F. R. and 16 other authors (1997) Science277, 1453–1462 aaAnonymous (1994) Nature (London)368, 167
kWinzeler, E. A., and 51 other authors (1999) Science285, 901–906 bbSchuler, G. D. and 102 other authors (1996) Science274,540–546
lKaneko, T., and 23 other authors (1996) DNA Res.3, 109–136. See also ccKoonin, S. E. (1998) Science279, 36–37
http://www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano ddOlson, M. V. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 4338–4344
mDujon, B., and 107 other authors (1994) Nature (London)369, 371–378 eeThe Arabidopsis Genome Initiative, (2000) Nature408, 796–815
nTaguchi, T., Seko, A., Kitajima, K., Muto, Y., Inoue, S., Khoo, K.-H.,Morris, ffStevens, J. E. (1994) Science266, 1186–1187
H. R., Dell, A., and Inoue, Y. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 8762–8771 ggShimamoto, K. (1995) Science270, 1772–1773
oJohnston, M., and 34 other authors. (1994) Science265, 2077–2082 hhSingh, K., Ishii, T., Parco, A., Huang, N., Brar, D. S., and Khush, G. S. (1996)
pWilliams, N. (1995) Science268, 1560–1561 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 6163–6168
qSogin, M. L., Gunderson, J. H., Elwood, H. J., Alonso, R. A., and Peattie, D. iiCarels, N., Barakat, A., and Gernardi, G. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
A. (1989) Science243, 75–77 92, 11057–11060
rLoomis, W. F., and Insall, R. H. (1999) Nature (London)401, 440 –441 jjAlberts, B., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K., and Watson, J. D. (1994)
Molecular Biology of the Cell, 3rd ed., Garland, New York

--- Page 17 ---

B. Eukaryotic Cells 13
acidic.40 Small vesicles sometimes bud inward from out” or excess cell parts including mitochondria.
the plasma membrane in a process called endocytosis. Lysosomes are vital components of cells,41 and several
In this manner the cell may engulf particles (phago- serious human diseases result from a lack of specific
cytosis) or droplets of the external medium (pinocytosis). lysosomal enzymes.
The resulting endocytotic vesicles or endosomes often
fuse with lysosomes, which are small acidified vesicles
containing a battery of enzymes powerful enough to 4. The Endoplasmic Reticulum and Golgi
digest almost anything in the cell. In cells that engulf Membranes
bits of food (e.g., ameba) lysosomes provide the diges-
tive enzymes. Lysosomes also take up and digest Although cytoplasm is fluid and in some organisms
denatured or damaged proteins and may digest “worn can undergo rapid streaming, the electron microscope
C
N
M
G
V
Figure 1-7 Electron micrograph of a thin section of a young epidermal cell of a sunflower. The tissue was fixed and stained
with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Clearly visible are the nucleus (N), mitochondria (M), chloroplasts (C), a Golgi body
dictyosome (G), endoplasmic reticulum, vacuole (V), cell wall, plasmodesmata, and cuticle (upper right, thin dark layer).
Micrograph courtesy of H. T. Horner.

--- Page 18 ---

14 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
has revealed that within the liquid portion, the cytosol,
5. Mitochondria, Plastids, and Peroxisomes
there is a complex network of membranes known as
theendoplasmic reticulum (ER). The membranes
Mitochondria, complex bodies about the size of
of the ER form tubes, vesicles, and flattened sacs called
bacteria and bounded on the outside by a double mem-
cisternae. The intracisternal spaces appear to connect
brane (Figs. 1-6 and 1-7), are present in all eukaryotic
with the perinuclear space and to a series of 3–12
cells that use oxygen for respiration. The numbers
flattened, slightly curved disk-shaped membranes
per cell appear to vary from the one for certain tiny
known as the Golgi apparatus (Figs. 1-7, 20-8).42,43
trypanosomes to as many as 3 x 105 in some oocytes.
This organelle was first reported by Camillo Golgi in
Liver cells often contain more than 1000 mitochondria
1898.44 Its existence was long doubted, but it is known
apiece.45 Study of ultrathin serial sections of a single
now to play a vital role in metabolism.
yeast cell by electron microscopy has shown that under
The ER, the Golgi membranes, and secretion gran-
some growth conditions all of the yeast mitochondria
ules apparently represent an organized system for
are interconnected.46 More recent evidence from new
synthesis of secreted protein and formation of new
imaging procedures, e.g. using the green fluorescent
membranes. Parts of the ER, the rough endoplasmic
protein (Box 23-A)46a, 46b also supports the idea that
reticulum are lined with many ribosomes of 21–25 nm
mitochondria are interconnected in a reticulum that
diameter. While resembling those of bacteria, these
can become fragmented under some conditions. The
eukaryotic ribosomes are about 50% heavier (4 x 106 Da).
inner membrane of a mitochondrion is often highly
Thesmooth endoplasmic reticulum lacks ribosomes
folded to form the cristae (crests). The outer mem-
but proteins made in the rough ER may be modified in
brane is porous to small molecules but the passage of
the smooth ER, e.g., by addition of carbohydrate chains.
substances into and out of the inner space of the mito-
Small membrane vesicles break off from the smooth
chondrion, known as the matrix, is tightly controlled by
ER and pass to the Golgi membranes which lie close to
the inner membrane. Although some of the oxidative
the smooth ER on the side toward the center of the cell.
chemical activites of the cells are located in the ER and in
Here additional modification reactions occur (Chapter
peroxisomes, the major energy-yielding reactions for
20). At the outer edges the membranes of the Golgi
aerobic organisms are found in the mitochondria, which
apparatus pinch off to form vacuoles which are often
are also the principal site of utilization of oxygen.
densely packed with enzymes or other proteins.
Within each mitochondrion is a small circular molecule
Thesesecretion granules move to the surface and are
of DNA whose genes encode only a few of the many
released from the cell. In this process of exocytosis
proteins needed in this organelle. Also present within
the membranes surrounding the granules fuse with
mitochondria are ribosomes of a size similar to those
the outer cell membrane. The rough ER appears to
of bacteria and smaller than those lining the rough ER.
contribute membrane material to the smooth ER and
Plastids are organelles of plant cells that serve
Golgi apparatus, while material from Golgi membranes
a variety of purposes.45 Most important are the
can become incorporated into the outer cell membrane
chloroplasts, the chlorophyll-containing sites of photo-
and into lysosomes. Outer mitochondrial membranes
synthesis. Like mitochondria they contain folded
and membranes around vacuoles in plant cells may
internal membranes (see Fig. 23-19) and several small
also be derived directly from the ER. Outer membrane
molecules of DNA.
materials are probably “recycled” by endocytosis.
Fragile organelles, the peroxisomes or microbodies,
The term microsome, frequently met in the bio-
occur in many cells.47–50 In green leaves they may occur
chemical literature, refers to small particles of 50–150
in numbers up to one-third those of mitochondria.
nm diameter which are mostly fragments of the ER
Peroxisomes are often about the size of mitochondria
together with some material from the plasma mem-
but have only a single membrane and do not contain
brane. Microsomes are formed when cells are ground
DNA. They often contain an apparently crystalline
or homogenized. Upon centrifugation of the disrupted
“core.” The single membrane of peroxisomes is porous
cells, nuclei and other large fragments sediment first,
to small molecules such as sucrose. This permits these
then the mitochondria. At very high speeds (e.g., at
organelles to be separated from mitochondria by cen-
100,000 times the force of gravity) the microsomes,
trifugation in a sucrose gradient where the microbodies
whose masses are 108–109 Da, settle. With the electron
assume a density of about 1.25 g/cm3 compared to 1.19
microscope we see that in the microsomes the mem-
for the impervious mitochondria.
brane fragments have closed to give small sacs to the
Peroxisomes are rich in enzymes that produce and
outside of which the ribosomes still cling:
decompose hydrogen peroxide. They often make a
major contribution to the oxidative metabolism of
cells. In germinating oilseeds glyoxysomes, a type of
peroxisome, contain enzymes that catalyze reactions of
the biosynthetic “glyoxylate pathway” of metabolism.51
Endoplasmic Microsomes Organelles that resemble peroxisomes in appearance
reticulum

--- Page 19 ---

B. Eukaryotic Cells 15
but which are functionally more closely related to resembles a bacterial flagellum in appearance, but
mitochondria are the hydrogenosomes of anaerobic there are distinct and significant chemical differences.
protozoa.52 As the name suggests, these organelles are Thebasal body of the flagellum, the kinetosome
the site of formation of molecular hydrogen, a common (Fig. 1-8), resembles a centriole in structure, dimensions,
product of anaerobic metabolism. and mode of replication. Recently a small 6–9 megabase
pair DNA has been found in basal bodies of the protozoan
Chlamydomonas.55,56
6. Centrioles, Cilia, Flagella, and Microtubules Microtubules similar to those found in flagella are
also present in the cytoplasm. Together with thinner
Many cells contain centrioles,53 little cylinders microfilaments of several kinds they form an internal
about 0.15 µm in diameter and 0.5 µm long, which are cytoskeleton that provides rigidity to cells.58,59
not enclosed by membranes. Each centriole contains Microtubules also form the “spindle” of dividing cells.
a series of fine microtubules of 25 nm diameter. A In nerve axons (Chapter 30) the microtubules run
pair of centrioles are present near the nucleus in most parallel to the length of the axons and are part of a
animalcells and play an important role in cell division. mechanical transport system for cell constituents.
Together with surrounding materials they form the
centrosome. However, centrioles have never been
observed in plant cells. 7. Cell Coats, Walls, and Shells
Related in structure to centrioles are the long
flagella and shorter cilia (the two words are virtually Like bacteria, most cells of higher plants and
synonymous) which are commonly present as organ- animals are surrounded by extracellular materials.
elles of locomotion in eukaryotic cells. Stationary cells Plants have rigid walls rich in cellulose and other
of our own bodies also often have cilia. For example, carbohydrate polymers. Outside surfaces of plant cells
there are 109 cilia/cm2 in bronchial epithelium.54 are covered with a cuticle containing layers of a poly-
Modified flagella form the receptors of light in our ester called cutin and of wax (Fig. 1-6). Surfaces of
eyes and of taste in our tongues. Flagella and cilia animal cells are usually lined with carbohydrate mole-
have a diameter of about 0.2 µm and a characteristic cules which are attached to specific surface proteins to
internal structure. Eleven hollow microtubules of ~24 formglycoproteins. Spaces between cells are filled
nm diameter are usually arranged in a “9 + 2” pattern with such “cementing substances” as pectins in plants
with nine pairs of fused tubules surrounding a pair of andhyaluronic acid in animals. Insoluble proteins
single tubules (Figs. 1-8 and 19-23). Each microtubule such as collagen and elastin surround connective
tissue cells. Cells that lie on a surface
(epithelial and endothelial cells) are
This cilium is about 8 µm long. often lined on one side with a thin,
Lengths range from about 2 µm collagen-containingbasement
to 2 mm with 10–20µm most common.
0.5µm membrane (Figs. 1-6 and 8-31).
Cross-section, Inorganic deposits such as calcium
× 2.5
Membrane phosphate (in bone), calcium carbonate
Microtubules (24 nm diameter) (eggshells and spicules of sponges), and
in 9 + 2 array
silicon dioxide (shells of diatoms) are
“Arms” on microtubules
at 17–22 nm intervals laid down, often by cooperative action
E. coli of several or many cells.
Secondary fiber
10
C. Inheritance, Metabolic
20
50 40 Variation, and Evolution
0
30 of Eukaryotes
Typical movement of a long
flagellum of a eukaryote The striking differences between
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells have
Basal body (kinetosome)
led to many speculations about the
evolutionary relationship of these two
great classes of living organisms. A
Cross-section, × 2.5
popular theory is that mitochondria,
which are characteristic of most eukary-
otes, arose from aerobic bacteria. After
cyanobacteria had developed and oxygen
Figure 1-8 Structure of cilia and flagella of eukaryotes. After P. Satir.57

--- Page 20 ---

16 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
BOX 1-D INHERITED METABOLIC DISEASES
In 1908 Archibald Garroda,b proposed that cysti-
nuria(Chapter 8) and several other defects in amino
acid and sugar metabolism were “inborn errors of
metabolism”, i.e. inherited diseases. Since that time
the number of recognized genetic defects of human
metabolism has increased at an accelerating rate to
~4000.c–e Hundreds of other genetic problems have
also been identified. For over 800 of these the
defective gene has been mapped to a specific
chromosome.f An example is sickle cell anemia
(Box 7-B) in which a defective hemoglobin differs
from the normal protein at one position in one of its
constituent polypeptide chains. Many other defects
involve loss of activity of some important enzyme.
Photomicrograph of human male metaphase chromosomes. © Photo
Most genetic diseases are rare, affecting about
Researchers
one person in 10,000. However, cysticfibrosis
affects one in 2500. There are so many metabolic
diseases that over 0.5% of all persons born may
develop one. Many die at an early age. A much However, many are damaging and some are lethal.
greater number (>5%) develop such conditions as If a mutation is lethal, a homozygote will not survive
diabetes and mental illness which are, in part, of and will be lost in an early (and usually undetected)
genetic origin. Since new mutations are always spontaneous abortion. Healthy individuals carry as
arising, genetic diseases present a problem of con- many as ten lethal recessive mutations as well as at
tinuing significance. least 3–5 autosomal recessive mutations of a seriously
At what rate do new mutations appear? From harmful type. Harmful dominant mutations are also
the haploid DNA content (Table 1-2) we can estimate frequent in the population. These include an elevated
that the total coding capacity of the DNA in a human lipoprotein content of the blood and an elevated cho-
cell exceeds two million genes (actually two million lesterol level which are linked to early heart disease.
pairs of genes in diploid cells). However, only a frac- Biochemical disorders are also important because
tion of the DNA codes for proteins. There are per- of the light they shed on metabolic processes. No
haps 50,000 pairs of structural genes in human DNA. other species is observed as carefully as Homo sapiens.
Theeasily detectable rate of mutation in bacteria is As a consequence frequent reference will be made to
about 10–6 per gene, or 10–9 per base per replication.g genetic diseases throughout the book. A goal is to
As a result of sophisticated “proofreading” and find ways to prevent or ameliorate the effects of these
repair systems, it may be as low as 10–10 per base in disorders. For example, in the treatment of phenyl-
humans.h Thus, in the replication of the 3 x 109 base ketonuria (Chapter 25) or of galactosemia (Chapter
pairs in diploid human chromosomes we might 20), a change in the diet can prevent irreversible
anticipate about one mistake per cell division. Only damage to the brain, the organ most frequently
about 1/50 of these would be in structural genes and affected by many of these diseases. Injection of a
potentially harmful. Thus, if there are 1016 division missing enzyme is giving life to victims of Gaucher’s
cycles in a normal life spanh each parent may pass on disease (Chapter 20). In many other cases no satis-
to future generations about 2 mutations in protein factory therapy is presently available, but the possi-
sequences. The ~1014 body cells (somatic cells) also bilities of finding some way to supply missing
undergo mutations which may lead to cancer and to enzymes or to carry out “genetic surgery” are among
other problems of aging. Most mutations may be the most exciting developments of contemporary
harmless or nearly so and a few may be beneficial. medical biochemistry (Chapter 26).
a Garrod, A. E. (1909) Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Oxford, London e McKusick, V. A. (1994) Mendelian Inheritance in Man, 11th ed.,
b Bearn, A. G. (1993) Archibald Garrod and the Individuality of Man, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore, Maryland
Oxford, New York f McKusick, V. A., Amberger, J., and Steinberg, J. (1994) J. NIH
c Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds. (1995) Res.6, 115–134
The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed., g Watson, J. D. (1976) Molecular Biology of the Gene, 3rd ed.,
McGraw-Hill, New York Benjamin, Menlo Park, California (p. 254)
d Davies, K. E. (1992) Molecular Basis of Inherited Disease, Oxford, h Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1994) Science266, 1925
New York

--- Page 21 ---

C. Inheritance, Metabolic Variation, and Evolution of Eukaryotes 17
had become abundant, a symbiotic relationship could that at some time in the past the entire genome of
have arisen in which small aerobic bacteria lived bacteriawas doubled and that it was later doubled
within cells of larger bacteria that had previously been again.73 Evidence for this is that the masses of bacterial
obligate anaerobes. Sequence similarities of proteins chromosomes group around values of 0.5, 1.4, and
suggest that these symbionts may have been related to 2.7 x 109 Da. Genes can also be duplicated during the
present-day methanogens60 and thermophilic sulfur process of genetic recombination, which is discussed
bacteria.61 The aerobes presumably used up any oxy- in Chapter 27. In addition, the size of the genome may
gen present, protecting the surrounding anaerobic have increased by incorporation of genetic material
organisms from its toxicity. The relationship became from extrachromosomal plasmids.
permanent and led eventually to the mitochondria- A possible advantage to a cell possessing an extra
containing eukaryotic cell.62–65 Further symbiosis with copy of a gene is that the cell would survive even when
cyanobacteria or prochlorophytes could have led to the mutations rendered unusable the protein encoded by
chloroplasts of the eukaryotic plants. one of the copies. As long as one of the genes remained
A fact that supports such ideas is the existence “good,” the organism could grow and reproduce.
among present-day organisms of many endosymbiotic The extra, mutated gene could be carried for many
relationships. For example, the green paramecium generations. As long as it produced only harmless,
(Paramecium bursaria) contains, within its cytoplasm, nonfunctioning proteins there might be little selection
an alga (Chlorella), a common green plant that is quite pressure to eliminate it and it might undergo repeated
capable of living on its own. Perhaps by accident it mutations. After many mutations and many genera-
took up residence within the paramecium.62 Some tions later, the protein for which it coded could prove
dinoflagellates (Fig. 1-9) contain endosymbiotic cyano- useful to the cell in some new way.
bacteria66 and recently a ciliate that contains endo- An example of evolution via gene duplication is
symbiotic purple photosynthetic bacteria has been provided by the oxygen-carrying proteins of blood.
discovered.67 These bacteria do not produce O but It appears that about a billion years ago, the gene for
2
utilize products of the host ciliates’ metabolism such an ancestral globin, the protein of hemoglobin, was
as acetate, lactate, and H as electron donors for photo- doubled. One gene evolved into that of present-day
2
syntheses. They also utilize O for respiration and globins and the other into the gene of the muscle
2
may protect their hosts from the toxicity of O , just as protein myoglobin. Still later, the globin gene again
2
may have happened in the distant past. According to doubled leading to the present-day α and β chains of
this theory the symbionts would eventually have lost hemoglobin (Chapter 7). These are two distinctly
their photosynthetic ability and have become mito- different but related protein subunits whose genes are
chondria. The relationship of mitochondria to bacteria not even on the same chromosome. To complicate the
is also supported by many biochemical similarities. picture further, most human beings have two or more
Fossils of bacteria and blue-green algae have been copies of their α chain gene74 as well as genes for fetal
obtained from rocks whose age, as determined by and embryonic forms of hemoglobin. However, some
geochemical dating, is more than 3 × 109 years.68,69 populations have lost one or more α chain genes. Thus,
However the first eukaryotic cells may have appeared the genome changes in many details, even today.
about 1 × 109 years ago70 and started to evolve into the
more than one million species that now exist.1,71,72
2. Genetic Recombination, Sex, and
Chromosomes
1. A Changing Genome
Bacteria usually reproduce by simple fission. The
How is it possible for the genome of an organism single DNA molecule of the chromosome is duplicated
to increase in size as it evolved from a lower form to a and the bacterium divides, each daughter cell receiving
higher one? Simple mutations that cause alterations in an identical chromosome. However, genetic recombi-
protein sequences could lead to changes in form and nation, which is accomplished in several ways by
behavior of the organisms but could not, by themselves, bacteria (Chapter 27), provides a deliberate process
account for the increase in genetic material that accom- for mixing of genes. This process has been most fully
panied evolution. As a result of new techniques of developed in eukaryotic organisms that undergo sexual
genetic mapping and determining the sequence of reproduction. The growth of a multicelled individual
nucleotides in DNA we are rapidly acquiring a detailed begins with the fusion of two haploid gametes, an egg
knowledge of the organization of the genome. It has and a spermatozoon. Each gamete carries a complete
been found that genes are often present as duplicate set of genetic instructions, and after the nuclei fuse the
but not entirely identical copies. This suggests that fertilized egg or zygote is diploid. Each diploid cell
there are mechanisms by which cells can acquire extra containstwo complete sets of genetic blueprints of
copies of one or more genes. Indeed it seems probable quite different origin. Even if a gene from one parent

--- Page 22 ---

18 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
is defective, the chances are that the gene from the other
3. Haploid and Diploid Phases
parent will be good. Sexual reproduction and the
associated genetic recombination also provide a means
In human beings and other higher animals, meiosis
for mixing of genes.
leads directly to formation of the gametes, the egg and
When eukaryotic cells prepare to divide in the
sperm cells. These fuse to form a diploid nucleus and
process called mitosis (Fig. 26-11), the DNA molecules
the adult develops by repeated mitosis of the diploid
of the nucleus, which become spread out through a large
cells. While meiosis also occurs in the life cycle of all
volume, coil and fold. Together with proteins and other
eukaryotic creatures, it is not always at a point corre-
molecules they form the compact bodies known as
sponding to that in the human life cycle. Thus, the
chromosomes. Some organisms, such as Ascaris (a round-
cells of many protozoa and of fungi are ordinarily
worm), have only two chromosomes, a homologous
haploid. When two haploid nuclei fuse to form a
pair, one inheritied from the father and one from the
diploid cell, meiosis quickly occurs to produce haploid
mother. Both chromosomes divide in every mitotic cell
individuals again. Among lower plants and animals
division so that every cell of the organism has the homo-
there is often an alternation of haploid and diploid
logous pair. Higher organisms usually have a larger
phases of the life cycle. For example, gametes of ferns
number of chromosomes. Thus, humans have 23 homo-
fall to the ground and germinate to form a low-growing
logous pairs. The mouse has 20, the toad 11, onions 8,
green mosslike haploid or gametophyte form. The
mosquitos 3, and Drosophila 4. Human chromosomes
latter produces motile haploid gametes which fuse to a
vary in size but are usually 4–6(cid:1)m long and ~1 (cid:1)m in
diploid zygote that grows into the larger and more obvious
diameter.
sporophyte form of the fern.
By the successive divisions of mitosis, a single
It is presumably the ability to survive as a hetero-
fertilized eukaryotic egg cell can grow to an adult.
zygote, even with one or more highly deleterious
Less than 50 successive mitotic divisions will produce
mutations, that has led to the dominance of the diploid
the ~1014 cells of a human. However, formation of
phase in higher plants and animals.76 However, to
gametes, which are haploid, requires the special pro-
the biochemical geneticist organisms with a haploid
cess of meiosis (Fig. 26-12), by which the number of
phase offer experimental advantages because recessive
chromosomes is divided in half. During meiosis one
mutants can be detected readily.
chromosome of each of the homologous pairs of the
diploid cell is passed to each of the gametes that are
formed. In an organism such as Ascaris, which con-
D. Survey of the Protists
tains only a single pair of chromosomes, a gamete
receives either the chromosome of maternal origin or
Unicellular eukaryotes have traditionally been
that of paternal origin but not both. In organisms that
grouped together with multicellular organisms in
have several pairs of chromosomes, one chromosome of
which all cells have similar functions, with little or no
each pair is passed to the gamete in a random fashion
differentiation into tissues, as the kingdom Protista.77,78
during meiosis. Most gametes receive some chromo-
The fungi may also be included or may be regarded as
somes of maternal and some of paternal origin. An
a separate kingdom.79 With present-day emphasis on
important feature of meiosis is the genetic recombina-
DNA sequence comparisons the traditional classifica-
tion that occurs during crossing-over. In this process,
tion is changing, however.26
the strands of DNA are cut and genetic material is
exchanged between the chromosomes of maternal and
paternal origin. Thus, crossing-over breaks the linkage
1. Protozoa
between genes and provides for greater variability in
the offspring than would otherwise be possible. Each
Among the best known of the animal-like protista
of us receives half of our genes from our mother and
is the ameba (subphylum Sarcodina or Rhizopoda).
half from our father, but some of these genes have been
The most striking feature of the ameba (Fig. 1-9) is
inherited from each grandparent on both sides of the
its method of locomotion, which involves the trans-
family, some from each great-grandparent, etc.
formation of cytoplasm from a liquid state to a semi-
Many genes are passed down through many
solid gel. As the ameba moves, the cytoplasm at the
generations without substantial change, but others
rear liquifies and flows to the front and into the
are evidently designed to be scrambled readily within
extending pseudopodia where it solidifies along the
somatic cells. Cell surface proteins75 and antibody
edges. The ameba poses several important biochemical
molecules are among the proteins whose genes undergo
questions: What chemistry underlies the reversible
alteration during growth and differentiation of the
change from liquid to solid cytoplasm? How can the
tissues of the body (Chapter 32).
cell membranes break and reform so quickly when an
ameba engulfs food particles?80
Relatives of the ameba include the Radiolaria,

--- Page 23 ---

D. Survey of the Protists 19
marine organisms of remarkable symmetry with com- malaria, one of our most serious ailments on a world-
plex internal skeletons containing the carbohydrate wide basis.81–84 Throughout history malaria has prob-
polymer chitin together with silica (SiO ) or strontium ably killed more persons than any other disease.
2
sulfate. The Foraminifera deposit external shells of Toxoplasma gondii is another parasite which, in its
calcium carbonate or silicon dioxide. Over 20,000 haploid phase, is found throughout the world in wild
species are known and now as in the distant past their animalsand in humans. Although its presence usually
minute shells fall to the bottom of the ocean and form elicits no symptoms, it sometimes causes blindness
limestone deposits. and mental retardation in children and can be fatal to
Tiny ameboid parasites of the subphylum Sporozoa persons with AIDS. Its sexual cycle occurs exclusively
attack members of all other animal phyla. Several in cats.85,86
genera of Coccidia parasitize rabbits and poultry Another subphylum of protozoa, the Mastigophora,
causing enormous damage. Humans are often the are propelled by a small number of flagella and are
victims of species of the genus Plasmodium (Fig. 1-9) intermediate between animals and the algae. One of
which invade red blood cells and other tissues to cause these is Euglena viridis, a small freshwater organism
with a long flagellum in front, a
flexible tapered body, green chloro-
Trichonympha lives in
50µm plasts, and a light-sensitive “eye-
the gut of termites spot” which it apparently uses to
E. coli—food
for protozoa keep itself in the sunshine (Fig. 1-9).
Euglena is also able to live as a
Euglena viridis. typical animal if there is no light.
Wood particles Is it a plant Treatment with streptomycin (Box
digested with help or an animal?
20-B) causes Euglena to lose its
of symbiotic bacteria
chloroplasts and to become an animal
permanently. The dinoflagellates
Chloroplasts
(Fig. 1-9), some colorless and some
green, occur in great numbers
Trypanosoma A dinoflagellate among the plankton of the sea.
gambiense Giardia lamblia is a troublesome
(causes African
sleeping sickness) intestinal parasite.
A second Thehemoflagellates are respon-
A red blood cell flagellum sible for some of our most terrible
lies in the
diseases. Trypanosomes (genus
groove
Trypanosoma) invade the cells of the
Malaria-causing
nervous system causing African
Plasmodium inside
sleeping sickness. Mutating their
Gelled cytosol surface proteins frequently by gene-
turns fluid here
scrambling mechanisms, these and
other parasites are able to evade the
immune response of the host.87,88
For the same reason it is difficult
to prepare vaccines against them.
Other flagellates live in a symbiotic
relationship within the alimentary
Tetrahymena canals of termites (Fig. 1-9) and
roaches. Termites depend upon
Amoeba proteus
bacteria that live within the cells of
these symbiotic protozoans to pro-
Flow of cytosol vide the essential enzymes needed
to digest the cellulose in wood.
Members of the subphylum
Cytosol gels Ciliophora, structurally the most
in this region Entamoeba histolytica complex of the protozoa, are cov-
(causes amebic dysentery) ered with a large number of cilia
which beat together in an organized
pattern.89 The following question
immediately comes to mind: How
Figure 1-9 A few well-known protists.

--- Page 24 ---

20 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
are the cilia able to communicate with each other to studies.97 The ascospores can be dissected out in order
provide this organized pattern? Two ciliates that are from the ascus and cultivated separately to observe the
often studied by biochemists are Tetrahymena (Fig. 1-9), results of crossing-over during meiosis.
one of the simplest, and Paramecium, one of the more Neurospora also reproduces via haploid spores
complex. calledconidia. The haploid mycelia exist as two mating
TheMyxomycetes or “slime molds” are more types and conidia or mycelia from one type can fertilize
closely related to protozoa than to fungi.90 Members cells in a special body (the protoperithecium) of the other
of the family Acrasieae, the best studied member of type to form zygotes. The latter immediately undergo
which is Dictyostelium discoideum, start life as small meiosis and mitosis to form the eight ascospores.
amebas. After a time, when the food supply runs Among other Ascomycetes are the highly prized edible
low, some of the amebas begin to secrete pulses of a truffles and morels. However, most mushrooms and
chemical attractant cyclic AMP. Neighboring amebas puffballs are fruiting bodies of Basidiomycetes. Other
respond to the pulses of cyclic AMP by emitting their Basidiomycetes include the rusts, which cause enor-
own pulses about 15 s later, then moving toward the mous damage to wheat and other grain crops.
original source.91,92 The ultimate effect is to cause the Yeasts are fungi adapted to life in an environment
amebas to stream to centers where they aggregate of high sugar content and which usually remain uni-
and form fungus-like fruiting bodies. Asexual spores cellular and reproduce by budding (Fig. 1-10). Occa-
are formed and the life cycle begins again. Other sionally the haploid cells fuse in pairs to form diploid
Myxomycetes grow as a multinucleate (diploid) cells and sexual spores. Some yeasts are related to the
plasmodium containing millions of nuclei but no Ascomycetes, others to Basidiomycetes. Saccharomyces
individual cell membranes. Physarumpolycephalum, a cerevisiae, the organism of both baker’s and brewer’s
species whose plasmodium may spread to a diameter yeast, is an Ascomycete. It can grow indefinitely in
of 30 cm, has become popular with biochemists. either the haploid or diploid phase. The genetics
The 800,000 nuclei per square millimeter all divide and biochemistry of this yeast have been studied
synchronously. extensively.98–102 The genome is relatively small with
13.5 x 106 base pairs in 17 chromosomes. The sequence
of the 315,000 base pairs of chromosome III was deter-
2. Fungi mined in 1992101,102 and the sequence of the entire
genome is now known.103
Lacking photosynthetic ability, living most often in Fungi often grow in symbiotic association with
soil but sometimes in water, the fungi are represented by other organisms. Of special importance are the
almost half as many species (~105) as are the vascular mycorrhizae (fungus roots) formed by colonization
plants.93 The distinguishing characteristics of fungi of fine roots by beneficial soil fungi. Almost all plants
are the lack of chlorophyll and growth as a series of of economic importance form mycorrihizae.104
manybranched tubules (usually 6–8(cid:1)m diameter), the
hyphae, which constitute the mycelium. The hyphae
are not made up of separate cells but contain a mass of 3. Algae
protoplasm with many nuclei. Only occasional septa
divide the tubules. Most fungi are saprophytic, living Algae are chlorophyll-containing eukaryotic organ-
on decaying plants or animal tissues. However, others isms which may be either unicellular or colonial.105
are parasites that produce serious and difficult-to-treat The colonial forms are usually organized as long fila-
infections in humans. An important medical problem ments, either straight or branched, but in some cases
is the lack of adequate antibiotics for treating fungal as blades resembling leaves. However, there is little
infections (mycoses).94–96 On the other hand, fungi differentiation among cells. The gold-brown, brown,
produce important antibiotics such as penicillin. Still and red algae contain special pigments in addition to
others form some of the most powerful toxins known! the chlorophylls.
The lower fungi or Phycomycetes include simple The euglenids (Euglenophyta) and dinoflagellates
aquatic molds and mildew organisms. Higher fungi (Pyrrophyta), discussed in the protozoa section, can
are classified as Ascomycetes or Basidiomycetes equally well be regarded as algae. The bright green
according to the manner in which the sexual spores are Chlorophyta, unicellular or filamentous algae, are
born. In the Ascomycetes these spores are produced in definitely plants, however. Of biochemical interest is
a small sac called an ascus (Fig. 1-10). Each ascus Chlamydomonas, a rather animal-like creature with two
contains four or eight spores in a row, a set of four flagella and a carotenoid-containing eyespot or stigma
representing the results of a single pair of meiotic (Fig. 1-11). Chlamydomonas contains a single chloroplast.
divisions. A subsequent mitotic division will give eight The“pyrenoid”, a center for the synthesis of starch,
spores. This is one of the features that has made Neu- lies, along with the eyespot, within the chloroplast. The
rospora crassa (Fig. 1-10) a favorite subject for genetic organism is haploid with “plus” and “minus” strains

--- Page 25 ---

D. Survey of the Protists 21
and motile gametes. Zygotes immediately undergo Some unicellular algae grow to a remarkable size.
meiosis to form haploid spores. With a well-established One of these is Acetabularia (Fig. 1-11), which lives in
genetic map, Chlamydomonas is another important organ- the warm waters of the Mediterranean and other
ism for studies of biochemical genetics.106 tropical seas. The cell contains a single nucleus which
The filamentous Ulothrix shows its relationship lies in the base or rhizoid portion. In the mature alga,
to the animals through formation of asexual spores whose life cycle in the laboratory is 6 months, a cap of
with four flagella and biflagellate gametes. Only the characteristic form develops. When cap development
zygote is diploid. On the other hand, the incomparably is complete, the nucleus divides into about 104 second-
beautifulSpirogyra (Fig. 1-11) has no motile cells. The ary nuclei which migrate up the stalk and out into the
ameboid male gamete flows through a tube formed rays of the cap where they form cysts. After the cap
between the two mating cells, a behavior suggesting a decays and the cysts are released, meiosis occurs and
relationship to higher green plants. the flagellated gametes fuse in pairs to form zygotes
which again grow into diploid algae.
Because of its large size and the
location of the nucleus in the base,
50µm the cells can be cut and grafted.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Nuclei can be removed or trans-
planted and growth and develop-
Ascus
ment can be studied in the presence
Macroconidia or absence of a nucleus.107–110 The
green algae Volvox live in wheel-like
colonies of up to several thousand
cells and are useful for biochemical
Ascus containing
8 ascospores studies of differentiation.111
Look through the microscope
Neurospora crassa at almost any sample of algae from
a pond or aquarium and you will
see little boatlike diatoms slowly
Microconidia
gliding through the water. The most
prominent members of the division
Chrysophyta, diatoms are character-
ized by their external “shells” of
silicon dioxide. Large and ancient
deposits of diatomaceous earth
contain these durable silica skeletons
which are finely marked, often with
beautiful patterns (Fig. 1-11). The
slow motion of diatoms is accom-
plished by streaming of protoplasm
through a groove on the surface of
the cell. Diatoms are an important
part of marine plankton, and it is
estimated that three-fourths of the
organic material of the world is
produced by diatoms and dino-
flagellates. Like the brown algae,
Nucleus passing × 10 Chrysophyta contain the pigment
through pore fucoxanthin.
in septum Other groups of algae are the
brown and red marine algae or
seaweed. The former (Phaeophyta)
include the giant kelps from which
Protoperithecium the polysaccharide algin is obtained.
TheRhodophyta are delicately
branched plants containing the red
Figure 1-10 Two frequently studied fungi. Top (including ascus): the yeast
pigmentphycoerythrin. The poly-
Saccharomycescerevisiae. Below: Neurospora crassa showing various stages.
saccharides,agar and carrageenin,
After J. Webster.93

--- Page 26 ---

22 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
a popular additive to chocolate drinks and other foods, penetrate the algae cells and derive nutrients from
come from red algae. them.112 Although either of the two partners in a lichen
Symbiotic associations of fungi with either true can be cultured separately, the combination of the two
algae or with cyanobacteria are known as lichens. is capable of producing special pigments and phenolic
Over 15,000 varieties of lichens grow on rocks and in substances known as depsides which are not formed
other dry and often cold places. While the algae by either partner alone.
appear to benefit little from the association, the fungi
A diatom
Chlamydomonas
Scenedesmus
Chlorella, a common symbiont
inHydra, sponges, and protozoa.
Chlorella also lives free and has
often been used in studies of
photosynthesis.
Cosmarium, Oscillatoria, a blue-green
a bright green “alga”, a prokaryotic
“desmid” organism
0 50 100µm
Spirogyra
E. coli
Conjugation
tube
Acetabularia
(actual size)
Spore
Figure 1-11 A few species of algae.

--- Page 27 ---

E. The Variety of Animal Forms 23
the pores to bring food to the sponge. Within the body
E. The Variety of Animal Forms
amebocytes work in groups to form the spicules of
calcium carbonate, silicon dioxide, or the protein
In this section, we will consider only a few bio-
spongin (Fig. 1-12). Sponges appear to lack a nervous
chemical and other aspects of multicellular animals or
system.
Metazoa. The sudden appearance of a large number
Individuals of the next most complex major phy-
of Metazoans about 0.5 x 109years ago113,114 may have
lum,Cnidaria (formerly Coelenterata), are radially
been an outcome of the appearance of split genes (see
symmetricwith two distinct cell layers, the endoderm
Section B, 1). As a result of gene duplication the coding
andectoderm. Many species exist both as a polyp or
pieces of split genes, the exons, could be moved to
hydra form (Fig. 1-13) and as a medusa or jellyfish.
new locations in a chromosome where they could have
The jellyfish apparently has no brain but the ways in
become fused with other pieces of DNA to form entirely
which its neurons interconnect in a primitive radial net
new genes.115
are of interest. The Cnidaria have a very simple body
form with remarkable regenerative powers. The fresh-
water hydra, a creature about 1 cm long (Fig. 1-13),
1. Major Groups of Multicellular Animals
contains a total of ~105 cells. A complete hydra can be
regenerated from a small piece of tissue if the latter
The simplest metazoa are tiny symbiotic worms
contains some of both the inner and the outer cell
of the phylum (or subkingdom) Mesozoa, which live
layers.121,122
in the kidneys of deep sea-dwelling cephalopods
The body of flatworms (phylum Platyhelminthes)
(octopi and squid). Each worm is made up of only 25
consists of two external cell layers (endoderm and
cells in a single layer enclosing one or a small number
ectoderm) with a third layer between. A distinct excre-
of elongated axial cells (Fig. 1-12). Mesozoa have been
tory system is present. In addition to a nerve net
regarded as parasitic, but they appear to facilitate
resembling that of the Cnidaria, there are a cerebral
excretion of NH by the host through acidification of
3 ganglion and distinct eyes. One large group of flat-
the urine.118,119
worms, the planarians (typically about 15 mm in
Porifera or sponges are the most primitive of
length, Fig. 1-14), inhabit freshwater streams. They are
multicelled animals.120 They lack distinct tissues but
said to be the simplest creatures in which behavior can
contain several specialized types of cells. The body is
be studied.
formed by stationary cells that pump water through
Polar
Osculum
cells Calotte
Spicule
Choanocyte
Spongocoel
Porocyte
Axial cell
Mesenchyme
nucleus
Amebocyte
Thickener
Axoblasts
Incurrent pore
Pinacocyte
Dicyema, a Founder
member of the
phylum Mesozoa
A B C
Figure 1-12 Some lower forms of Metazoa. (A) Mesozoa (25 cells). After C. P. Hickman.116 (B) A small asconoid sponge.
After C. A. Villee, W. F. Walker, Jr., and R. D. Barnes.117 (C) Ameboid cells of a sponge forming spicules. After Hickman.

--- Page 28 ---

24 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
E. coli in the bacterial world.129 The
108 nucleotides in the worm’s six
Stinging cell
chromosomes contain ~13,600
genes. C. elegans has become an
important animal in which to study
differentiation. Already the exact
lineage of every cell has been traced,
as has every connection among the
302 neurons in the animal’s nervous
Muscle cell system. The related rotifers,130 with
outer layer
whirling“wheels” of cilia on their
heads (Fig. 1-14) and transparent
Muscle cell
inner layer bodies, are a delight to the micro-
Gland cell
scopist. Like nematodes, they are
“cell constant” organisms. The total
number of cells in the body is con-
Sperm
stant as is that in almost every part
of every organ. Part of the develop-
mental plan of such organisms is a
Muscle cell
inner layer Gland cell “programmed cell death” (Chapter 32).
TheAnnelida (segmented
Interstitial cell worms)131 are believed to be evolu-
Interstitial cell tionary antecedents of the arthropods.
Present-day members include earth-
worms, leeches, and ~105 species of
marinepolychaetes. Annelids have
Egg Manubrium a true body cavity separate from the
Gonad alimentary canal and lined by a
Radial canal peritoneum. They have a well-
Muscle cell
outer layer developed circulatory system and
B
Medusa their blood usually contains a type
of hemoglobin.
A
About 106 species of arthropods
(80% of all known animals) have
been described. Most are very
Figure 1-13 (A) Hydra. After Loomis.123 (B) The medusa stage of Obelia, a
small.72 These creatures, which
hydroid coelenterate.123a
have a segmented exoskeleton of
chitin and other materials, include
the horseshoe crabs, the Arachnida
Many parasitic flatworms (tapeworms and flukes) (scorpions, spiders, and mites), the Crustacea, Myri-
attack higher organisms.124 Among them are the opoda (centipedes and millipedes), and the Insecta.
Schistosoma, tiny worms that are transmitted to Important biochemical problems are associated with
humans through snails and which attack the blood the development and use of insecticides and with our
vessels. The resulting schistosomiasis is one of the understanding of the metamorphosis that occurs
most widespread debilitating diseases on earth today, during the growth of arthropods.132 The fruit fly
affecting 200 million people or more.125,126 Drosophila melanogaster has provided much of our basic
The roundworms (Nematoda)127–129 have, in knowledge of genetics and continues to be the major
addition to the enteron (alimentary tract), a separate species in which development is studied.133–134a
body cavity. Free-living nematodes abound in water Among the molluscs (phylum Mollusca) the
and soil but many species are parasitic. They do enor- squids and octopuses have generated the most interest
mous damage to plants and to some animal species. among biochemists. The neurons of squid contain giant
Trichina, hookworms129a, and filaria worms attack axons, the study of which has led to much of our
humans. However, in the laboratory the 1-mm-long, knowledge of nerve conduction. Octopuses show
810-cell nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans (Fig. 1-14) has signs of intelligence not observed in other invertebrates
become an important animal. In 1963 Sydney Brenner whose nervous reactions seem to be entirely “prepro-
launched what has become a worldwide effort to make grammed.” The brains of some snails contain only 104
this tiny worm the equivalent in the animal kingdom of neurons, some of which are unusually large. The

--- Page 29 ---

E. The Variety of Animal Forms 25
A Echinodermata or spiny-skinned animals (starfish,
Cerebral ganglia sea urchins, and sea cucumbers) are regarded as a
Lateral nerve cord highly advanced phylum. Their embryological devel-
opment has been studied intensively.
Transverse nerve Intestine
(anterior trunk) The phylum Chordata, to which we ourselves
Pharynx
Diverticulum belong, includes not only the vertebrates but also more
primitive marine animals that have a spinal cord.
Pharyngeal
chamber Mouth Among these primitive species, which may be related
Pharyngeal to early ancestral forms, are the tunicates or sea squirts.
Mouth
opening
They have a very high concentration of vanadium in
Pharynx
their blood.
Intestine
(right posterior trunk)
2. Cell Types and Tissues
B
Isolated animal cells in tissue culture, no matter
how highly differentiated, tend to revert quickly to
one of three basic types known as epitheliocytes,
mechanocytes, and amebocytes. Epitheliocytes are
closely adherent cells derived from epithelial tissues
and thought to be related in their origins to the two
surface layers of the embryonic blastula. Mechano-
cytes, often called fibroblasts or fibrocytes, are
derived from muscle, supporting, or connective tissue.
Like the amebocytes, they arise from embryonic mes-
enchymal tissue cells that have migrated inward from
the lower side of the blastula (Chapter 32). Neurons,
neuroglia, and lymphocytes are additional distinct
C Ciliated
cell types.
crown
Flame cell
Eye Mouth
Pharynx (mastax) BOX 1-E ERRORS, MISCONCEPTIONS,
Jaws
AND SPECULATION
Digestive gland
Warning: Not everything in this book is true.
Stomach Despite all efforts to get it right, there are unin-
tentional errors and misinterpretations of experi-
Ovary
mental results. Indeed, the history of biochemistry
Protonephridial is replete with accounts of experimental findings
tubule
that were interpreted incorrectly. Yet, the ideas
Intestine
expressed often stimulated others to develop a
more correct picture later. The same is true today.
Bladder
Students should be critical, should look at experi-
Anus
mental details, and consult original literature as
Pedal glands much as possible.
Progress in science depends both upon careful
Foot
observations and measurements and upon imagi-
native interpretations of unexpected findings.
Speculative ideas, a number of which are men-
tioned in this book, provide an important stimulus
Figure 1-14 (A) A planarian, length 15 mm. After
in science. They should neither be ignored nor
Hickman.116 Diagram of digestive and nervous sytems;
accepted as facts. I have tried to write in such
cutaway section shows ventral mouth. Small drawing
shows pharynx extended through ventral mouth. (B) The a way that established facts will not often be
nematodeCaenorhabditis elegans. Ascaris is very similar in confused with speculation.
appearance. From Buchsbaum.77 (C) A rotifer, Philodina
(~103 cells). After C. A. Villee et al.117

--- Page 30 ---

26 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
Tissues. Cells aggregate to form four major kinds time before they migrate into the tissues where they
of tissue. Epithelial tissues line the primary surfaces of becomemacrophages,136 relatively fixed phagocytic
the body: the skin, the digestive tract, urogenital tract, cells. Macrophages not only phagocytize and kill
and glands. External skin is composed of flat platelike invading bacteria, protozoa, and fungi but also destroy
squamous epithelial cells whereas internal surfaces are cancer cells. They also destroy damaged cells and
often formed by colummar epithelial cells. Glands cellular debris as part of the normal turnover of tissues.
(sweat, oil, mammary, and internal secretory) as well They play an essential role in the immune system by
as the sensory organs of the tongue, nose, and ear are “processing” antigens and in releasing stimulatory
all composed of epithelial cells. Epithelial cells are proteins.
among the most highly polarized of cells. One side of Granulocytes of diameter 9–12µm are formed in
each cell faces the outside, either air or water, while the red bone marrow. Three types are distinguished
the other side is often directly against a basement by staining: neutrophils,eosinophils, and basophils.
membrane. Neutrophils are the most numerous phagocytic cells of
Supporting and connective tissues include the fatty our blood and provide the first line of defense against
adipose tissue as well as cartilage and bone. Both bacterial infections. The functions of eosinophils and
of the latter contain large amounts of intercellular basophils are less well understood. The number of
material or ground substance consisting largely of eosinophils rises during attacks of hay fever and asthma
complex polymers. Embryonic fibroblasts differentiate and under the influence of some parasites, while the
into white fibers, which produce collagen, and yellow basophil count is increased greatly in leukemia and
fibers, which form elastin. The fibrils of both of these also by inflammatory diseases. Granules containing
proteins are assembled in the intercellular space histamine, heparin, and leukotrienes are present in the
where they are embedded in the ground substance. basophils. Bloodplatelets or thrombocytes are tiny
Osteoblasts form bone by deposition of calcium (2–3µm diameter) cell-like bodies essential for rapid
phosphate in 3–7µm thick layers within a ground coagulation of blood. They are formed by fragmenta-
substance that contains special proteins. tion of the cytoplasm of bone marrow megakaryocytes.
A third tissue is muscle, which is classified into One mature megakaryocyte may contribute 3000 plate-
three types: striated (voluntary skeletal muscle), lets to the 1–3 x 108 per ml present in whole blood.
cardiac (involuntary striated muscle), and smooth
(involuntary) muscle. There are two major groups of Cell culture. Laboratory growth of isolated animal
cells in nervous tissue, the fourth tissue type. Neurons cells has become very important in biochemistry.137
are the actual conducting cells whose cell membranes Sometimes it is necessary to have many cells with as
carry nerve impulses. Several kinds of glial cells lie nearly as possible identical genetic makeup. Such
between and around the neurons. bacterial cells are obtained by plating out the bacteria
and selecting a small colony that has grown from a
Blood cells. Blood and the linings of blood vessels single cell to propagate a “pure strain.” Similarly,
may be regarded as a fifth tissue type.135,135a The single eukaryotic cells may be selected for tissue cul-
human body contains 5 x 109erythrocytes or red ture and give rise to a clone of cells which remains
blood cells per ml, a total of 2.5 x 1013 cells in the five genetically identical until altered by mutations.
liters of blood present in the body. Erythrocytes are The culture of embryonic fibroblasts is used to
rapidly synthesized in the bone marrow. The nucleus obtain enough cells to perform prenatal diagnosis of
is destroyed, leaving a cell almost completely filled inherited metabolic diseases (Box 1-D). Tissue culture
with hemoglobin. With an average lifetime of 125 is easiest with embryonic or cancer cells, but many
days, human red blood cells are destroyed by leuko- other tissues can be propagated. However, the cells
cytes in the spleen and liver. that grow best and which can be propogated indefi-
The white blood cells or leukocytes are nearly a nitely are not entirely normal; the well-known HeLa
thousandfold less numerous than red cells. About 7 x 106 strain of human cancer cells which was widely grown
cells are present per ml of blood. There are three types for many years throughout the world contains 70–80
of leukocytes: lymphocytes (~26% of the total), chromosomes per cell compared with the normal 46.
monocytes (~7% of the total), and polymorphonuclear
leukocytes or granulocytes (~70% of the total).
Lymphocytes are about the same size as erythrocytes 3. Communication
and are made in lymphatic tissue. Individual lympho-
cytes may survive for as long as ten years. They func- Plants are able to maintain their form because the
tion in antibody formation and are responsible for cells are surrounded by thick walls that cement the
maintenance of long-term immunity. cells together. However, animal cells lack rigid walls
Monocytes, two times larger, are active in ingesting and must be held together by specialized contacts.138,139
bacteria. These cells stay in the blood only a short Contacts between cells of both plants and animals are

--- Page 31 ---

E. The Variety of Animal Forms 27
A B
200 nm 100 nm
C D
200 nm 100 nm
Figure 1-15 Electron micrographs of cell junctions of three types. (A) Freeze-fractured zona occludens (occlusion zone)
between epithelial cells of the rat small intestine. The tight junctions are repesented as a meshwork of ridges (in the P or
protoplasmic fracture face) or grooves (in the E fracture face which looks toward the extracellular space). These represent the
actual sites of membrane fusion. Microvilli are seen in the lower part of the photograph. From D. S. Friend and N. B. Gilula.141
(B) Thin cross section of tight junction between mouse hepatocytes. The arrows indicate points of membrane fusion. From
Gilula.142 Copyright 1975 by The Williams & Wilkins Co., Baltimore. (C) A freeze-fractured septate junction from ciliated
epithelium of a mollusc. This type of junction forms a belt around the cells. Fracture face P (central depressed area) contains
parallel rows of membrane particles that correspond to the arrangmenet of the intracellular septa seen in thin sections. The
surrounding fracture face E contains a complementary set of grooves. Particles in nonjunctional membrane regions (upper
right corner) are randomly arranged. (D) Thin section of a septate junction of the type shown in (C). The plasma membranes
of the two cells are joined by a periodic arrangement of electron-dense bars or septa, which are present within the intercellular
space. Note the Golgi membranes in the lower right part of the photograph. (C) and (D) are from N. B. Gilula143

--- Page 32 ---

28 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
E F
100 nm
100 nm
G
100 nm
Figure 1-15 (continued) (E) Desmosomes (macula adherens) in rat
intestinal epithelium. Features include a wide (25–35 nm) intercellular
space containing dense material, two parallel cell membranes, a dense
plaque associated with the cytoplasmic surface and cytoplasmic tono-
filaments that converge on the dense plaque. From Gilula.143(F) Freeze-
fractured surface through gap junctions between communicating cells in
culture. Both a large junction and a smaller one below (arrow) can be
seen. (G) Gap junctions in thin section. (F) and (G) are from N. B. Gilula.144
important for a second reason: Cells must communicate, one with
another.
Cell contacts and junctions. Many epithelial cells, e.g., those
lining the border of kidney tubules and secretory glands, form
tight junctions with adjacent cells. Electron microscopy shows
that in these junctions the outer portions of the membranes actual-
ly fuse in some places (Fig. 1-15). One way in which this has been

--- Page 33 ---

F. Higher Plants and Plant Tissues 29
demonstrated is to freeze a tissue rapidly and to frac- developed most highly by cells of the immune system
ture it in the frozen state within a vacuum chamber. but is possessed to some extent by others. For example,
The fractured tissue is kept at about –100°C in a vacuum cells of sponges can be separated by partial digestion
for a short time while water molecules evaporate from of the protein “cement” that holds them together.
the fractured surfaces. A thin plastic replica is then When dissociated cells from orange sponges were
made of the etched surfaces, which sometimes pass mixed with those from yellow sponges, the cells
through tight junctions revealing details of their struc- clumped together to reform small sponges.150,151
ture (Fig. 1-15, A, E). Study of electron micrographs of Furthermore, orange cells stuck to orange cells and
such surfaces shows that some cells are completely yellow to yellow cells. Similar results have been
surrounded by belts of tight junctions, sometimes obtained using a mixture of cultivated liver, kidney,
referred to as occlusion zones or terminal bars. and embryonic brain cells. When a wound heals,
Tight junctions between endothelial cells of blood epithelial cells grow and move across the wound
capillaries in the brain prevent free diffusion of com- surface but they stop when they meet. Cells in tissue
pounds from the blood stream into brain cells and culture and growing on a glass surface experience
form the blood–brain barrier.140 Tight junctions this same contact inhibition152 and spread to form
between neurons and adjacent cells surround the a unicellular layer. Cancer cells in culture do not stop
nodes of Ranvier (Chapter 30). but climb one on top of the other, apparently lacking
Contacts of another type, known as septate proper recognition and communication. Many chem-
desmosomes or adhesion discs, form a belt around ical signals appear to pass between cells. An important
the cells of invertebrate epithelia. In these contacts a goal of contemporary biochemistry is to understand
space of ~18 nm between adjacent cell membranes is how cells recognize each other and respond to signals
bridged in a number of places by thin walls. Behind that they receive.
the desmosomes the membrane is often backed up at
thesepoints by an electron-dense region to which are
attached many fine microfilaments of ~6–10 nm F. Higher Plants and Plant Tissues
diameter (Fig. 1-15, D).
One method of communication between cells is Botanists recognize two divisions of higher plants.
by passage of chemical substances through special TheBryophyta or moss plants consist of the Musci
junctions which, because of their appearance in electron (mosses) and Hepaticae (liverworts). These plants
micrographs of thin sections (Fig. 1-15, G) are known grow predominantly on land and are characterized
asgap junctions.139,145,146 Gap junctions may cover by swimming sperm cells and a dominant gameto-
substantial areas of the cell interface. In cross section, phyte (haploid) phase. Tracheophyta, or vascular
a thin 3–4 nm gap between the adjacent cell membranes plants, contain conducting tissues. About 2 x 105
is bridged by a lattice-like structure, which may appear species are known. The ferns (class Filicineae, formerly
in freeze-fractured surfaces as a hexagonal array of Pteridophyta) are characterized by a dominant diploid
particles (Fig. 1-15, F, lower junction). These particles plant and alternation with a haploid phase. Seed plants
orconnexons are each thought to be composed of six are represented by two classes: Gymnosperms
protein subunits. A central channel in the connexon is (cone-bearing trees) and Angiosperms, the true
able to pass molecules of molecular mass up to about flowering plants.
500 Da.147,148 Small molecules may be able to pass Genetically the simplest of the angiosperms is
freely from one cell to another through the gap junction. the little weed Arabidopsis thaliana, whose generation
Because of their low electrical resistance, gap junctions time is as short as five weeks. Its five chromosomes
allow“electrical coupling” of cells. Such junctions contain only 108 base pairs in all, the smallest known
form the electrotonic synapses that link some neurons genome among angiosperms153 and one whose com-
to other excitable cells. Heart cells are all electrically plete nucleotide sequence is being determined. Its
coupled through gap junctions.149 biochemistry, physiology, and developmental biology
Another type of communicating junction is also are under intensive study. It may become the “fruit
found in synapses of the nervous system. At these fly” of the plant kingdom.
specialized contacts a nerve impulse transmitted along There are several kinds of plant tissues. Undiffer-
the membrane of one neuron triggers the release of a entiated, embryonic cells found in rapidly growing
neurotransmitter, a chemical substance that passes regions of shoots and roots form the meristematic
across the gap between cells of the synapse and initiates tissue. By differentiation, the latter yields the simple
a nerve impulse in the second neuron (Chapter 30). tissues, the parenchyma, collenchyma, and scleren-
chyma. Parenchyma cells are among the most abun-
Cell recognition. Cells of higher organisms are dant and least specialized in plants. They give rise
able to recognize other cells as identical, as belonging through further differentiation to the cambium layer,
to another tissue, or as being “foreign.” This ability is the growing layer of roots and stems. They also

--- Page 34 ---

30 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
make up the pith or pulp in the center of stems and undergo differentiation to form new layers of xylem
roots, where they serve as food storage cells. increasing the woody part of the stem. New phloem
Thecollenchyma, present in herbs, is composed cells are also formed, and as the stem expands all of
of elongated supporting cells and the sclerenchyma the tissues external to the cambium are renewed and
of woody plants is made up of supporting cells with the older cells are converted into bark.
hard lignified cell walls and a low water content. Plantseeds consist of three distinct portions.
This tissue includes fiber cells, which may be ex- Theembryo develops from a zygote formed by fusion
tremely long; e.g., pine stems contain fiber cells of 40 of a sperm nucleus originating from the pollen and
µm diameter and 4 mm long. an egg cell. The fertilized egg is surrounded in the
Two complex tissues, the xylem and phloem, gymnosperms by a nutritive layer or endosperm
provide the conducting network or “circulatory system” which is haploid and is derived from the same game-
of plants. In the xylem or woody tissue, most of the tophyte tissue that produced the egg. In angiosperms
cells are dead and the thick-walled tubes (tracheids) two sperm nuclei form; one of these fertilizes the egg,
serve to transport water and dissolved minerals from while the other fuses with two haploid polar nuclei
the roots to the stems and leaves. The phloem cells derived from the female gametophyte. (The polar nuclei
provide the principal means of downward conduction are formed by the same mitotic divisions that formed
of foods from the leaves. Phloem cells are joined end the egg.) From this develops a 3ntriploid endosperm.
to end by sieve plates, so-called because they are
perforated by numerous minute pores through which
cytoplasm of adjoining sieve cells appears to be con- G. The Chemical Composition of Cells
nected by strands 5–9µm in diameter.154 Mature sieve
cells have no nuclei, but each sieve cell is paired with a Water is the major component of living cells, but
nucleated“companion” cell. the amount varies greatly. Thus, the pig embryo is
Epidermal tissue of plants consists of flat cells, 97% water; at birth a new-born pig is only 89% water.
usually containing no chloroplasts, with a thick outer A lean 45-kg pig may contain 67% water but a very fat
wall covered by a heavy waxy cuticle about 2 µm thick. 135-kg animal only 40% water. Similar variations are
Only a few specialized cells are found in the epidermis. encountered with other constitutents.
Among them are the paired guard cells that surround The water content of a tissue is often determined
the small openings known as stomata on the under- by thoroughly drying a weighed sample of tissue at
surfaces of leaves and control transpiration of water. low temperature in vacuum and then weighing it a
Specialized cells in the root epidermis form root hairs, second time. The solid material can then be extracted
long extensions (~1 mm) of diameter 5–17µm. Each with a solvent that will dissolve out the fatty com-
hair is a single cell with the nucleus located near the tip. pounds. These are referred to collectively as lipids.
Figure 1-16 shows a section from a stem of a typical After evaporation of the solvent the lipid residue may
angiosperm. Note the thin cambium layer between be weighed. By this procedure a young leafy vegetable
the phloem and the xylem. Its cells continuously might be found to contain 2–5% lipid on a dry weight
Ray
Ray
Sieve
tube
Ray
Phloem
Cambium
Xylem
Pith Fiber S p i l e a v te e Vessel
Fiber
Figure 1-16 Section of the stem of an angiosperm. Enlarged sections showing tubes of the phloem (left) and xylem (right).
From S. Biddulph and O. Biddulph.155 Drawn by Bunji Tagawa.

--- Page 35 ---

G. The Chemical Composition of Cells 31
basis. Even very lean meats contain 10–30% lipid. A dried tissue sample may be burned at a high
The residue remaining after removal of the lipid temperature to an ash, which commonly amounts to
consists predominately of three groups of compounds: 3–10% and is higher in specialized tissues such as
proteins,nucleic acids, and carbohydrates. Most of bone. It is a measure of the inorganic constituents of
the nitrogen present in tissues is found in the proteins tissues.
and the protein content is sometimes estimated by The carbohydrate content can be estimated by the
determining the percentage of nitrogen and multiplying difference of the sum of lipid, protein, and ash from
by 6.25. In a young green plant, 20–30% of the dry 100%. It amounts to 50–60% in young green plants
matter may be protein, while in very lean meat it may and only 2–10% in typical animal tissues. In excep-
reach 50–70%. tional cases the carbohydrate content of animal tissues
may be higher; the glycogen content of oysters is 28%.
The amount of nucleic acid in tissues varies from
0.1% in yeast and 0.5–1% in muscle and in bacteria to
TABLE 1-4 15–40% in thymus gland and sperm cells. In these latter
Approximate Composition of Metabolically materials of high nucleic acid content it is clear that
Active Cells and Tissuesa multiplication of % N by 6.25 is not a valid measure of
protein content. For diploid cells of the body the DNA
Green plant content per cell is nearly constant.
(spinach, Rat Table 1-4 compares the composition of a bacterium,
E. colib Spinacia liverd of a green plant, and of an active animal tissue (rat
Component (%) oleracea)c (%) liver). Although the solid matter of cells consists
principally of C, H, O, N, S, and P, many other chemical
H 2 O 70 93 69 elements are also present. Among the cations, Na+, K+,
Protein 15 2.3 21 Ca2+, and Mg2+ are found in relatively large amounts.
Thus, the body of a 70 kg person contains 1050 g Ca
Amino acids 0.4
(mostly in the bones), 245 g K, 105 g Na, and 35 g Mg.
DNA 1 0.2 Iron (3 g), zinc (2.3 g), and rubidium (1.2 g) are the next
most abundant. Of these iron and zinc are essential to
RNA 6 1.0
life but rubidium is probably not. It is evidently taken up
Nucleotides 0.4
by the body together with potassium.
Carbohydrates 3 3.2 The other metallic elements in the human body
Cellulose 0.6 amount to less than 1 g each, but at least seven of them
Glycogen 3.8 play essential roles. They include copper (100 mg),
manganese (20 mg), and cobalt (~5 mg). Others, such
Lipids 2 0.3 6
Phospholipids 3.1 as chromium (<6 mg), tin, and vanadium, have only
Neutral lipids 1.6 recently been shown essential for higher animals.156,157
Sterols 0.3 Nickel, lead, and others may perhaps be needed.
Nonmetallic elements predominating in the ash
Other small molecules 0.2
are phosphorus (700 g in the human body), sulfur
Inorganic ions 1 1.5 (175 g), and chlorine (105 g). Not only are these three
K+ 0.4
elements essential to all living cells but also selenium,
fluorine, silicon (Box 4-B), iodine, and boron are needed
Equivalents per liter in rat liver
by higher animals and boron by plants (Fig. 1-17).
Amino acid residues 2.1 Iodine deficiency may affect one billion human beings
and may cause 20 million cases per year of cretinism,
Nucleotide units 0.03 or less severe brain damage.158
Glycogen (glucose units) 0.22 What is the likelihood that other elements will be
found essential? Consider a human red blood cell, an
K+ 0.1
object of volume ~80 µm3 and containing about 3 x 108
protein molecules (mostly hemoglobin). About 7 x 105
a Data were not readily available for spaces left blank
atoms of the “trace metal” copper and 105 atoms of the
b From J. D. Watson (1976) Molecular Biology of the Gene, 3rd ed.,
p. 69, Benjamin, New York The amounts of amino acids, nutritionally essential tin are present in a single red
nucleotides, carbohydrates, and lipids include precursors present cell. Also present are 2 x 104 atoms of silver, a toxic
in the cell. metal. Its concentration, over 10-7 M, is sufficient that
c From B. T. Burton (1976) Human Nutrition, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill,
it could have an essential catalytic function. However,
New York (p. 505)
d From C. Long, ed., (1961) Biochemists’ Handbook, pp. 677–679, Van we know of none and it may simply have gotten into
Nostrand-Reinhold, Princeton, New Jersey our bodies from handling money, jewelry, and other

--- Page 36 ---

32 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
BOX 1-F ABOUT THE REFERENCES
The lists of references at the ends of chapters Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. and FEBS Letts. are
are provided to encourage readers to look at origi- dedicated to rapid publication of short reports but
nal research articles. The lists are neither complete are also refereed. Other journals provide mostly
nor critically selected, but they do increase the reviews or a mixture of reviews. Periodical review
information given in this book many-fold. I apolo- series, such as Advances in Nucleic Acid Chemistry
gize for the important papers omitted. However, and Related Topics, often appear annually. Every
the references that are here will help a student to student who intends to become a professional
get started in reading the literature. Each reference biochemist should consider purchasing the Annual
contains other references and names of persons Review of Biochemistry each year. This indispensible
active in the field. By searching recent journal source of current information on most aspects of
indices or a computer database it is easy to find biochemistry is available to students at a very low
additional articles by the same authors or on the price.
same subject. Many journal papers are difficult to read. To
Look at the various types of scientific articles start, pick papers that have an understandable
including reviews, preliminary reports and full introduction. Choose reviews that are short, such
research papers. Be sure to examine those in the as those in Trends in Biochemical Sciences. Then go
primary source journals which publish detailed on to the more comprehensive ones. Never sit back
research results. These articles have always been and hope that your computer will automatically
sent to referees, active scientists, who check to see fetch just what you need! Many journals carry papers
that the experiments are described accurately, that of biochemical importance. Those specializing in
the authors have cited relevant literature, and that biochemistry include the following:
the conclusions are logical. Some journals, e.g.,
Full Title Abbreviation
Advances in Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biochemistrya Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem.
Advances in Protein Chemistrya Adv. Protein Chem.
Analytical Biochemistry Anal. Biochem.
Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structurea Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomolec. Struct.
Annual Review of Biochemistrya Ann. Rev. Biochem.
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
Biochemical Journal Biochem. J.
Biochemistry
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Biochim. Biophys. Acta
Bioorganic Chemistry Bioorg. Chem.
Carbohydrate Research Carbohydr. Res.
EMBO Journalb EMBO J.
European Journal of Biochemistry Eur. J. Biochem.
FASEB Journalc FASEB J.
Journal of Bacteriology J. Bacteriol.
Journal of Biochemistry J. Biochem.
Journal of Biological Chemistry J. Biol. Chem.
Journal of Lipid Research J. Lipid Res.
Journal of Molecular Biology J. Mol. Biol.
Journal of the American Chemical Society J. Am. Chem. Soc.
Journal of Theoretical Biology J. Theor. Biol.
Methods in Enzymologya Methods Enzymol.
Nature
Nucleic Acids Research Nucleic Acids Res.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
Science
Structure
Trends in Biochemical Sciences Trends Biochem. Sci. or TIBS
a These are not journals but series of review and reference books. There are many other series of “Advances in...” and “Annual
Reviews of ...” that are not listed here.
b EMBO–European Molecular Biology Organization
c FASEB–Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology

--- Page 37 ---

G. The Chemical Composition of Cells 33
H He
Li Be B C N O F Ne
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
R Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn S Te I Xe
Cs Ba La Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn
Essential to all animals Essential to several classes Believed essential to a Possible essential trace
and plants of animals and plants variety of species elements for some species
Figure 1-17 Elements known to be essential to living things (after da Silva and Williams157). Essential elements are enclosed
within shaded boxes. The 11 elements–C, H, O, N, S, P, Na, K, Mg, Ca, and Cl–make up 99.9% of the mass of a human being.
An additional 13 are known to be essential for higher animals in trace amounts. Boron is essential to higher plants but
apparently not to animals, microorganisms, or algae.
silver objects. The red blood cell also contains boron contains about ten times less Na+ and Cl- and several
and aluminum (3 x 105 atoms each), arsenic (7 x 105 times less Ca2+ and Mg2+ than is present in seawater,
atoms), lead (7 x 104 atoms), and nickel (2 x 104 atoms). but it is nevertheless relatively rich in these ions.
Of the elements (uranium and below) in the periodic In general, cells are rich in K+ and Mg2+, the K+
table, only four (Ac, Po, Pa, and Ra) are present, on the predominating by far, and are poor in Na+ and Ca2+.
average, in quantities less than one atom per cell.156 Chloride is the principal inorganic anion, but organic
Of the apparently nonessential elements, several, carboxylate and phosphate groups contribute most of
e.g., Cs, Rb, Sr, and Ni (possibly essential) are not toxic the negative charges (Table 1-4), many of which are
at low concentrations. Others, such as Sb, As, Ba, Be, fixed to proteins or other macromolecules. Ling esti-
Cd, Pb, Hg, Ag, Tl, and Th, are highly toxic. matedthat cells typically contain about 1.66 M of amino
The ionic compositions of tissues and of body fluids acid residues in their proteins. Of these residues, 10%
vary substantially. Blood of marine organisms is similar have negatively charged side chains and 8% positively
to that of seawater in its content of Na+, Cl-, Ca2+, and charged. The difference is a net negative charge
Mg2+. Blood of freshwater and terrestrial organisms amounting to 33 mM within cells.159.

--- Page 38 ---

34 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
References
1. May, R. M. (1992) Sci. Am.267(Oct), 42–48 29. Wheelis, M. L., Kandler, O., and Woese, C. R. 62. Margulis, L. (1981) Symbiosis in Cell Evolution,
2. Stanier, R. Y., Ingraham, J. L., Wheelis, M. L., (1992)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, Freeman, San Francisco, California
and Painter, P. R. (1986) The Microbial World, 2930–2934 63. Hurst, L. D. (1994) Nature (London)369, 451
5th ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New 30. Woese, C. R., Kandler, O., and Wheelis, M. L. 64. Gupta, R. S., and Golding, G. B. (1996) Trends
Jersey (1990)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.87, 4576– Biochem. Sci.21, 166–171
3. Brock, T. D., Smith, D. W., and Madigan, M. T. 4579 65. de Duve, C. (1996) Sci. Am.274 (Apr), 50–57
(1988)Biology of Microorganisms, 5th ed., 30a. Doolittle, W. F. (1999) Science284, 2124 – 2128 66. Markert, C. L., Shaklee, J. B., and Whitt, G. S.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 30b. Pennisi, E. (1999) Science284, 1305 – 1307 (1975)Science189, 102–114
4. Neidhardt, F. C., ed. (1987) Escherichia coli and 31. Cavalier-Smith, T. (1992) Nature (London)356, 67. Fenchel, T., and Bernard, C. (1993) Nature
Salmonella typhimurium, Am. Soc. for 570 (London)362, 300
Microbiology, Washington, D.C. 32. Angert, E. R., Clements, K. D., and Pace, N. R. 68. Schopf, J. W. (1993) Science260, 640–646
5. Neidhardt, F. C., Ingraham, J. L., and (1993)Nature (London)362, 239–241 69. Horgan, J. (1993) Sci. Am.269(Aug), 24
Schaechter, M. (1990) Physiology of the Bacterial 33. Thimann, K. V. (1963) The Life of Bacteria, 2nd 70. Doolittle, W. F. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5,
Cell, Sinauer, Sunderland, Mass. ed., Macmillan, New York 146–149
6. Maniloff, J., and Morowitz, H. J. (1972) 34. Stanier, R. Y., and Cohen-Bazire, G. (1977) 71. May, R. M. (1986) Nature (London)324, 514–515
Bacteriol. Rev.36, 263–290 Ann. Rev. Microbiol.31, 225–274 72. Seger, J. (1989) Nature (London)337, 305–306
7. Razin, S. (1978) Microbiol. Rev.42, 414–470 35. Morden, C. W., and Golden, S. S. (1989) 73. Riley, M., and Anilionis, A. (1978) Ann. Rev.
8. Barile, M. F., Razin, S., Tully, J. G., and Nature (London)337, 382–385 Microbiol.32, 519–560
Whitcomb, R. F., eds. (1979) The Mycoplasmas, 36. Marme, D., Marre, E., and Hertel, R., eds. 74. Goossens, M., Dozy, A. M., Embury, S. H.,
Vol. I, Academic Press, New York (1982)Plasmalemma and Tonoplast: Their Zachariades, Z., Hadjiminas, M. G.,
9. Watson, J. D. (1976) Molecular Biology of the Functions in the Plant Cell, Elsevier, Amsterdam Stamatoyannopoulos, G., and Kan, Y. W.
Gene, 3rd ed., Benjamin, Menlo Park, 37. Collins, F. S. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. (1980)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 518–521
California (p. 61) 92, 10821–10823 75. Williams, R. O., Young, J. R., and Majiwa, P.
10. Horowitz, D. M., and Sanders, J. K. M. (1994) 38. Hinshaw, J. E., Carraghen, B. O., and A. O. (1979) Nature (London)282, 847–849
J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 2695–2702 Milligan, R. A. (1992) Cell69, 1133–1141 76. Kondrashov, A. S. (1988) Nature (London)336,
10a. Gansheroff, L. J., and O’Brien, A. D. (2000) 39. Dingwall, C., and Lasky, R. (1992) Science258, 435–440
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 2959 – 2961 942–947 77. Buchsbaum, R., Buchsbaum, M., Pearse, J.,
11. Fraser, C. M., Gocayne, J. D., White, O., 40. Nolta, K. V., Padh, H., and Steck, T. L. (1991) and Pearse, V. (1987) Animals Without
Adams, M. D., Clayton, R. A., Fleischmann, R. J. Biol. Chem.266, 18318–18323 Backbones, 3rd ed., Univ. Chicago Press,
D., Bult, C. J., Kerlavage, A. R., Sutton, G., 41. de Duve, C. (1975) Science189, 186–194 Chicago, Illinois
Kelley, J. M., Fritchman, J. L., Weidman, J. F., 42. Griffiths, G., and Simons, K. (1986) Science 78. Margulis, L., and Schwartz, K. V. (1999) Five
Small, K. V., Sandusky, M., Fuhrmann, J., 234, 438–443 Kingdoms: An Illustrated Guide to the Phyla of
Nguyen, D., Utterback, T. R., Saudek, D. M., 43. Hartley, S. M. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, Life on Earth, 3rd ed., Freeman, New York
Phillips, C. A., Merrick, J. M., Tomb, J.-F., 325–327 79. Laver, W. G., Air, G. M., Dopheide, T. A., and
Dougherty, B. A., Bott, K. F., Hu, P.-C., Lucier, 44. Golgi, C. (1898) Arch. Ital. Biol.30, 60 and 278 Ward, C. W. (1980) Nature (London)283, 454–
T. S., Peterson, S. N., Smith, H. O., Hutchison, 45. Kirk, J. T. O., and Tilney-Bassett, R. A. E. 457
C. A., III, and Venter, J. C. (1995) Science270, (1978)The Plastids: Their Chemistry, Structure, 80. McKanna, J. A. (1973) Science179, 88–90
397–403 Growth, and Inheritance, 2nd ed., Elsevier- 81. Miller, L. H. (1992) Science257, 36–37
12. Sonea, S. (1988) Nature (London)331, 216 North Holland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam 82. Wyler, D. J. (1993) N. Engl. J. Med.329, 31–37
13. Costerton, J. W., Geesey, G. G., and Cheng, K.- 46. Hoffmann, H. P., and Avers, C. J. (1973) 83. Miller, L. H., Good, M. F., and Milon, G.
J. (1978) Sci. Am.238(Jan), 86–95 Science181, 749–751 (1994)Science264, 1878–1883
14. Macnab, R. M. (1987) in Escherichia coli and 46a. Capaldi, R. A. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 84. Nussenzweig, R. S., and Long, C. A. (1994)
Salmonella typhimurium (Niedhardt, F. C., ed), 212– 214 Science265, 1381–1382
pp. 70–83, Am. Soc. for Microbiology, 46b. Rutter, G. A., and Rizzuto, R. (2000) Trends 85. Sibley, L. D., and Boothroyd, J. C. (1992) Nature
Washington, D.C. Biochem. Sci.25, 215 – 221 (London)359, 82–85
15. Margulis, L., Ashen, J. B., Sonea, S., Solé, M., 47. Fukui, S., and Tanaka, A. (1979) Trends 86. Soldati, D., and Boothroyd, J. C. (1993) Science
and Guerrero, R. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Biochem. Sci.4, 246–249 260, 349–352
U.S.A.90, 6966–6970 48. Kindl, H., and Lazarow, P. B., eds. (1982) 87. Donelson, J. E., and Turner, M. J. (1985) Sci.
16. Goldstein, S. F., Charon, N. W., and Kreiling, Peroxisomes and Glyoxysomes, Vol. 386, Annals Am.252(Feb), 44–51
J. A. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, of the New York Academy of Sciences, New 88. Blum, M. L., Down, J. A., Gurnett, A. M.,
3433–3437 York Carrington, M., Turner, M. J., and Wiley, D. C.
17. Levine, M. M. (1985) N. Engl. J. Med.313, 49. de Duve, C. (1983) Sci. Am.248(May), 74–84 (1993)Nature (London)362, 603–609
445–447 50. Masters, C., and Crane, D. (1995) The 89. Gall, J. G., ed. (1986) The Molecular Biology of
18. Kuehn, M. J., Heuser, J., Normark, S., and Peroxisome: A Vital Organelle, Cambridge Univ. Ciliated Protozoa, Academic Press, Orlando,
Hultgren, S. J. (1992) Nature (London)356, Press, London Florida
252–255 51. Lord, J. M., and Roberts, L. M. (1980) Trends 90. Olive, L. S. (1975) The Mycetozoans, Academic
19. Alper, J. (1993) Science262, 1817 Biochem. Sci.5, 271–274 Press, New York
20. Holt, J. G., Krieg, N. R., Sneath, P. H. A., 52. Cerkasov, J., Cerkasovova, A., Kulda, J., and 91. Kimmel, A. R., ed. (1989) Molecular Biology of
Staley, J. T., and Williams, S. T., eds. (1994) Vilhelmova, D. (1978) J. Biol. Chem.253, 1207– Dictyostelium Development, Liss, New York
Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology, 1214 92. Traynor, D., Kessin, R. H., and Williams, J. G.
9th ed., Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, 53. Glover, D. M., Gonzalez, C., and Raff, J. W. (1992)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 8303–
Maryland (1993)Sci. Am.268(Jun), 62–68 8307
21. Doolittle, R. F. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 191 – 200 54. Olmsted, J. B., and Borisy, G. G. (1973) Ann. 93. Webster, J. (1980) Introduction to Fungi, 2nd
22. Schwartz, R. M., and Dayhoff, M. O. (1978) Rev. Biochem.42, 507–540 ed., Cambridge Univ. Press, New York
Science199, 395–403 55. Hall, J. L., Ramanis, Z., and Luck, D. J. L. 94. Davies, D. A. L., and Pope, A. M. S. (1978)
23. Cavalier-Smith, T. (1986) Nature (London)324, (1989)Cell59, 121–132 Nature (London)273, 235–236
416–417 56. Hyams, J. S. (1989) Nature (London)341, 485– 95. Georgopapadakou, N. H., and Walsh, T. J.
24. Jones, W. J., Nagle, D. P., Jr., and Whitman, W. 486 (1994)Science264, 371–373
B. (1987) Microbiol. Rev.51, 135–177 57. Satir, P. (1961) Sci. Am.204(Feb), 108–116 96. Sternberg, S. (1994) Science266, 1632–1634
25. Woese, C. R. (1987) Microbiol. Rev.51, 221–271 58. Lazarides, E. (1980) Nature (London)283, 244– 97. Davis, R. H., and DeSerres, F. J. (1970) Meth.
26. Sogin, M. L., Gunderson, J. H., Elwood, H. J., 256 Enzymol.17A, 79–148
Alonso, R. A., and Peattie, D. A. (1989) Science 59. Amos, L. A., and Amos, W. B. (1991) Molecules 98. Botstein, D., and Fink, G. R. (1988) Science240,
243, 75–77 of the Cytoskeleton, Guilford, New York 1439–1443
27. Garrett, R. A., Dalgaard, J., Larson, N., Kjems, 60. Iwabe, N., Kuma, K., Hasegawa, M., Osawa, 99. Pringle, J. R., Broach, J. R., and Jones, E. W.,
J., and Mankin, A. S. (1991) Trends Biochem. S., and Miyata, T. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. eds. (1991–1994)The Molecular and Cellular
Sci.16, 22–26 U.S.A.86, 9355–9359 Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces, Cold
28. Searcy, D. G. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 61. Lake, J. A. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 46–50 Springs Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold
183–185 Spring Harbor, New York (3 Vols.)

--- Page 39 ---

35
References
100. Wheals, A. E., Rose, A. H., and Harrison, S. J., 135. Maddy, A. H. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17,
eds. (1995) The Yeasts, 2nd ed., Vol. 6, 125–126
Academic Press, San Diego, California 135a.Harris, J. R., ed. (1991) Blood Cell Biochemistry,
101. Gimeno, C. J., Ljungdahl, P. O., Styles, C. A., Plenum, New York (Three volumes)
and Fink, G. R. (1992) Cell68, 1077–1090 136. Johnston, R. B., Jr. (1988) N. Engl. J. Med.318,
102. Oliver, S. G., and 146 other authors (1992) 747–754
Nature (London)357, 38–46 137. Freshney, R. I. (1994) Culture of Animal Cells,
103. Williams, N. (1995) Science268, 1560–1561 3rd ed., Wiley-Liss, New York
104. Ruehle, J. L., and Marx, D. H. (1979) Science 138. Feldman, J., Gilula, N. B., and Pitts, J. D., eds.
206, 419–422 (1978)Intercellular Junctions and Synapses,
105. Canter-Lund, H., and Lund, J. W. G. (1995) Halsted Press, New York
Freshwater Algae: Their Microscopic World 139. Staehelin, L. A., and Hull, B. E. (1978) Sci. Am.
Explored, Biopress, Bristol, England 238(May), 141–153
106. Harris, E. H. (1989) The Chlamydomonas 140. Bradbury, M. (1979) The Concept of a Blood-
Sourcebook, Academic Press, San Diego, Brain Barrier, Wiley, Chichester, New York
California 141. Friend, D. S., and Gilula, N. B. (1972) J. Cell
107. Brachet, J. L. A. (1965) Endeavour24, 155–161 Biol.53, 771
108. Bonotto, S., Kefeli, V., and Puiseux-Dao, S. 142. Gilula, N. B. (1975) Cellular Membranes and
(1979)Developmental Biology of Acetabularia, Tumor Cells, Williams & Wilkins Co.,
Elsevier-North Holland, Amsterdam Baltimore, Maryland (p. 221)
109. Berger, S., and Kaever, M. J. (1992) 143. Gilula, N. B. (1974) in Cell Communication
Dasycladales: An Illustrated Monograph of a (Cox, R. P., ed), pp. 1–29, Wiley, New York
Fascinating Algal Order, Oxford Univ. Press, 144. Gilula, N. B. (1972) Nature (London)235, 262–
New York 265
110. Menzel, D., and Elsner-Menzel, C. (1990) 145. Zimmer, D. B., Green, C. R., Evans, W. H., and
Protoplasm157, 52–63 Gilula, N. B. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 7751–
111. Jaenicke, L. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 61–64 7763
112. Ahmadjian, V. (1962) in Physiology and 146. Hertzberg, E. L., and Johnson, R. G., eds.
Biochemistry of Algae, Vol. 2 (Lewin, R. A., ed), (1988)Gap Junctions, Liss, New York
pp. 817–822, Academic Press, New York 147. Robinson, S. R., Hampson, E. C. G. M.,
113. Morris, S. C. (1993) Nature (London)361, 219– Munro, M. N., and Vaney, D. I. (1993) Science
221 262, 1072–1074
114. Levinton, J. S. (1992) Sci. Am.267(Nov), 84–91 148. Stauffer, P. L., Zhao, H., Luby-Phelps, K.,
115. Keese, P. K., and Gibbs, A. (1992) Proc. Natl. Moss, R. L., Star, R. A., and Muallem, S. (1993)
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 9489–9493 J. Biol. Chem.268, 19769–19775
116. Hickman, C. P. (1973) Biology of the Invertebrates, 149. Veenstra, R. D., and DeHaan, R. L. (1986)
Mosby, St. Louis, Missouri Science233, 272–274
117. Villee, C. A., Walker, W. F., Jr., and Barnes, R. 150. Moscona, A. A. (1961) Sci. Am.205(Sep), 143–
D. (1973) General Zoology, Saunders, 162
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 151. Alberts, B., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M.,
118. Lapan, E. A., and Morowitz, H. (1972) Sci. Am. Roberts, K., and Watson, J. D. (1983) Molecular
227(Dec), 94–101 Biology of the Cell, pp. 679–680, Garland Publ.,
119. Lapan, E. A. (1975) Comp. Biochem. Physiol. New York
52A, 651–657 152. Heaysman, J. E. M. (1978) Intl. Rev. Cytol.55,
120. Bergquist, P. R. (1978) Sponges, Hutchinson, 49–66
London 153. Palca, J. (1989) Science245, 131
121. Grimmelikhuijzen, C. J. P., and Schaller, H. C. 154. Lloyd, A. M., Barnason, A. R., Rogers, S. G.,
(1979)Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 265–267 Byrne, M. C., Fraley, R. T., and Horsch, R. B.
122. Lenhoff, H. M., and Lenhoff, S. G. (1988) Sci. Am. (1986)Science234, 464–466
258(Apr), 108–113 155. Biddulph, S., and Biddulph, O. (1959) Sci. Am.
123. Loomis, W. F. (1959) Sci. Am.200(Apr), 150 200(Feb), 44–49
123a.Hickman, C. P. Integrated Principles of Zoology 156. Bowen, H. J. M. (1966) Trace Elements in
(1966) Mosby, St. Louis Biochemistry, Academic Press, New York
124. Trager, W. (1986) Living Together: The Biology of 157. Fraústo da Silva, J. J. R., and Williams, R. J. P.
Animal Parasitism, Plenum, New York (1991)The Biological Chemistry of the Elements:
125. Cherfas, J. (1991) Science251, 630–631 The Inorganic Chemistry of Life, Clarendon
126. Kolberg, R. (1994) Science264, 1859–1861 Press, Oxford
127. Wood, W. B., ed. (1988) The Nematode 158. Hetzel, B. S. (1994) N. Engl. J. Med.331, 1770–
Caenorhabditis elegans, Cold Spring Harbor 1771
Lab. Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 159. Ling, G. N. (1962) A Physical Theory of the
128. Kenyon, C. (1988) Science240, 1448–1453 Living State, Ginn (Blaisdell), Boston,
129. Roberts, L. (1990) Science248, 1310–1313 Massachusetts
129a.Hotez, P. J., and Pritchard, D. I. (1995) Sci. Am.
272(Jun), 68 – 74
130. Dumont, H. J., and Green, J., eds. (1980)
Rotatoria, p. 42, Junk, The Hague
131. Mill, P. J., ed. (1978) Physiology of Annelids,
Academic Press, New York
132. Florkin, M., and Scheer, B. T., eds. (1970, 1971)
Chemical Zoology, Vol. 5 and 6, Academic
Press, New York
133. Goldstein, L. S. B., and Fyrberg, E. A., eds.
(1994)Drosophila melanogaster: Practical Uses in
Cell and Molecular Biology, Academic Press,
San Diego, California
134. Lawrence, P. (1992) The Making of a Fly: The
Genetics of Animal Design, Blackwell, Oxford
134a.Rubin, G. M., and Lewis, E. B. (2000) Science
287, 2216–2218

--- Page 40 ---

36 Chapter 1. The Scene of Action
Study Questions
1. Describe the principal structural or organizational d.What fraction by volume of a liver cell is
differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic composed of ribosomes, of plasma membrane,
cells. of mitochondria (assume 1000 mitochondria)?
What fraction is accounted for by the nucleus?
2. Describe two or more principal functions of proteins
within cells, one function of DNA, two or more 5. a. What is the molar concentration of an enzyme
functions of RNA, and one function of lipids. of which only one molecule is present in an
E. coli cell?
3. Compare the chemical makeup of ribosomes, of
cell membranes, and of bacterial flagella. b.Assume that the concentration of K+ within an
E. coli cell is 150 mM. Calculate the number of
4. Assume the following dimensions: Mycoplasma, K+ ions in a single cell.
sphere, 0.33 µm diameter; E. coli, cylinder, 0.8 µm
diameter x 2 µm; liver cell, sphere 20 µm; root hair, c. If the pH inside the cell is 7.0, how many H+
cylinder, 10 µm diameter x 1 mm. ions are present?
a. Calculate for each cell the total volume, the 6. If chromosomes (and chromatin) are 15% DNA,
mass in grams and in daltons (assume a specific what will be the mass of 23 pairs of chromosomes
gravity of 1.0). in a human diploid cell? If the nucleus has a
diameter of 5 mm and a density of 1.1 g/cm3, what
b.Assume that bacterial ribosomes are approxi- fraction by weight of the nucleus is chromatin?
mately spherical with a diameter of 23 nm.
What is their volume? If the mass of a bacterial 7. Compare the surface to volume ratios for an E. coli
ribosome is 2.7 x 106 daltons, what is its appar- cell, a liver cell, the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell, a
ent density (divide mass by volume)? Experi- root hair. If a cell of 20 µm diameter is 20%
mentally the buoyant density of bacterial covered with microvilli of 0.1 µm diameter and 1
ribosomes in a cesium chloride gradient µm length centered on a 0.2 µm spacing, how
(Chapter 5) is about 1.6 g/cm3. How can this much will the surface/volume ratio be increased?
difference be explained? If eukaryotic ribo-
somes are 1.17 times larger than bacterial 8. It has been shown that the code for specifying a
ribosomes in linear dimensions, what is the particular amino acid in a protein is determined
volume of a eukaryotic ribosome? by a sequence of three nucleotides (a codon) in a
DNA chain. There are four different kinds of
c. What fraction of volume of E. coli consists of cell nucleotide units in DNA. How many different
wall, of plasma membrane, of ribosomes (assume codons exist? Note that this is larger than the
15,000 are present)? If a cell of E. coli is 80% number of different amino acids (20) that are
water, what fraction by weight of the total solids incorporated into proteins plus the three stop
consists of ribosomes? Of DNA (assuming 2 (termination) codons (see Tables 5-5 and 5-6 for a
chromosomes per cell)? list of codons).

--- Page 41 ---

37
Study Questions
9. State two similarities and two differences between
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) and green algae.
10. Compare the sizes and structures of bacterial and
eukaryotic flagella.
11. How much larger in volume is a typical eukaryotic
cell compared to a bacterium?
12. Compare the structure and properties of mito-
chondria, chloroplasts, and peroxisomes.
13. What are the possible origins of mitochondria and
chloroplasts? What evidence can you cite to
support your answer?
14. How many different kinds of polymers, e.g.
proteins, RNA, that are present in or around living
cells, can you name? Can you name some sub-
groups in any of your categories?
15. Compare the composition of these three, especially
with respect to C, H, O, N, S, P, Fe, Cu, Al, and Si:
a. The earth’s crust
b. Ocean water
c. Cytoplasm

--- Page 42 ---

38 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
A spider’s orb-web is formed by extrusion of a concen-
trated protein solution and stretching of the resulting
fiber. The cross-strands, which are stronger than steel,
resemble silkworm silk. The molecules contain micro-
crystallineβ sheet domains that are rich in Gly-Ala repeats
as well as polyalanine segments. The capture spiral is
formed from much more elastic molecules that contain
manyβ-turn-forming sequences. These assume a spring-
likeβ spiral. See Box 2-B.
© John Gerlach/DRK PHOTO
Contents
39 A. Structural Principles for Small Molecules 81 G. Dynamic Properties of Proteins
39 1. Bond Angles 81 1. Motion of Backbone and Side Chains
40 2. Bond Lengths 81 2. Conformational Changes
40 3. Contact Distances 82 3. Denaturation and Refolding
41 4. Asymmetry: Right-Handed and Left-Handed 83 4. Effects of pH and Solvent
Molecules 84 5. Irreversible Damage to Proteins
42 TheD- and L- families of amino acids 85 H. Design and Engineering of Proteins
42 The RS notation for configuration
43 Diastereoisomers 86 References
43 Geometrical isomers 91 Study Questions
43 5. Conformations: The Shapes that Molecules can
Assume
45 6. Tautomerism and Resonance Boxes
46 B. Forces between Molecules and between 58 Box 2-A Proteins of Blood Plasma
Chemical Groups 67 Box 2-B Silks
46 1. Van der Waals Forces 83 Box 2-C The Nobel Prizes
47 2. Attraction between Charged Groups
(Salt Linkages) Tables
47 3. Hydrogen Bonds 41 Table 2-1 The Sizes of Some Atoms
49 4. The Structure and Properties of Water 52 Table 2-2 Structure and Chemical Properties
50 5. Hydration of PolarMolecules and Ions of Side Chain Groups of Amino Acids
50 6. Hydrophobic Interactions 61 Table 2-3 Approximate Torsion Angles for Some
51 C. Amino Acids and Peptides Regular Peptide Structures
51 1. Properties of α-Amino Acids 78 Table 2-4 Classification of Protein Residues
55 2. Acidic and Basic Side Chains According to Their Tendencies to
55 3. The Peptide Unit Formα Helix, β Structure, and
56 4. Polypeptides β Turns
59 D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins
59 1. Conformations of Polypeptide Chains
61 2. The Extended Chain β Structures
62 Pleated sheets
63 Twisted sheets
64 Properties of β sheets
65 Cylinders and barrels
67 Beta propellers
68 3. Helices
69 Properties of helices
70 Stacking of helices in proteins
70 Coiled coils
71 Helix bundles
72 4. Polyglycine II and Collagen
72 5. Turns and Bends
74 6. Domains, Subunits, and Interfaces
75 7. Packing of Side Chains
75 8. The Network of Internal Hydrogen Bonds
76 E. Folding Patterns and Protein Families
76 1. Complex Folding Patterns
77 2. Symmetry
78 3. Effects of Sequence on Folding
79 F. Chemical Modification and Crosslinking
80 1. Disulfide Crosslinkages
80 2. Other Crosslinkages

--- Page 43 ---

39
2
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
Thousands of different proteins make up a very
A. Structural Principles for Small Molecules
large fraction of the “machinery” of a cell. Protein
molecules catalyze chemical reactions, carry smaller
Stable organic molecules are held together by
molecules through membranes, sense the presence of
covalent bonds which are usually very strong. The
hormones, and cause muscle fibers to move. Proteins standard Gibbs energies of formation (∆G°)† of many
f
serve as structural materials within cells and between
covalent single bonds are of the order of –400 kJ/mol
cells. Proteins of blood transport oxygen to the tissues,
(96 kcal/mol). The bonds have definite directions,
carry hormones between cells, attack invading bacteria,
which are measured by bond angles and definite
and serve in many other ways. No matter what bio-
bond lengths.
logical process we consider, we find that a group of
special proteins is required.
The amino acid units that make up a protein mole-
1. Bond Angles
cule are joined together in a precise sequence when the
protein is made on a ribosome. The chain is then folded,
Because of the tetrahedral arrangement of the four
often into a very compact form. Sometimes the chain
bonds around single-bonded carbon atoms and most
is then cut in specific places. Pieces may be discarded
phosphorus atoms, all six of the bond angles about the
and parts may be added. A metal ion, a coenzyme
central atom have nearly the same tetrahedral angle of
derived from a vitamin, or even a single methyl group 109.5°.
may be attached to form the biologically active protein.
The final product is a complex and sophisticated O 3–
machine, often with moving parts, that is exquisitely O
C O P
designed for its particular role.
The biological functioning of a protein is determined 109.5° O Phosphate ion
both by the properties of the chemical groups in the
amino acids that are joined to form the protein chain and
Bond angles within chains of carbon atoms in organic
by the way the chain is folded. The ways in which the
compounds vary only slightly from this, and even
different parts of the protein interact with each other
atoms that are attached to fewer than four groups
and with other molecules are equally important. These
usually have similar angles; for example, the H–O–H
interactions play a major role in determining the folding angle in a water molecule is 105°, and the H–N–H
pattern and also provide much of the basis for the bio- angles of ammonia are 107°. In ethers the C–O–C
logical functioning of proteins. Similar considerations angle is 111°. However, bond angles of only 101° are
apply also to carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and other bio- present in H O and of 92° in H S and PH .
2 2 2 3
polymers. For these reasons it is appropriate to review
some fundamentals of molecular structure and geometry.
†See Chapter 6 for a review of thermodynamics

--- Page 44 ---

40 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
The presence of double bonds leads to planarity O O
and to compounds with bond angles of 120°, the inter- COOH ≡ C CONHR ≡ C
nal angle in a hexagon. The planar geometry imposed
OH N R
upon an atom by a double bond is often transmitted
to an adjacent nitrogen or oxygen atom as a result of CH3 H
H
resonance (Section 6). For example, the amide groups ≡ C
that form the peptide linkage in proteins (see Fig. 2-5)
are nearly planar and the angles all fall within four
CH3 H
degrees of 120°.
≡
C CH2
C CH3
O
H
2. Bond Lengths P ≡ P OH = phospho group
Chemists describe bond lengths as the distances O–
between the nuclei of bonded atoms. The C–C single
bond has a length of 0.154 nm (1.54 Å). The C–O
bond is ∼0.01 nm shorter (0.143 nm), and the typical 3. Contact Distances
C–H bond has a length of ∼0.109 nm. The C–N bond
Covalent bond distances and angles tell us how
distance is halfway between that for C–C and C–O
the atomic nuclei are arranged in space but they do not
(0.149 nm). Other lengths, such as that of O–H, can be
tell us anything about the outside surfaces of mole-
estimated from the covalent radii given in Table 2-1.
cules. The distance from the center of an atom to the
The length of a double bond between any two
point at which it contacts an adjacent atom in a packed
atoms (e.g., C=C) is almost exactly 0.020 nm less than
structure such as a crystal (Fig. 2-1) is known as the
that for a single bond between the same atoms. If
vander Waals radius. The ways in which biological
there is resonance, hence only partial double bond
molecules fit together are determined largely by the
character, the shortening is less. For example, the
van der Waals contact radii. These, too, are listed in
length of the C–C bond in benzene is 0.140 nm; the
Table 2-1. In every case they are approximately equal
C–O distances in the carboxylate anion are 0.126 nm.
to the covalent radius plus 0.08 nm. Van der Waals radii
O O
C ≡ C – H H H
C O a – rboxylate ion O H O O H H H H H H H H H H O H H O H H H H H H H H H H O O H
H
Using simple geometry, it is easy to calculate
overall lengths of molecules; here are two distances
worth remembering:
C
C C
0.254 0.31 nm
nm
Distance between Distance across
alternate C atoms in fully a benzene ring
extended hydrocarbon chain Hydrogen Oxygen Carbon
In the preceding simplified structural formula for
Figure 2-1 Packing of molecules of suberic acid HOOC–
benzene the six hydrogen atoms have been omitted.
(CH ) –COOH in a crystal lattice as determined by neutron
2 6
Resonance between the two possible arrangements diffraction.2 Notice the pairs of hydrogen bonds that join the
of the three double bonds1 is indicated by the circle. carboxyl groups at the ends of the molecules and also the
Chemical shorthand of the following type is used close contact of hydrogen atoms between the chains. Only
throughout the book. Carbon atoms may be represented the positions of the hydrogen nuclei were determined; the
by an angle or the end of a line, but other atoms will van der Waals radii have been drawn around them. How-
ever, the radii were originally determined from X-ray and
always be shown.
neutron diffraction data obtained from many different
crystalline compounds.

--- Page 45 ---

A. Structural Principles for Small Molecules 41
are not as constant as covalent radii because atoms can explain in words how a right and a left hand differ.
be“squeezed” a little, but only enough to decrease However, since most biochemical compounds are
the contact radii by 0.005–0.01 nm. The radii of space- asymmetric,3 it is important to be able to visualize
filling molecular models are usually made a little these molecules in three dimensions and to draw their
smaller than the actual scaled van der Waals radii to structures on paper. One of the best ways of learning
permit easier assembly. to do this is to study molecular models. You may
learn the most by making your own models (see
Appendix).
4. Asymmetry: Right-Handed and Left- Whenever four different groups are bonded to a
Handed Molecules central carbon atom, the molecule is asymmetric and
the four groups can be arranged in two different
The left hand looks much like the right hand, but configurations. Consider alanine, one of the alpha
they are different. One is the mirror image of the other. (α)-amino acids from which proteins are built.
A practical difference is that your right hand will not
fit into a left-handed glove. Despite our daily acquain-
N C
tance with “handedness” it may seem difficult to
COO– α−Alanine
2(α) According to the O
H3 +N C H Fisher projection
formula it is
TABLE 2-1 3(β)CH3 L-alanine. H
The Sizes of Some Atomsa–c
van der Waals radii (nm)d It is called an α-amino acid because the amino group
Covalent a b is attached to the α (or number 2) carbon atom. To
radius Sideways Polar indicate its three-dimensional structure on a flat piece
Element (nm)a,b,d
contactc contactc
of paper, the bonds that project out of the plane of the
paper and up toward the reader are often drawn as
H 0.030 0.12
elongated triangles, while bonds that lie behind the
F 0.064 0.138 0.130
plane of the paper are shown as dashed lines. The
C 0.077 0.16 isomer of alanine having the configuration about
N 0.070 0.160 0.160 theα-carbon atom shown in the following structural
O 0.066 0.154 0.154 formulas is called S-alanine or L-alanine. The isomer
Cl 0.099 0.178 0.158 which is a mirror image of S-alanine is R-alanine or
Si 0.117
D-alanine. Pairs of R and S compounds (see Section B
for definitions) are known as enantiomorphic forms
P 0.110 0.19
orenantiomers.
S 0.104 0.203 0.160
Br 0.114 0.184 0.154
I 0.133 0.213 0.176 H CH3 H3C COO–
Se 0.215 0.170 C ≡ C
“Radius” of 0.20 H3N+ C O H3N+ H
methyl group
O–
Half-thickness of 0.170
aromatic molecules COO– CH3
a From Pauling, L. (1960) The Nature of the Chemical Bond, 3rd ed., H3 +N C H ≡ H3 +N C COO–
Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca, New York (pp. 224–227 and 260).
b Covalent radii for two atoms can be summed to give the inter- CH3 H
atomic distance. The van der Waals radii determine how closely S-Alanine (L-Alanine)
molecules can pack. The closest observed contacts between atoms
in macromolecules are approximately 0.02 nm less than the sum
of the van der Waals radii. From Sasisekharian, V., Lakshminara-
Notice that in the foregoing drawings, the carboxyl
yanan, A. V., and Ramachandran, G. N. (1967) in Conformation of
Biopolymers, Vol. 2 (Ramachandran, G. N., ed), Academic Press, group ( C O ), abbreviated –COOH, is shown as
New York, (p. 641) OH
c Nyburg, S. C and Faerman, C. H. (1985) Acta Crystal.B41, 274 – 279 havinglost a proton to form the carboxylate ion –COO–.
Shapes of many atomic surfaces are elliptical. The major radius Likewise, the amino group (–NH ) has gained a proton
a applies to sideways contacts and the minor radius b to “polar” 2
to form the –NH + ion. The resulting dipolar ionic or
contacts along a covalent bond axis. Distances are for atoms singly 3
bonded to C and may differ slightly if bonds are to other atoms. zwitterionic structure is the one that actually exists
d For distances in Å multiply by 10. for amino acids both in solution and in crystals.

--- Page 46 ---

42 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
The D- and L- families of amino acids. The lower. In the following illustration, the priorities of the
amino acids of which proteins are composed are related groups in D-alanine are indicated by the letters a > b >
toL-alanine but have various side chains (R groups) in c > d. The highest priority (a) is assigned to the NH
2
place of the methyl group of alanine. In the preceding groups which contain nitrogen bonded to the central
section the structure of L-alanine was given in four atom. To establish the configuration, the observer
different ways. To recognize them all as the same views the molecule down the axis connecting the
structure, we can turn them in space to an orientation central atom to the group having the lowest priority,
in which the carboxyl group is at the top, the side i.e., to group d. Viewed in this way, the sequence of
chain (–CH ) is down, and both project behind the groups a,b, and c can either be that of a right-handed
3
paper. The amino group and hydrogen atom will then turn (clockwise) as shown in the drawing or that of a
project upward from the paper at the sides as shown left-handed turn (counterclockwise).
below. According to a convention introduced at the
beginning of this century by Emil Fischer, an amino acid
COOH b
d
isL if, when oriented in this manner, the amino group lies to a b
NH a
the left and D if it lies to the right. d H 2 observer
CH c c
3
R-Alanine (d-Alanine)
COO– COO–
The view down the axis and toward the group of lowest priority (d),
H3 +N C H H C NH3 +
which lies behind the page. The right-handed turn indicates the
configuration R (rectus = right); the opposite configuration is S
R R
(sinister = left).
L-Amino acid D-Amino acid
To establish the priority sequence of groups first
Fischer further proposed that the amino acid in this look at the atoms that are bonded directly to the central
orientation could be projected onto the paper and atom, arranging them in order of decreasing atomic
drawn with ordinary lines for all the bonds. This gives number. Then if necessary, move outward to the next
the previously shown Fischer projection formula of set of atoms, again comparing atomic numbers. In the
L-alanine. case of alanine, groups b and c must be ordered in this
Although the D and L system of designating configu- way because they both contain carbon directly bonded
ration is old it is still widely used. Remember that D and to the central atom. When double bonds are present at
L refer to the absolute configurations about a selected one of the atoms being examined, e.g., the carboxyl
reference atom in the molecule; for an amino acid this group in alanine, imagine that phantom atoms that
is the number 2 or α-carbon. A quantity that is related replicate the real ones are present at the ends of the
to the asymmetry of molecules is the experimentally bonds:
measurableoptical rotation (Chapter 23). The sign of phantom atoms
the optical rotation (+ or –) is sometimes given together O (O) O (C)
with the name of a compound, e.g., D(+)-glucose. The C C
older designations d (dextro) and l (levo) indicated +
OH OH
and–, respectively. However, compounds with the D
configuration may have either + or – optical rotation. These phantom atoms fill out the valences of the atoms
In older literature optical isomerism of the type involved in the multiple bonds and are considered to
represented by D and L pairs was usually discussed in have zero atomic number and zero mass. They are not
terms of “asymmetric carbon atoms” or “asymmetric considered in establishing priorities.
centers.” Now the terms chiral (pronounced ki-ral) If the first rule and the expansion of multiple
molecules, chiral centers, and chirality (Greek: bonds are not sufficient to establish the priority, use
“handedness”) are preferred. these additional rules: (2) Higher atomic mass precedes
lower. (3) When a double bond is present Z precedes
The RS notation for configuration. This nota- E (see Geometrical isomers). For ring systems a cis
tion, devised by Cahn, Ingold, and Prelog, provides an arrangement of the highest priority substituents pre-
unambiguous way of specifying configuration at any cedestrans. (4) When a pair of chiral centers is present
chiral center.4,5 It is especially useful for classes of R,R or S,S precedes R,S or S,R. (5) An R chiral center
compounds for which no well-established DL system precedes S. For further details see Eliel et al.5 and Bentley.6
is available. The groups or atoms surrounding the The following groups are ordered in terms of decreas-
central carbon atom, or other central atom, are ranked ing priority6: SH > OR > OH > NH–COCH > NH >
3 2
according to a prioritysequence. The priority of a COOR > COOH > CHO > CH OH > C H > CH >
2 6 5 3
group is determined by a number of sequence rules, 3H > 2H > H.
the first of which is (1) Higher atomic number precedes Although the RS system is unambiguous, closely

--- Page 47 ---

A. Structural Principles for Small Molecules 43
related compounds that belong to the same configura- Configurations of amide or ester linkages may also
tional family in the DL system may have opposite con- be specified in this manner. This is possible because
figurations in the RS system. Thus, L-cysteine (side the C–N bond of an amide has partial double-bond
chain–CH SH) has the R configuration. This is one of character, as to a lesser extent does the C–O bond to
2
the reasons that the DL system is still used for amino the bridge oxygen in an ester. In this case, assign the
acids and sugars. lowest priority to the unshared electron pair on the
ester bridge oxygen.
Diastereoisomers. Whereas compounds with
one chiral center exist as an enantiomorphic pair,
bC Oa bC Oa bC Oa
molecules with two or more chiral centers also exist as
C C C
diastereoisomers (diastereomers). These are pairs of
isomers with an opposite configuration at one or more N N O
of the chiral centers, but which are not complete mirror
b'H Ca' a'C Hb' a'C b'
images of each other. An example is L-threonine which Zor trans E or cis
has the 2S, 3R configuration. The diastereoisomer with
the 2S, 3S configuration is known as L-allo-threonine. An amide of the Z configuration is ordinarily referred to
L-isoleucine, whose side chain is –CH(CH
3
) CH
2
CH
3
, astrans in protein chemistry because the main chain
has the 2S, 3R configuration. It can be called 2(S)- atoms are trans.
amino-3(R)-methyl-valeric acid but the simpler name
L-isoleucine implies the correct configuration at both
chiral centers. 5. Conformations: The Shapes That Molecules
Sometimes the subscript s or g is added to a D or L Can Assume
prefix to indicate whether the chirality of a compound
is being related to that of serine, the traditional config- As important to biochemists as configurations, the
urational standard for amino acids, or to that of gly- stable arrangements of bonded atoms, are conforma-
ceraldehyde. In the latter case the sugar convention tions, the various orientations of groups that are caused
(Chapter 4) is followed. In this convention the config- by rotation about single bonds.5,8 In many molecules
urations of the chiral centers furthest from C1 are such rotation occurs rapidly and freely at ordinary
compared. Ordinary threonine is Ls - or Dg -threonine. temperatures. We can think of a –CH 3 group as a kind
The configuration of dextrorotatory (+)-tartaric acid of erratic windmill, turning in one direction, then
can be described as 2R, 3R, or as Ds , or as Lg . another. However, even the simplest molecules have
preferredconformations, and in more complex structures
COOH rotation is usually very restricted.
Consider a molecule in which groups A and B are
HCOH
joined by two CH (methylene) groups. If A and B are
2
HOCH
pulled as far apart as possible, the molecule is in its
COOH fully extended anti or staggered conformation:
2R, 3R-tartaric acid
Biochemical reactions are usually stereospecific H H A H H
and a given enzyme will catalyze reactions of mole- C
A
cules of only a single configuration. A related fact is
B H H B
that proteins ordinarily consist entirely of amino acids
C
of the L series.
H H
A
Geometrical isomers. The RS system also gives
H H
The antiperiplanar
an unambiguous designation of geometrical isomers
conformation
containing a double bond.5,7 At each end of the bond, H H
B
select the group of highest priority. If these two groups
lie on the same side of the double bond the configuration View down the axis joining the
C atoms (Newton projection)
isZ (from the German zusammen,“together”); if on
opposite sides E (entgegen,“opposite”).
Groups A and B are said to be antiperiplanar (ap) in
b a b a this conformation. Not only are A and B as far apart as
C C a and a' higher
possible but also all of the hydrogen atoms are at their
priority than
C C b or b' maximum distances one from the other. This can be
b' a' a' b' seen by viewing the molecule down the axis joining
Z E

--- Page 48 ---

44 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
the carbon atoms (Newman projection). Rotation of minimizing steric interference between the OH groups
the second carbon atom 180° around the single bond on the second and fourth carbons.
yields the eclipsed conformation in which groups A
and B are synperiplanar.
H
H OH H OH
(B) 5
A B A H 4
1 2 3 H
OH
H
H H OH HO H
H H H H
Ribitol in sickle conformation
Eclipsed or synperiplanar conformation
If A and B are large bulky groups they will bump The complete series of possible conformations is shown
together, attainment of the eclipsed conformation will in Fig. 2-2.
be almost impossible, and rotation will be severely
restricted. Even if A and B are hydrogen atoms (ethane),
there will be a rotational barrier in the eclipsed con-
synperiplanar (sp)
formation which amounts to ∼12 kJ (3 kcal) per mole
because of the crowding of the hydrogen atoms as
they pass each other.5,9 This can be appreciated readily A φ
by examination of space-filling molecular models.
30° B
If groups A and B are methyl groups (butane), the
–sp +sp
steric hindrance between A and B leads to a rotational synclinal synclinal
barrier of ∼25 kJ ( 6 kcal) per mole. The consequence –sc(g–) –sc(g–) +sc(g+) ( + g s a c u ( c g h + e ) )
of this simple fact is that in fatty acids and related
substances and in polyethylene the chains of CH –90 90°
2
groups tend to assume fully extended zigzag confor-
–a +ac
mations.
anticlinal anticlinal
In addition to this extended conformation there –a +ap
–ac +ac
are two gauche (skewed or synclinal) conformations
which are only slightly less stable than the staggered
conformation and in which A and B interfere only if antiperiplanar (trans)
ap (t)
they are very bulky. In one of the twogauche confor-
mations B lies to the right of A and in the other to the
left of A when viewed down the axis.
Figure 2-2 Description of conformations about a single
bond in the terminology of Klyne and Prelog10,11 using the
φ Newman projection. Group A is on the front atom at the top:
A H B A the conformation is given for each possible position of group
H B B on the other atom.
H H
H H H
H
One of the two gauche or synclinal conformations
In the chain of methylene units, the hydrogen
These two conformations are related to right-handed atoms on alternate carbon atoms of the fully extended
and left-handed screws, respectively. The threads on chain barely touch (Fig. 2-1) but larger atoms cannot
an ordinary right-handed household screw, when be accommodated. Thus, when fluorine atoms of van
viewed down the axis from either end, move back- der Waals radius 0.135 nm replace the hydrogen atoms
ward from left to right in the same fashion as do the of radius 0.12 nm, a fully extended chain is no longer
groups A and B in the illustration. The angle φ is the possible. For this reason the torsion angle in polyfluo-
torsion angle and is positive for right-handed con- roethylene is changed from the 180° of polyethylene to
formations. Gauche conformations are important in 166°, enough to relieve the congestion but not enough
many biological molecules; for example, the sugar to cause severe eclipsing of the fluorines on adjacent
alcoholribitol stacks in crystals in a “sickle” confor- carbons. The resulting helical structure is reminis-
mation,6 in which the chain starts out (at the left) in cent of those occurring in proteins and other biopoly-
the zigzag arrangement but shifts to a gauche con- mers. We see that helix formation can be a natural
formation around the fourth carbon atom, thereby result of steric hindrance between groups of atoms.

--- Page 49 ---

A. Structural Principles for Small Molecules 45
chain O OH
H H torsion F F torsion H
angle, angle, N N
H H 180° F F 166°
O N O N
Polyethylene Polyfluoroethylene (Teflon) H
A H B
O OH
Conformations of ring-containing molecules are dealt
with in Chapter 4. N N
HO N HO N
6. Tautomerism and Resonance
C H D (2-4)
Many simple organic compounds exist as mix-
tures of two or more rapidly interconvertible isomers CH2OH CH2OH
ortautomeric forms. Tautomers can sometimes be
separated one from the other at low temperatures
HO CH2OH –O CH2OH
where the rate of interconversion is low. The classic
example is the oxo-enol (or keto-enol) equilibrium
(Eq. 2-1).
H3C N H3C N
H+
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
O OH A B (2-5)
H H
R C C R' R C C R'
H
The tautomerism in Eq. 2-2 is the counterpart of
Oxo form Enol (2-1)
that in the oxo-enol transformation. However, the
equilibrium constant for aqueous conditions favors
Although usually less stable than the oxo (keto) form, form A very strongly. 2-Pyridone is tautomerized to
the enol is present in a small amount. It is formed 2-hydroxypyridine (Eq. 2-3) to a greater extent. Pyri-
readily from the oxo tautomer by virtue of the fact that midines (Eq. 2-4) and purines can form a variety of
hydrogen atoms attached to carbon atoms that are tautomers. The existence of form D of Eq. 2-4 is the
immediately adjacent to carbonyl (C=O) groups are basis for referring to uracil as dihydroxypyrimidine.
remarkably acidic. Easy dissociation of a proton is a However, the di-oxo tautomer A predominates. Pyri-
prerequisite for tautomerism. Since most hydrogen doxine (vitamin B ) exists in water largely as the di-
6
atoms bound to carbon atoms do not dissociate readily, polar ionic tautomer B (Eq. 2-5) but in methanol as
tautomerism is unusual unless a carbonyl or other the uncharged tautomer A. In a pair of tautomers,
“activating group” is present. a hydrogen atom always moves from one position to
Since protons bound to oxygen and nitrogen another and the lengths and bond character of these
atoms usually do dissociate readily, tautomerism also bonds also change.
exists in amides and in ring systems containing O and The equilibrium constant for a tautomeric inter-
N (Eqs. 2-2 to 2-5). conversion is simply the ratio of the mole fractions
of the two forms; for example, the ratio of enol to oxo
forms of acetone12 in water at 25°C is 6.0 x 10–9, while
O O H that for isobutyraldehyde is 1.3 x 10–4. The ratio of
2-hydroxypyridine to 2-pyridone is about 10–3 in water
R N C R' R N C R'
H but increases to 0.6 in a hydrocarbon solvent and to
A B (2-2) 2.5 in the vapor phase.13,14 The ratio of dipolar ion to
uncharged pyridoxine (Eq. 2-5) is ∼4 at 25°C in water.15
The ratios of tautomers B, C, and D to the tautomer A of
uracil (Eq. 2-4) are small, but it is difficult to measure
them quantitatively.16 These tautomeric ratios are
N O N OH defined for given overall states of protonation (see
H Eq. 6-82). The constants are independent of pH but
2-Pyridone 2-Hydroxypyridine (2-3) will change if the overall state of protonation of the
molecule is changed. They may also be altered by

--- Page 50 ---

46 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
σ
changes in temperature or solvent or by binding to a N has sometimes also been called N3, it is best not to
protein or other molecule. use the numerical designations for the nitrogen atoms.
It is important to distinguish tautomerism from The tautomeric ratio of B to A for histidine in
resonance, a term used to indicate that the properties water (Eq. 2-6) has been estimated, using 15N- and
of a given molecule cannot be represented by a single 13C-NMR, as 5.0 when the α-amino group is proto-
valence structure but can be represented as a hybrid of nated and as 2.5 when at high pH it is unprotonated.17
two or more structures in which all the nuclei remain This tautomerism of the imidazole group is probably
in the same places. Only bonding electrons move to important to the function of many enzymes and other
ε
convert one resonance form into another. Examples proteins; for example, if N of structure A (Eq. 2-6) is
are the enolate anion, which can be thought of as a embedded in a protein, a proton approaching from
hybrid of structures A and B, and the amide linkage, the outside can induce the tautomerism shown with
which can be represented by a similar pair of resonance the release of a proton in the interior of the protein,
forms. perhaps at the active site of an enzyme. The form
δ
protonated on N (B of Eq. 2-6), which is the minor
form in solution, predominates in some positions
O O– within proteins.18
H H
R C C R' R C C R'
–
A B
B. Forces between Molecules and between
Enolate anion
Chemical Groups
A double-headed arrow is often used to indicate that The structure of living cells depends very much
two structures drawn are resonance structures rather on the covalent bonds within individual molecules
than tautomers or other separable isomers. and on covalent crosslinks that sometimes form
Although they are distinctly different, tautomer- between molecules. However, weaker forces acting
ism and resonance are related. Thus, the acidity of between molecules and between different parts of the
carbon-bound hydrogens in ketones, which allows same molecule are responsible for many of the most
formation of enol tautomers, results from the fact that important properties of biochemical substances. These
the enolate anion produced by dissociation of one of are described as van der Waals forces, electrostatic
these hydrogens is stabilized by resonance. Similarly, forces,hydrogen bonds, and hydrophobic interac-
tautomerism in the imidazole group of the amino acid tions. In the discussion that follows the thermody-
histidine is related to resonance in the imidazolium namic quantities ∆H,∆S, and ∆G will be used. If
cation. Because of this resonance, if a proton approaches necessary, please see Chapter 6 for definitions and
structure A of Eq. 2-6 and becomes attached to the left- a brief review.
δ
hand nitrogen atom (N ), the positive charge in the
resulting intermediate is distributed over both nitrogen
ε
atoms. This makes the proton on N acidic, permitting 1. Van der Waals Forces
it to dissociate to tautomer B.
All atoms have a weak tendency to stick together,
and because of this even helium liquifies at a low
δ ε enough temperature. This is a result of the van der
H+ N NH +HN NH HN N+H Waals or “London dispersion forces” which act strongly
only at a very short distance. These forces arise from
4 electrostatic attraction between the positively charged
A Imidazolium cation nucleus of one atom and the negatively charged electrons
Imizadole of the other.19–21 Because nuclei are screened by the
group
electron clouds surrounding them, the force is weak.
The energy (enthalpy) of binding of one methylene
HN N + H+ (–CH –) unit into a monomolecular layer of a fatty
2
acid is about –∆H°= 1.7 kJ/mol.22 Although this is
a small quantity, when summed over the 16 or more
B (2-6) carbon atoms of a typical fatty acid the binding energy
is substantial. When a methylene group is completely
surrounded in a crystalline hydrocarbon, its van der
Note: The nitrogen atom designated N δ (or ND1)11 in Waals energy, as estimated from the heat of sublimation,
π
Eq. 2-6 may also be called N1 or N (pros-N). Likewise, is 8.4 kJ/mol; that of H O in liquid water at the melt-
2
N ε (NE2) may be designated N3 or N τ (tele- N). Since ing point of ice is 15 kJ/mol.22

--- Page 51 ---

B. Forces Between Molecules and Between Chemical Groups 47
While van der Waals forces between individual dielectric constant is usually as high as 30–60.24 For
atoms act over very short distances, they can be felt closely spaced charges in hydrophobic niches it may be
at surprisingly great distances when exerted by large as low as 2–4.25–27
molecules or molecular aggregates.23 Forces between A calculation that is often made is the work required
very smooth surfaces have been measured experimen- to remove completely two charges from a given distance
tally at distances as great as 10 nm and even to 300 apart (e.g., 0.40 nm) to an infinite distance (Eq. 2-8).
nm.23a However, these “long-range van der Waals
forces” probably depend upon layers of oriented qq'
water molecules on the plates23 (see also Section 5). W(kJ mol-1) = 8.9875 × 106× rε N
138.9
=
εr(in nm) (2-8)
2. Attraction between Charged Groups
(Salt Linkages)
Ifε = 2, this amounts to 174 kJ/mol for single charges
Fixed positive and negative charges attract each at a distance of 0.40 nm; 69 kJ/mol at 1 nm; and only
other strongly. Consider a carboxylate ion in contact 6.9 kJ/mol at 10 nm, the distance across a cell mem-
with–NH + or with an ion of calcium: brane. We see that very large forces exist between
3
closely spaced charges.
Electrostatic forces are of great significance in
O H O interactions between molecules and in the induction of
C – + N C Ca2+ changes in conformations of molecules. For example,
O H H O– attraction between –COO– and –NH 3 + groups occurs
in interactions between proteins. Calcium ions often
interact with carboxylate groups, the doubly charged
~0.25 nm ~0.24 nm
Ca2+ bridging between two carboxylate or other polar
groups. This occurs in carbohydrates such as agarose,
From the van der Waals radii of Table 2-1 and the ionic converting solutions of these molecules into rigid gels
crystal radius of Ca2+ of 0.10 nm, we can estimate an (Chapter 4).
approximate distance between the centers of positive Individual macromolecules as well as cell surfaces
and negative charge of 0.25 nm in both cases. It is of usually carry a net negative charge at neutral pH. This
interest to apply Coulomb’s law to compute the force causes the surfaces to repel each other. However, at a
F between two charged particles which are almost in certain distance of separation the van der Waals attrac-
contact. Let us choose a distance of 0.40 nm (4.0 Å) tive forces will balance the electrostatic repulsion.21
and apply Eq. 2-7. Protruding hydrophobic groups may then interact and
may“tether” bacteria or other particles at a fixed distance,
qq' often ~5 nm, from a cell surface.28
F = 8.9875 × 109× newtons
r2ε
(2-7)
3. Hydrogen Bonds
In this equation r is the distance in meters, q and q’
are the charges in coulombs (one electronic charge = One of the most important weak interactions
1.6021 x 10–19 coulombs), ε is the dielectric constant, between biologically important molecules is the hydro-
andF is the force in newtons (N). The force per mole gen bond (H-bond).29,30,30a These “bonds” are the result
isNF where N is Avogadro’s number. of electrostatic attraction caused by the uneven distri-
An uncertainty in this kind of calculation is in the bution of electrons within covalent bonds. For example,
dielectric constant ε, which is 1.0 for a vacuum, about the bonding electron pairs of the H–O bonds of water
2 for hydrocarbons, and 78.5 for water at 25°C. If ε is molecules are attracted more tightly to the oxygen
taken as 2, the force for r = 0.40 nm is 4.3 x 1014 N/mol. atoms than to the hydrogen atoms. A small net positive
The force would be twice as great for the Ca2+– COO– charge is left on the hydrogen and a small net negative
case. To move two single charges further apart by just charge on the oxygen. Such polarization of the water
0.01 nm would require 4.3 kJ/mol, a substantial amount molecules can be indicated in the following way:
of energy. However, if the dielectric constant were that
of water, this would be reduced almost 40-fold and the δ+
electrostatic force would not be highly significant in δ – H
binding. It is extremely difficult to assign a dielectric O
constant for use in the interior of proteins.23b For
H
δ–
charges spaced far apart within proteins the effective δ+

--- Page 52 ---

48 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
Here the δ+ and δ– indicate a fraction of a full charge X-ray structures of macromolecules, the lengths of
present on the hydrogen atoms and on the nonbonded hydrogen bonds are often measured between the
electron pairs of the oxygen atom, respectively. Mole- surrounding heavy atoms:
cules such as H O, with strongly polarized bonds, are
2
referred to as polarmolecules and functional groups
with such bonds as polar groups. They are to be O H O
contrasted with such nonpolar groups as the –CH
3
group in which the electrons in the bonds are nearly length of a
hydrogen bond
equally shared by carbon and hydrogen.
A hydrogen bond is formed when the positively
charged end of one of the dipoles (polarized bonds) A typical —OH- - -O hydrogen bond will have a length
is attracted to the negative end of another dipole. of about 0.31 nm; a very strong hydrogen bond may
Water molecules tend to hydrogen bond strongly one be less than 0.28 nm in length, while weak hydrogen
to another; each oxygen atom can be hydrogen-bonded bonds will approach 0.36 nm, which is the sum of the
to two other molecules and each hydrogen to another van der Waals contact distances plus the O–H bond
water molecule. Thus, every water molecule can have length. Beyond this distance a hydrogen bond cannot
up to four hydrogen-bonded neighbors. be distinguished easily from a van der Waals contact.
Hydrogen bonds are strongest when the hydrogen
atom and the two heavy atoms to which it is bonded
O H
A water molecule are in a straight line. For this reason hydrogen bonds
hydrogen bonded
H O tend to be linear. However, the dipoles forming the hydro-
H to four other
H H water molecules; gen bond do not have to be colinearfor strong hydrogen
O H O
note the bonding:32,32a There is some preference for hydrogen
H H tetrahedral
bonding to occur in the direction of an unshared electron
arrangement of
O H bonds around the pair on the oxygen or nitrogen atom.33–35
central oxygen.
H
δ– δ+ δ–
O H O
Many groups in proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic δ+
acids form hydrogen bonds to one another and to C
surrounding water molecules. For example, an imida-
zole group of a protein can bond to an OH group of A linear O–H- - -O hydrogen bond with
an amino acid side chain or of water in the following dipoles at an angle one to another.
ways:
δ– Both ammonia, NH , and the –NH groups of proteins
3 2
δ– δ+ δ– O δ– δ+ are good electron donors for hydrogen bond forma-
N N H O or H N N H tion. However, the hydrogen atoms of uncharged –NH
δ+ 2
groups tend to be poor proton donors for H-bonds.36
H δ+
Do hydrogen bonds have some covalent character?
The answer is controversial.36a,36b,36c
Hydrogen bonding is important both to the inter-
Remember that hydrogen bonds are always formed nal structure of biological macromolecules and in
between pairs of groups, with one of them, often C=O interactions between molecules. Hydrogen bonding
or C=N-, containing the negative end of a dipole and often provides the specificity necessary to bring sur-
the other providing the proton. The proton acceptor faces together in a complementary way. Thus, the
group, often OH or NH and occasionally SH, and even location of hydrogen-bond forming groups in surfaces
CH in certain structures,31,31a,31b donates an unshared between molecules is important in ensuring an exact
pair of electrons. Dashed arrows are sometimes drawn alignment of the surfaces.37 The hydrogen bonds do
from the hydrogen atom to the electron donor atom not always have to be strong. For example, Fersht and
to indicate the direction of a hydrogen bond. Do not coworkers, who compared a variety of mutants of an
confuse these arrows with the curved arrows that enzyme of known three-dimensional structure, found
indicate flow of electrons in organic reactions. that deletion of a side chain that formed a good hydro-
The strength of hydrogen bonds, as measured by gen bond to the substrate weakened the binding energy
the bond energy, varies over the range 10–40 kJ/mol. by only 2–6 kJ/mol. However, loss of a hydrogen
The stronger the hydrogen bond the shorter its length. bond to a charged group in the substrate caused a loss
Because hydrogen atoms can usually not be seen in of 15–20 kJ/mol of binding energy.37 Study of mutant

--- Page 53 ---

B. Forces Between Molecules and Between Chemical Groups 49
proteins created by genetic engineering is now an In a gaseous water dimer the hydrogen bond is linear,
important tool for experimentally investigating the a fact that suggests some covalent character.52
biological roles of hydrogen bonding.37–39
0.298 nm
H
4. The Structure and Properties of Water O H O
H H
Water is the major constituent of cells and a re-
markable solvent whose chemical and physical prop- Its length is distinctly greater than that in ice. This
erties affect almost every aspect of life. Many of these is one of a number of pieces of evidence suggesting
properties are a direct reflection of the fact that most cooperativity in formation of chains of hydrogen
water molecules are in contact with their neighbors bonds.40,53,54 Consider the following three trimers
entirely through hydrogen bonds.40–48 Water is the for which theoretical calculations have predicted the
only known substance for which this is true. indicated hydrogen bond energies.40 In the first case
In ordinary ice all of the water molecules are the central water molecule donates two protons for
connected by hydrogen bonds, six molecules forming hydrogen-bond formation; in the second it accepts the
a hexagonal ring resembling that of cyclohexane. The protons. In the third case it is both an electron acceptor
structure is extended in all directions by the formation and a donor. The OH dipoles are oriented “head to tail”
of additional hydrogen bonds to adjacent molecules and the hydrogen bonds are stronger than in the other
(Fig. 2-3). As can be seen in this drawing, the molecules
in ice assume various orientations in the hexagonal
array, and frequently rotate to form their hydrogen H H H H
O O
bonds in different ways. This randomness remains as
–27 kJ/mol
the temperature is lowered, and ice is one of few sub- H H
stances with a residual entropy at absolute zero.49,50 O
Ice is unusual also in that the molecules do not assume O O
closest packing in the crystal but form an open struc- H H H H
ture. The hole through the middle of the hexagon and O –27 kJ/mol
on through the hexagons lying below it is ∼0.06 nm in H H
diameter. H
The short hydrogen-bond length (averaging 0.276
O O
nm) in ice indicates of strong bonding. The heat of
sublimation (∆H°) of ice is –48.6 kJ/mol. If the van der H H H H
O –43 kJ/mol
Waals dispersion energy of –15 kJ/mol is subtracted
from this, the difference of –34 kJ/mol can be attributed H
entirely to the hydrogen bonds—two for each molecule.
Their average energy is 17 kJ/mol apiece. However,
some of the hydrogen bonds are stronger and others cases. Long chains of similarly oriented hydrogen
weaker than the average.51 bonds exist in ice and this may account for the short
hydrogen bond lengths. Closed rings of hydrogen
bonds oriented to give a maximum cooperative effect
also exist in liquid water clusters55 and within proteins,
carbohydrates, and nucleic acids.53,54
The nature of liquid water is still incompletely
0.10 nm
understood,46-48,56 but we know that water contains ice-
like clusters of molecules that are continually breaking
up and reforming in what has been called a “flickering
cluster” structure. Judging by the infrared spectrum
0.276 nm of water, about 10% of the hydrogen bonds are broken
when ice melts.41 A similar conclusion can be drawn
from the fact that the heat of melting of ice is –5.9 kJ/mol.
It has been estimated that at 0°C the average cluster
contains about 500 water molecules.41 At 50°C there
are over 100 and at the boiling point about 40. Although
Figure 2-3 Six water molecules in the lattice of an ice
most molecules in liquid water are present in these
crystal. The hydrogen bonds, which connect protons with
clusters, the hydrogen bonds are rapidly broken and
electron pairs of adjacent molecules, are shown as dashed
reformed in new ways, with the average lifetime of a
lines.
given hydrogen bond being ∼10–12s.

--- Page 54 ---

50 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
low solubility in water and a high solubility in non-
5. Hydration of Polar Molecules and Ions
polar solvents. Similarly, the long alkyl groups of fatty
acid esters aggregate within membranes and nonpolar
Water molecules are able to hydrogen bond not
side chains of proteins are often packed together in the
only to each other but also to polar groups of dissolved
centers of protein molecules. Because it is as if the
compounds. Thus, every group that is capable of
nonpolar groups “fear” water, this is known as the
forming a hydrogen bond to another organic group
hydrophobic effect.59–70 The terms hydrophobic forces,
is also able to form hydrogen bonds of a somewhat
hydrophobic interactions, and hydrophobic bonding
similar strength with water. For this reason, hydrogen
have also been used. However, the latter term can be
bonding is usually not a significant force in holding
misleading because the hydrophobic effect arises not
small molecules together in aqueous solutions. Polar
out of any special attraction between nonpolar groups
molecules that stick together through hydrogen bond-
but primarily from the strong internal cohesion of the
ing when dissolved in a nonpolar solvent often do not
hydrogen-bonded water structure.
associate in water. How then can biochemists assert
How strongly do nonpolar groups “attract” each
that hydrogen bonding is so important in biochemistry?
other in water? A partial answer can be obtained by
Part of the answer is that proteins and nucleic acids
measuring the standard Gibbs energy ∆G of transfer of a
can be either properly folded with hydrogen bonds
hydrocarbon molecule from a dilute aqueous solution into
formed internally or denatured with hydrogen bonds
a dilute solution in another hydrocarbon. By studying a
from those same groups to water. The Gibbs energy
series of alkanes, Abraham62 calculated the Gibbs energy
change between these two states is small.
change per CH unit (Eq. 2-9) as: ∆Go = –3.8 kJ/mol.
Every ion in an aqueous solution is surrounded 2
by a shell of oriented water molecules held by the
–CH –(water)→–CH –(hexane)
attraction of the water dipoles to the charged ion. 2 2
∆G° = –3.8kJ/mol (2-9)
The hydration of ions has a strong influence on all
aspects of electrostatic interactions and plays a domi-
This equation is a quantitative statement of the
nant role in determining such matters as the strength
fact that the CH group prefers to be in a nonpolar
of acids and bases, the Gibbs energy of hydrolysis of 2
environment than to be surrounded by water. A similar
ATP, and the strength of bonding of metal ions to
Gibbs energy change would be expected to accompany
negatively charged groups. For example, the previously
the bringing together of a methylene unit from a small
considered interaction between carboxylate and calcium
molecule and a hydrophobic surface on a protein mole-
ions would be much weaker if both ions retained their
cule. However, in the latter case the accompanying
hydration shells.
Consider the following example. ∆G° for dissocia- decrease in entropy would make ∆G° less negative.
What causes the decrease in Gibbs energy when
tion of acetic acid in water is +27.2 kJ/mol (Table 6-5).
The enthalpy change ∆H° for this process is almost nonpolar groups associate in water? Jencks60 suggested
zero (–0.1 kJ/mol) and ∆S° is consequently –91.6 J K–1. that we think of the transfer of a nonpolar molecule
from a nonpolar solvent into water in two steps: (1)
This large entropy decrease reflects the increased
Create a cavity in the water of about the right size to
amount of water that is immobilized in the hydration
accommodate the molecule. Since many hydrogen
spheres of the H+ and acetate– ions formed in the
bonds will be broken, the Gibbs energy of cavity for-
dissociation reaction. In contrast, dissociation of NH +
4 mation will be high. It will be principally an enthalpy
to NH and H+ converts one positive ion to another.
∆H° is 3 large (+52.5 kJ/mol)but the entropy change ∆S° (∆H) effect. (2) Allow the water molecules in the solvent
to make changes in their orientations to accommodate
is small (–2.0 J K–1, Table 6-5).
the nonpolar molecule that has been placed in the
Although effects of hydration are important in
cavity. The water molecules can move to give good
almost all biochemical equilibria, they are difficult to
van der Waals contacts and also reorient themselves to
assess quantitatively. It is hard to know how many
give the maximum number of hydrogen bonds. Since
molecules of water are freed or immobilized in a given
hydrogen bonds can be formed in many different
reaction. Charged groups in proteins are often hydrated.
ways in water, there may be as many or even more
However, if they are buried in the interior of the pro-
hydrogen bonds after the reorientation than before.
tein, they may be solvated by polarizable protein side
This will be true especially at low temperature where
chain groups such as –OH or by backbone or side
most water exists as large icelike clusters. For dissolved
chain amide groups.57,58
hydrocarbons, the enthalpy of formation of the new
hydrogen bonds often almost exactly balances the
enthalpy of creation of the cavity initially so that ∆H
6. Hydrophobic Interactions
for the overall process (transfer from inert solvent into
water) is small. For the opposite transfer (from water
Fats, hydrocarbons, and other materials whose
to hydrocarbon hexane; Eq. 2-9) ∆H° is usually a small
molecules consist largely of nonpolar groups have a

--- Page 55 ---

C. Amino Acids and Peptides 51
positive number for aliphatic hydrocarbons and is
C. Amino Acids and Peptides
nearly zero for aromatic hydrocarbons.
Since∆G° = ∆H°– T∆S° (see Chapter 6), it follows Twenty α-amino acids are the monomers from
that the negative value of ∆G° for hydrophobic inter-
which proteins are made. These amino acids share
actions must result from a positive entropy change,
with other biochemical monomers a property essential
which may arise from the restricted mobility of water
to their role in polymer formation: They contain at least
molecules that surround dissolved hydrophobic groups.
two different chemical groups able to react with each other
When two hydrophobic groups come together to form
to form a covalent linkage. In the amino acids these are
a“hydrophobic bond,” water molecules are freed from
the protonated amino (NH +) and carboxylate (COO–)
the structured region around the hydrophobic surfaces 3
groups. The characteristic linkage in the protein poly-
and the entropy increases. The ∆S° for Eq. 2-9 is about
mer is the peptide (amide) linkage whose formation
12 J deg–1 mol–1. Attempts have been made to relate
can be imagined to occur by the splitting out of water
this value directly to the increased number of orienta-
between the carboxyl of one amino acid and the amino
tions possible for a water molecule when it is freed
group of another (Eq. 2-11).
from the structured region.64 However, interpretation
This equation is not intended to imply a mecha-
of the hydrophobic effect is complex and controver-
nism for peptide synthesis. The equilibrium position
sial.65–71a
for this reaction in an aqueous solution favors the free
The formation constant K for hydrophobic asso-
f amino acids rather than the peptide. Therefore, both
ciations often increases with increasing temperature.
biological and laboratory syntheses of peptides usually
This is in contrast to the behavior of K for many asso-
f do not involve a simple splitting out of water. Since
ciation reactions that involve polar molecules and for
the dipeptide of Eq. 2-11 still contains reactive carboxyl
which∆H° is often strongly negative (heat is released).
and amino groups, other amino acid units can be joined
An example of the latter is the protonation of ammonia
by additional peptide linkages to form polypeptides.
in an aqueous solution (Eq. 2-10).
These range from short-chain oligomers to polymers
of from ∼50 to several thousand amino acid units, the
NH + H+→ NH +
3 4 proteins.75–77
∆H° = –52.5 kJ/mol (2-10)
SinceR1nK = –∆G°/T = –∆H°/T + ∆S°,K decreases O R
f f
with increasing temperature if ∆H° is negative. Because H + 3N CH C O–+ H+ N CH COO –
for a hydrophobic interaction with a positive value
H
of∆H°K increases with increasing temperature, an R H
f
increase in stability at higher temperatures is sometimes α-Amino acids
used as a criterion for hydrophobic bonding. However, –H2O
this criterion does not always hold. For example, base O R
stacking interactions in polynucleotides (Chapter 5),
+ –
whose strength does not increase with increasing
H3N CH C N CH COO
temperature, are still thought to be hydrophobic.
R H
The water molecules that are in immediate contact
A peptide linkage
with dissolved nonpolar groups are partially oriented.
in a dipeptide (2-11)
They form a cagelike structure around each hydropho-
bic group. When particles surrounded by such hydra-
tion layers are 1–2 nm apart, they sometimes experience
either a fairly strong repulsion or an enhanced attrac-
tion caused by these hydration layers.21,64–66,72 Direct 1. Properties of (cid:1)-Amino Acids
experimental measurements have shown that these
effects extend to distances of 10 nm21,63 and can ac-
The amino acids have in common a dipolar ionic
count for the previously mentioned long-range van
structure and a chiral center. They are differentiated,
der Waals forces.
one from another, by the structures of their side chain
Various efforts have been made to develop scales
groups, designated R in the foregoing formulas. These
ofhydrophobicity that can be used to predict the
groups are of varying size and chemical structure.
probability of finding a given amino acid side chain
The side chain groups fill much of the space in the
buried within a protein or in a surface facing water.59,73
interior of a protein molecule and also protrude from
A new approach has been provided by the study of
the external surfaces of the protein where they deter-
mutant proteins. For example, deletion of a single
mine many of the chemical and physical properties of
–CH – group from an interior hydrophobic region of
2 the molecule.
a protein was observed to decrease the stability of the
Table 2-2 shows the structures of the side chains
protein by 4.6 kJ/mol.74

--- Page 56 ---

52 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
of the amino acids commonly found in proteins. The group. Metabolic interrelationships will make it easier
complete structure is given for proline. Both the three- to learn structures of the rest of the amino acids later.
letter abbreviations and one-letter abbreviations used
in describing sequences of amino acids in proteins are
H H Replacement of
also given in this table. Amino acids of groups a–c of –OOC one H by phenyl phenylalanine
C
Table 2-2 plus phenylalanine and methionine are some- H by—OH serine
C by—SH cysteine
times grouped together as nonpolar. They tend to be
+ H by—COOH aspartic acid
found in a hydrophobic environment on the inside H 3 N
of a protein molecule. Groups f and i contain polar, l-Alanine
charged side chains which usually protrude into the
water surrounding the protein. The rest are classified Since the –COOH groups of glutamic and aspartic
aspolar but noncharged. acids are completely dissociated to –COO– at neutral
To get acquainted with amino acid structures, pH, it is customary in the biochemical literature to refer
learn first those of glycine,alanine,serine,aspartic to these amino acids as glutamate and aspartate
acid, and glutamic acid. The structures of many without reference to the nature of the cation or cations
other amino acids can be related to that of alanine present as counter ions. Such “-ate” endings are also
(R=CH ) by replacement of a β hydrogen by another used for most other acids (e.g., malate, oxaloacetate,
3
TABLE 2-2
–
Structure and Chemical Properies of Side Chain Groups (R) of Amino Acids OOC
R
C
a. Glycine "side chain" = —H (Gly, G)a
Strictly a link in the peptide chain, glycine + H
provides a minimum of steric hindrance to H N
3
rotation and to placement of adjacent groups.
b. Amino acids with alkyl groups as side chains
H H H H H H H H These bulky groups of distinctive
C H C C H C H *C C H s in h t a e p ra e c s t p io a n rt s i c in ip p a r te o t i e n i n h y in d t r e o r p io h r o s bic
H H and in forming binding sites of
H C H C C H
H C C specific shapes.
Alanine (Ala, A) H H C H H H
H H H H
Valine (Val, V)
H Isoleucine (Ile, I)
Leucine (Leu, L)
c. The imino acid proline. Because the side chain is fused to the α-amino group, the entire structure, not just the side
chain, is shown.
O
H H Note the secondary amino group and the relatively rigid conformation.
HO C The presence of proline strongly influences the folding of protein chains.
H
C C
H
H N C
C H replaced by —OH
in hydroxyproline
H H
(Hyp) which occurs
Proline (Pro, P) in collagen
d. Aromatic amino acids
H
H Tyrosine, phenylalanine,
H H H H H H Acidic protein, C H and tryptophan can form
pK ~9.5–10.9.
a hydrophobic bonds and
C H C H H donor in H
may be especially effective
hydrogen bonds
in bonding to other flat
molecules.
N
H H H O H H
H
H H H
PPhheennyyllaallaanniinnee ( (PPhhee, F, )F) TTyyrroossiinnee ( T(Tyyr,r ,Y Y)) TTrryypptotopphhana n(T (rTpr, pW, W) )

--- Page 57 ---

C. Amino Acids and Peptides 53
TABLE 2-2
(continued)
e. Amino acid alcohols
OH H
H OH The—OH group is very weakly acidic (pK ~13.6). It can form
a
* esters with phosphoric acid or organic acids and is a site of
C C
Note the second chiral center. attachment of sugar rings in glycoproteins. Hydroxyl groups
H CH3 TheL-amino acid with the of serine are found at the active centers of some enzymes.
Serine TThhrreeoonniinnee opposite configuration in the
(Ser, S) ((TThhrr,, TT)) side chain is L-allo-threonine.
f. Acidic amino acids
H H
H H Carboxyl groups of these side chains are dissociated
at neutral pH (pK values are 4.3–4.7) and provide
C C O a
anionic (–) groups on the surfaces of proteins.
C O C C
H OH
HO H
Aspartic acid (Asp, D) Glutamic acid (Glu, E)
g. Amides of aspartic acid and glutamic acid
H H The amide group is not acidic but is polar
H H
and participates in hydrogen bonding.
C H C O
C N C C If it is uncertain whether a position in a
H H protein is occupied by aspartic acid or
O H N H asparagine, it may be designated Asx or
Asparagine (Asn, N) H B. If glutamic or glutamine, it may be
designated as Glx or Z.
Glutamine (Gln, Q)
h. Sulfur-containing amino acids
H
H H2C Two cysteine SH groups can be oxidatively joined
to form a disulfide bridge in the "double-headed"
C S S
amino acid cystine.
S H A weak acid, CH2
Cysteine (Cys, C) pKa ~8.5
Key
H
H H H Essential in the human diet
C Essential if phenylalanine or cysteine is inadequate
C H
C S Essential for rapid growth
H H a The three-letter and one-letter abbreviations used for the
MMetehthioionniinnee ((MMeett,, MM)) amino acid residues in peptides and proteins are given in
parentheses. B, J, U, X, and Z can be used to indicate
modified or unusual amino acids.
i. Basic amino acids
Guanidinium ion
This basic site accepts a proton to
H
form a conjugate acid of pK ~6.4–
a
7.0 and carrying a positive charge. N H
H
H
H
CH2 CH2
Hydrogen
C
H
+
CH2
H
N C +
bonds
CH2 CH2 N H
N H
ε (also 3 or τ) CH2 CH ε2 H
δ (also 1 or π) N N H
H LLyyssiinnee ((LLyyss,, KK)) Arginine (Arg, R)
2
Histidine (His, H) A flexible side arm with a The guanidinium group has a high pK of
a
potentially reactive amino over 12 and remains protonated under
Theimidazole groups in histidine side group at the end. The most circumstances. It is stabilized by
chains are parts of the active sites of high pK of ~10.5 means resonance as indicated by the dashed line.
a
many enzymes. Like other basic that lysine side chains are Guanidinium groups are often sites for
groups in proteins they also may bind ordinarily protonated in binding of phosphate or carboxylate
metal ions. neutral solutions. groups by pairs of hydrogen bonds.

--- Page 58 ---

54 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
S S phosphate, and adenylate) and in
names of enzymes (e.g., lactate
Cys-Tyr-Ile-Gln-Asn-Cys-Pro-Leu-GlyNH2
dehydrogenase).
N-terminal Glycine amide, C-terminal
During the formation of poly-
Human oxytocin peptides, the α-aminoand carboxyl
groups of the amino acids are con-
S S
verted into the relatively unreactive
Cys-Tyr-Ile-Gln-Asn-Cys-Pro-Arg-GlyNH2 and uncharged amide (peptide)
N-terminal Glycine amide, C-terminal groups except at the two chain
termini. In many cases the terminal
Human vasopressin
amino and carboxyl groups are also
1 Ser-Tyr-Ser-Met-Glu-His-Phe-Arg-Trp-Gly-Lys-Pro-Val--Gly-Lys 15 converted within cells into uncharged
groups (Chapter 10). Immediately
30 Glu-Asp-Glu-Ala-Gly-Asn-Pro-Tyr-Val-Lys-Val-Pro-Arg-Arg-Lys
after the protein is synthesized its
Ser-Ala-Glu-Ala-Phe-Pro-Leu-Glu-Phe terminal carboxyl group is often
converted into an amide. The N
Human adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
terminus may be acetylated or
cyclized to a pyroglutamyl group.
N
Sometimes a cyclic peptide is formed
(Fig. 2-4).
HN
The properties of polypeptides
O and proteins are determined to a
H
N N Pyroglutamyl-His-Trp-Ser-Tyr large extent by the chemistry of the
O N side chain groups, which may be
H Pro-Arg-Leu-Gly
summarized briefly as follows.
O
H2N O GlyNH2 Glycine in a peptide permits a max-
imum of conformational mobility.
Hypothalamic thyrotropic hormone releasing Luteinizing hormone
factor (TRF); pyroglutamyl-histidyl-prolinamide releasing factor (LRF) The nine relatively nonpolar amino
acids–alanine, valine, leucine, iso-
leucine, proline, methionine, phe-
D-Phe L-Leu L-Orn L-Val L-Pro nylalanine, tyrosine, and trypto-
Gramicidin S phan–serve as building blocks of
L-Pro L-Val L-Orn L-Leu D-Phe characteristic shape. Tyrosine and
tryptophan also participate in hydro-
O
gen bonding and in aromatic: aro-
C L-Glu L-Leu D-Leu L-Val
matic interactions within proteins.
Surfactin
Much of the chemistry of pro-
O C L-Leu D-Leu L-Asp
teins involves the side chain func-
O tional groups –OH,–SH,–COO–,
–NH +, and imidazole (Eq. 2-6) and
Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met 3
the guanidinium group of arginine.
Methionine enkephalin
The side chains of asparagine and
glutamine both contain the amide
group CONH , which is relatively
2
inert chemically but which can
undergo hydrogen-bonding inter-
actions. The amide linkages of the
Figure 2-4 Structures of some naturally occurring peptides. Oxytocin and
polypeptide backbone must also be
vasopressin are hormones of the neurohypophysis (posterior lobe of the
pituitary gland). Adrenocorticotropin is a hormone of the adenohypophysis regarded as important functional
(anterior pituitary). Hormones of the adenohypophysis are released under the groups. Most polar groups are
influence of releasing factors (regulatory factors) produced in the neighboring found on the outside surfaces of
hypothalamus (a portion of the brain) in response to neural stimulation. proteins where they can react chem-
Structures of two releasing factors are shown. Note that the γ-carboxyl groups ically in various ways. When inside
of the N-terminal glutamine residues have reacted, with loss of NH , with the
3 proteins they form H-bonds to the
neighboring terminal –NH groups to form cyclic amide (pyroglutamyl) groups.78
2 peptide backbone and to other
Gramicidin S is an antibiotic made by Bacillus brevis, and surfactin is a depsi-
polar groups.
peptide (containing an ester linkage), a surface active antibiotic of Bacillus
subtilis. Methionine enkephalin is a brain peptide with opiate-like activity.79

--- Page 59 ---

C. Amino Acids and Peptides 55
of the amide linkages between the amino acid units.
2. Acidic and Basic Side Chains
Many of these properties follow from the fact that an
amide can be viewed as a resonance hybrid of the
The side chains of aspartic and glutamic acids
following structures. Because of the partial double-
carry negatively charged carboxylate groups at pH 7
bond character, the C–N bond is shorter than that of a
while those of lysine and arginine carry the positively
normal single bond and the C=O bond is lengthened.
charged –NH + and guanidinium ions, respectively.
3
O –O –O
H2N
+ C C C+
C NH2
N N+ N
HN
H H H
Guanidinium group The observed lengths in nanometers determined by
X-ray diffraction measurements are given in Fig. 2-5
(top). The partial double-bond character of the C–N
At pH 7 the weakly basic imidazole group of histidine
bond has important consequences. The peptide unit is
may be partially protonated. Both the –SH group of
nearly planar as is indicated by the dashed parallelo-
cysteine and the phenolic –OH of tyrosine are weakly
gram in Fig. 2-5.
acidic and will dissociate and thereby acquire negative
However, the bonds around the nitrogen retain
charges at a sufficiently high pH.
some pyramidal character (Fig. 2-5, bottom). Even
The number of positive and negative charges on
more important is the fact that there is flexibility. As
a protein at any pH can be estimated approximately
a result, the torsion angle ω may vary over a range of
from the acid dissociation constants (usually given as
± 15° or even more from that in the planar state.80,81,81a
pK values) for the amino acid side chains. These are
a The resonance stabilization of the amide linkage is
given in Table 2-2. However, pK values of buried
a thought to be about 85 kJ/mol. Rotation around the
groups are often greatly shifted from these, especially
C–N bond through 90° would be expected to require
if they associate as ion pairs. In addition, many pro-
teins have free amino and carboxyl-terminal groups
at the opposite ends of the peptide chain. These also
participate in acid–base reactions with approximately
the following pK values.
a
terminal COOH, pK = 3.6–3.7 a
terminal NH 3 +, pK a = 7.5–7.9 H R 1
The acid–base properties of an amino acid or of
a protein are described by titration curves of the type
shown in Figs. 3-1 and 3-2. In these curves the number C
of equivalents of acid or base that have reacted with an
amino acid or protein that was initially at neutral pH
are plotted against pH. The net negative or positive O R 2 H
electrical charge on the molecule can be read directly
from the curves. Both the net electrical charges and
the distribution of positively and negatively charged
groups are often of crucial importance to the functioning
of a protein.
Additional aspects of the acid–base chemistry of
amino acids and proteins are considered in Chapter 3,
Section A and Chapter 6, Section E. The student may
find it appropriate to study these sections at this time
and to work the associated study problems.
3. The Peptide Unit
The very ability of a protein to exist as a complex
three-dimensional structure depends upon the properties
621.0
N
0.132 C 2
201.0
O
H-bond length
0.28–0.30
α-Carbon H
of first
amino acid
C
1 0.151 116°
122°
0.146
α-Carbon 121° of second
amino acid
0.38
Distance (nm) between successive α-carbon atoms in a protein.
CΝ Ο
C 1 Η C 2 ω T be h i a s s a g n r g e l a e t , a ω s , ± m 1 a 5 y °
View down C—N axis
(as indicated by heavy arrow above)
Figure 2-5 Dimensions of the peptide linkage. Interatomic
distances in nm, including the hydrogen bond length to an
adjacent peptide linkage, are indicated. The atoms enclosed
by the dotted lines all lie approximately in a plane. However,
as indicated in the lower drawing, the nitrogen atom tends
to retain some pyramidal character.

--- Page 60 ---

56 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
about this much energy. This fact immediately sug- the upper structure would no longer exist. Thus, the
gests a way in which proteins may sometimes be able hydrogen bonds would be weakened. We can conclude
to store energy—by having one or more peptide units that if an amide linkage in such a chain becomes twisted,
twisted out of complete planarity.69 the hydrogen bonds that it forms will be weakened. If
there is cooperativity, the hydrogen bonds will all be
H
strongest when there is good planarity in all of the
ω amides in the chain.
N
Amides have very weak basic properties and pro-
tonation is possible either on the oxygen (A) or on the
O nitrogen (B).82,83
An important effect of the resonance of the amide
linkage is that the oxygen atom acquires some nega-
tive charge and the NH group some positive charge. HO O
+ + H
Some of the positive charge is usually depicted as NH N
residing on the nitrogen, but some is found on the H
hydrogen atom. The latter can be pictured as arising
A B
from a contribution of a fourth resonance form that
contains no bond to hydrogen. The pK values for such protonation are usually
a
less than zero, but it is possible that a correctly placed
acidic group in a protein could protonate either oxygen
–O C Fourth or nitrogen transiently during the action of a protein.
resonance
N H+ form Protonation on oxygen would strengthen hydrogen
bonds from the nitrogen whereas protonation on
nitrogen would weaken hydrogen bonds to oxygen
Nevertheless, this picture is inadequate. Various evi- and might permit rotation. The amide group has a
dence indicates that the nitrogen actually carries a net permanent dipole moment of 3.63 debyes oriented as
negative charge.81a follows:
The positive and negative ends of the dipoles in
O
the amide group tend to associate to form strong 3.63D
hydrogen bonds. These hydrogen bonds together
46.7°
with the connecting amide linkages can form chains N C
that may run for considerable distances through pro-
teins. The tendency for cooperativity in hydrogen H
bond formation may impart unusual stability to these
chains. As with individual amide linkages, these chains Here the arrow points toward the positive end of the
of hydrogen-bonded amides can also be thought of as dipole.
resonance hybrids: While the trans peptide linkage shown in Fig. 2-4
is usual, the following cis peptide linkage, which is
~8 kJ/mol less stable than the trans linkage, also occurs
–O C in proteins quite often. The nitrogen atom is usually
but not always from proline.81,84
+ –
N H O C
+ –
N H O C
N H+
C2
C1 N N
C H C
O C
O O
N H O C
cis Peptide linkages
N H O C
N H
4. Polypeptides
The two structures pictured are extreme forms, the The chain formed by polymerization of amino
true structure being something in between. In the acid molecules provides the primary structure of
lower form, rotation about the C–N bond would be a protein. Together with any covalent crosslinkages
permitted but then the charge separation present in and other modifications, this may also be called the

--- Page 61 ---

C. Amino Acids and Peptides 57
covalent structure of the protein. Each monomer Like amino acids, this tripeptide is a dipolar ion.
unit in the chain is known as an amino acid residue. The same structure can be abbreviated Ala-Val-Met or,
This term acknowledges the fact that each amino acid using one-letter abbreviations, AVM. It is customary
has lost one molecule of H O during polymerization. in describing amino acid sequences to place the amino-
2
To be more precise, the number of water molecules lost terminal (N-terminal) residue at the left end and the
isone less than the number of residues. Peptides are carboxyl-terminal (C-terminal) residue at the right end.
named according to the amino acid residues present Residues are numbered sequentially with the N-termi-
and beginning with the one bearing the terminal amino nal residue as 1. An example is shown in Fig. 2-6.
group. Thus, L-alanyl-L-valyl-L-methionine has the The sequence of amino acid units in a protein is
following structure: always specified by a gene. The sequence determines
how the polypeptide chain folds and how the folded
S—H3C
protein functions. For this reason much effort has
H CH3 O H
gone into “sequencing,” the determination of the
H
N precise order of amino acid residues in a protein.
H + 3N N COO– Sequences of several hundreds of thousands of pro-
H
H teins and smaller peptides have been established and
O CH
the number doubles each year.75,87,88,88a Most of these
H3C CH3
A 1 10 20 30 40
A P P S V F A E V P Q A Q P V L V F K L I A D F R E D P D P R K V N L G V G A Y
50 60 70 80
R T D D C Q P WV L P V V R K V E Q R I A N N S S L N H E Y L P I L G L A E F R
90 100 110 120
T C A S R L A L G D D S P A L Q E K R V G G V Q S L G G T G A L R I G A E F L A
130 140 150 160
R WY N G T N N K D T P V Y V S S P T WE N H D G V F T T A G F K D I R S Y R Y
170 180 190 200
WD T E K R G L D L Q G F L S D L E N A P E F S I F V L H A C A H N P T G T D P
210 220 230 240
T P E Q WK Q I A S V M K R R F L F P F F D S A Y Q G F A S G N L E K D A WA I
250 260 270 280
R Y F V S E G F E L F C A Q S F S K N F G L Y N E R V G N L T V V A K E P D S I
290 300 310 320
L R V L S Q M Q K I V R V T WS N P P A Q G A R I V A R T L S P D E L F H E WT
330 340 350 360
G N V K T M A D R I L S M R S E L R A R L E A L K T P G T WN H I T D Q I G M F
370 380 390 400
S F T G L N P K Q V E Y L I N E K H I Y L L P S G R I N M C G L T T K N L D Y V
410
A T S I H E A V T K I Q
B
Figure 2-6 (A) The complete amino acid sequence of the cytoplasmic enzyme aspartate aminotransferase from pig heart. The
peptide has the composition Lys , His, Arg , (Asp + Asn) , Ser , Thr , (Glu + Gln) , Pro , Gly , Ala , Cys, Val , Met, Ile ,
19 8 26 42 26 26 41 24 28 32 5 29 6 19
Leu , Tyr , Phe , Trp. The molecular mass is 46.344 kDa and the complete enzyme is a 93.147-kDa dimer containing two
38 12 23 9
molecules of the bound coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate attached to lysine-258 (enclosed in box).85,86 (B) A stereoscopic view of a
complete enzyme molecule which contains two identical subunits with the foregoing sequence. Coordinates from Arthur Arnone.
In this “wire model” all the positions of all of the nearly 7000 atoms that are heavier than hydrogen are shown. The > 8000
hydrogen atoms have been omitted. The view is into the active site of the subunit on the right. The pyridoxal phosphate and the
lysine residue to which it is attached are shown with heavy lines. The active site of the subunit to the left opens to the back side as
viewed here. The drawing may be observed best with a magnifying viewer available from Abrams Instrument Corp., Lansing,
Michigan or Luminos Photo Corp., Yonkers, New York. However, with a little practice, it is possible to obtain a stereoscopic view
unaided. Hold the book with good illumination about 20–30 cm from your eyes. Allow your eyes to relax as if viewing a distant
object. Of the four images that are visible, the two in the center can be fused to form the stereoscopic picture. Drawings by
program MolScript (Kraulis, 1991).

--- Page 62 ---

58 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
BOX 2-A PROTEINS OF BLOOD PLASMA
Among the most studied of all proteins are those Over 50 mutant forms have been found and at least 30
present in blood plasma.a–f Their ready availability persons have been found with no serum albumin in
and the clinical significance of their study led to the their blood.h,i These analbuminemic individuals are
early development of electrophoretic separations. healthy and have increased concentrations of other
Electrophoresis at a pH of 8.6 (in barbital buffer) indi- plasma proteins.
cated six main components. The major and one of the A second major function of plasma proteins is
fastest moving proteins is serum albumin. Trailing transport. Serum albumin binds to and carries many
behind it are the (cid:1) -,(cid:1) -, and (cid:2)-globulins,fibrinogen, sparingly soluble metabolic products, including fatty
1 2
and(cid:3)-globulins. Each of these bands consists of acids, tryptophan, cysteine, steroids, thyroid hormones,
several proteins and two-dimensional separation by Ca2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, other metal ions, bilirubin, and various
electrophoresis and isoelectric focusing (Chapter 3) drugs. There are also many more specialized transporter
reveals over 30 different proteins.e Many of these proteins. Transferrin carries iron and ceruloplasmin
contain varying numbers of attached carbohydrate (anα globulin) transports copper. Transcortin carries
2
units and appear as families of spots. corticosteroids and progesterone, while another pro-
Fractionation of large quantities of plasma together tein carries sex hormones. Retinol-binding protein
with immunochemical assays has led to identification carries vitamin A and cobalamin-binding proteins
of over 200 different proteins. Sixty or more are enzymes, vitamin B . Hemopexin carries heme to the liver,
12
some in very small quantitites which may have leaked where the iron can be recovered.j Haptoglobin binds
from body cells. Normally plasma contains 5.7 – 8.0 g hemoglobin released from broken red cells and also
of total protein per 100 ml (~1 mM). Albumin accounts assists in the recycling of the iron in the heme.k
for 3.5 – 4.5 g/100 ml. An individual’s liver synthesizes Lipoproteins (see Table 21-1) carry phospholipids,
about 12 g each day. Next most abundant are the neutral lipids, and cholesterol esters. Most of the
immunoglobulins. One of these (IgG or γ-globulin) mass of these substances is lipid.
is present to the extent of 1.2–1.8 g/100 ml. Also present Immunoglobulins,α -trypsin inhibitor and
1
in amounts greater than 200 mg per 100 ml are (cid:1)- and (cid:1) -macroglobulin,k ten or more blood clotting factors;
2
(cid:2)-lipoproteins, the (cid:1) antitrypsin,(cid:1) -macroglobulin, and proteins of the complement system all have
1 2
haptoglobin,transferrin, and fibrinogen. protective functions that are discussed elsewhere in
Plasma proteins have many functions. One of this book. Hormones, many of them proteins, are
them, fullfilled principally by serum albumin, is to present in the blood as they are carried to their target
impart enough osmotic pressure to plasma to match tissues. Many serum proteins have unknown or poorly
that of the cytoplasm of cells. The heart-shaped human understood functions. Among these are the acute phase
serum albumin consists of a single 65 kDa chain of 585 proteins, whose concentrations rise in response to
amino acid residues coiled into 28 helices.g Three inflammation or other injury.
homologous repeat units or domains each contain six
disulfide bridges, suggesting that gene duplication a Allison, A. C., ed. (1974) Structure and Function of Plasma
occurred twice during the evolution of serum albumins. Proteins, Vol. 1, Plenum, New York
b Allison, A. C., ed. (1976) Structure and Function of Plasma
The relatively low molecular mass and high density of
Proteins, Vol. 2, Plenum, New York
negative charges on the surface make serum albumin
c Putnam, F. W., ed. (1975) The Plasma Proteins, 2nd ed., Vol. 1
well adapted for the role of maintaining osmotic pres- and 2, Academic Press, New York
sure. However, serum albumin is not essential to life. d Blomback, B., and Hanson, L. A., eds. (1979) Plasma Proteins,
John Wiley, Chichester, Oklahoma
e Geisow, M. J., and Gordon, A. H. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci. 3,
169–171
f Smith, E. L., Hill, R. L., Lehman, I. R., Lefkowitz, R. J.,
Handler, P., and White, A. (1983) in Principles of Biochemistry,
Mammalian Biochemistry, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York,
pp. 3–37
g He, X. M., and Carter, D. C. (1992) Nature358, 209–215
h Peters, T., Jr. (1996) All About Albumin: Biochemistry, Genetics and
Medical Applications, Academic Press, San Diego, California
i Madison, J., Galliano, M., Watkins, S., Minchiotti, L., Porta, F.,
Rossi, A., and Putnam, F. W. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci: USA
91, 6476–6480
j Satoh, T., Satoh, H., Iwahara, S.-I., Hrkal, Z., Peyton, D. H.,
and Muller-Eberhard, U. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci: U.S.A.91,
8423–8427
k Feldman, S. R., Gorias, S. L., and Pizzo, S. V. (1985) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci: U.S.A.82, 5700–5704
Human serum albumin. From He and Carter. g

--- Page 63 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 59
have been deduced from the sequences of nucleotides times it could form a 7-nm square sheet about 0.5 nm
in DNA. Sequences of some small peptide hormones thick. The same polypeptide could form a thin helical
and antibiotics are shown in Fig. 2-4 and that of a 412- rod 45 nm long and ∼1.1 nm thick. If it had the right
residue protein in Fig. 2-6. The molecular mass of a amino acid sequence it could be joined by two other
protein can be estimated from the chain length by similar chains to form a collagen-type triple helix of
assuming that each residue adds 100–115 Da. 87 nm length and about 1.5 nm diameter (Fig. 2-7).
The amino acid composition varies greatly among The highly folded globular proteins vary consid-
proteins. A typical globular protein contains all or erably in the tightness of packing and the amount of
most of the 20 amino acids. The majority are often internal water of hydration.99,100 However, a density
present in roughly similar amounts but His, Cys, Met, of∼1.4 g cm–3 is typical. With an average mass per
Tyr, and Trp tend to be less abundant than the others. residue of 115 Da our 300-residue polypeptide would
Specialized proteins sometimes have unusual amino have a mass of 34.5 kDa or 5.74 x 10–20 g and a volume
acid compositions. For example, collagen of connec- of 41 nm3. This might be approximated by a cube 3.45
tive tissue contains 33 mole% glycine and 21% of nm in width, a “brick” of dimensions 1.8 x 3.6 x 6.3
proline + hydroxyproline residues; the major proteins nm, or a sphere of diameter 4.3 nm. Although protein
of saliva contain 22% of glutamate + glutamine and molecules are usually very irregular in shape,101 for
20–45% proline.89 Cell walls of plants contain both purposes of calculation idealized ellipsoid and rod
high proline and high glycine polypeptides. One from shapes are often assumed (Fig. 2-7).
petunias is 67% glycine.90 Silk fibroin contains 45% It is informative to compare these dimensions
glycine and 29% alanine. A DNA repair protein of with those of the smallest structures visible in cells; for
yeast has 13 consecutive aspartate residues.91 The example, a bacterial flagellum is ∼13 nm in diameter
tough eggshell (chorion) of the domesticated silkmoth and a cell membrane ∼8–10 nm in thickness. Bricks
Bombyx mori contains proteins with ∼30% cysteine.92 of the size of the 300-residue polypeptide could be
Many proteins consist, in part, of repeated short se- used to assemble a bacterial flagellum or a eukaryotic
quences. For example, the malaria-causing Plasmodium microtubule. Helical polypeptides may extend
falciparum in its sporozoite stage is coated with a protein through cell membranes and project on both sides,
that contains 37 repeats of the sequence NANP inter- while a globular protein of the same chain length may
spersed with 4 repeats of NDVP.93 These two sequences be almost completely embedded in the membrane.
have been indicated with single-letter abbreviations
for the amino acids.
With a large number of protein and DNA sequences 1. Conformations of Polypeptide Chains
available, it has become worthwhile to compare sequences
of the same protein in different species or of different To understand how a polypeptide chain folds we
proteins within the same or different species. Com- need to look carefully at the possible conformations
puter programs make it possible to recognize similar- of the peptide units. Since each peptide unit is nearly
ities and homologies between sequences even when planar, we can think of a polypeptide as a chain of flat
deletions and insertions have occurred.88,88a,94–97 The units fastened together as in Fig. 2-8. Every peptide
term homology has the precise biological definition unit is connected to the next by the α-carbon of an
“having a common evolutionary origin,” but it is often amino acid. This carbon provides two single bonds
used to describe any close similarity in sequence.98 to the chain and rotation can occur about both of them
Among a pair of homologous proteins, a change at a (except in the cyclic amino acid proline). To specify
given point in a sequence may be either conservative, the conformation of an amino acid unit in a polypeptide
meaning that a residue of similar character (large, chain, we must describe the torsion angles about both
small, positively charged, nonpolar, etc.) has been of these single bonds.11,76,102 These angles are indicated
substituted, or it may be nonconservative. by the symbols (cid:4) (phi) and(cid:5) (psi) and are assigned
the value 180° for the fully extended chain as shown in
Fig. 2-8. Each angle is taken as zero for the impossible
D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins conformation in which the two chain ends are in the
eclipsed conformation. By the same token, the torsion
All proteins are made in the same way but as the angle(cid:6)(omega)around the C–N bond of the amide
growing peptide chains peel off from the ribosome, is 0° for a planar cis peptide linkage and 180° for the
each of the thousands of different proteins in a living usualtrans linkage.
cell folds into its own special tertiary structure.88a Since both φ and ψ can vary for each residue in a
The number of possible conformations of a protein protein, there are a large number of possible confor-
chain is enormous. Consider a 300-residue polypeptide mations. However, many are excluded because they
which could stretch in fully extended form for ∼100 bring certain atoms into collision. This fact can be
nm. If the chain were folded back on itself about 13 established readily by study of molecular models.

--- Page 64 ---

60 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
α helix, 45 nm long,
1.1 nm diam, ~80 turns
Collagen
triple helix,
~29 nm β pleated sheet,
long 7× 7 nm
~0.5 nm thick
Double
helical Sphere,
rope, diameter = 4.3 nm
~21 nm
long
R
i+1
Oblate spheroid,
5.4× 2.7 nm H C
Extended,
~100 nm, ω N H
~0.5 nm i
width Prolate spheroid,
6.8× 3.4 nm
O C ψ
i
Repeat
H ith
d 0. i 7 st 2 a n n m ce C R i amino
φ acid
Cube, 3.45 nm i residue
H N
Brick,
1.8× 3.6 × 6.3 nm C O
R
i–1
C
H
Figure 2-8 Two peptide units in the completely
extendedβ conformation. The torsion angles φ,
i
ψ, and ω are defined as 0° when the main chain
0 5 10 15 20 nm i i
atoms assume the cis or eclipsed conformation.
The angles in the completely extended chain are
all 180°. The distance from one α carbon atom
Figure 2-7 Some idealized shapes that a 34.5 kDa protein molecule (Cα) to the next in a peptide chain is always 0.38
of 300 amino acids might assume. nm, no matter how the chain is folded.
Using a computer, it is possible to study the whole contains the pairs of torsion angles for the extended
range of possible combinations of φ and ψ. This has (cid:2)structures as well as for collagen. The lower area
been done for the peptide linkage by Ramachandran. contains allowed conformations for the right-handed
The results are often presented as plots of φ vs ψ helices. As can be seen from Fig. 2-10, most of the
(Ramachandran plots or conformational maps)102a,103,103a observed conformations of peptide units in a real
in which possible combinations of the two angles are protein fall into these regions. Glycyl residues are
indicated by blocked out areas. The original Ramachan- an exception. Since glycine has no β-carbon atom, the
dran plots were made by representing the atoms as conformations are less restricted. Out of nearly 1900
hard spheres of appropriate van der Waals radii, but non-glycine residues in well-determined protein struc-
theversion shown in Fig. 2-9 was calculated using a tures, 66 were found in disallowed areas of the Rama-
complex potential energy function to represent the chandran diagram.104a These were often accommodated
van der Waals attraction and the repulsion from close by local distortions in bond angles. The positions at
contact.103 This map was calculated for poly-L-alanine which such steric strain occurs are often in regions
but it would be very similar for most amino acids. concerned with function.104b One residue, which lies
Notice the two areas connected by a higher energy in a disallowed region in Fig. 2-10 is asparagine 297
bridge on the left side of Fig. 2-9. The upper area of aspartate aminotransferase (Fig. 2-6). It is located

--- Page 65 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 61
180° adjacent to the coenzyme site. The possible confor-
β C mations of proline residues are limited. The angle φ is
120° always–60± 20°, while ψ for the residue adjacent to the
proline N can be either ~150° or ~ –30°.105 Typical φ,ψ
α angles for some regular peptide structures are given in
60° L
Table 2-3.
Conformations of side chain groups are designated
ψ 0° by a series of torsion angles designated χ.11 Within
i
α proteins there are strong preferences for certain χ i ,χ 2
–60° R pairs.107 Torsion angles within proline rings are con-
sidered in Chapter 5,A,6.
–120°
2. The Extended Chain (cid:2) Structures
–180°
–180° –120° –60° 0° 60° 120° 180°
φ As was first pointed out by Pauling and Corey,108,109
an important structural principle is that within proteins
the maximum possible number of hydrogen bonds
involving the C=O and N–H groups of the peptide
Figure 2-9 Potential energy distribution in the φ–ψ plane
chain should be formed. One simple way to do this is
for a pair of peptide units with alanyl residues calculated to line up fully extended chains (φ = ψ = 180°) and to
using potential parameters of Scheraga and Flory. Contours
form hydrogen bonds between them. Such a structure
are drawn at intervals of 1 kcal (4.184 kJ) per mol going
down from 0 kcal per mol. The zero contour is dashed.
From Ramachandran et al.104 The points marked x are for
TABLE 2-3
the four ideal structures: twisted β structure (β), collagen (C),
right-handedα helix (α ), and the less favored left-handed Approximate Torsion Angles for Some Regular
R
α helix (α ). Peptide Structuresa
L
Structure φ (deg.) ψ (deg.)
180° Hypothetical fully extended
polyglycine chainb – 180 +180
β-Poly(l-alanine) in
120°
antiparallel-chain pleated sheet – 139 +135
Parallel-chain pleated sheet – 119 +113
60° Twisted β strand – 120 +140
Polyglycine II – 80 +150
Poly(l-proline) II – 78 +149
ψ 0° Collagenc – 60 ± 15 – 140 ± 15
Right-handedα helixd – 57 – 47
Left-handedα helix +57 +47
–60°
β Bends: Type I, residue 2 – 60 – 30
residue 3 – 90 0
–120° Type II, residue 2 – 60 120
residue 3 80 0
Type III, residue 2 & 3 – 60 – 30
–180 – ° 180° –120° –60° 0° 60° 120° 180° β Bulgese:“Classical”β bulgeresidue 1 – 100 – 45
φ G1 bulge residue 1 85 0
a From Liébecq, C., ed. (1992) Biochemical Nomenclature, Portland
Figure 2-10 Ramachandran plot for cytosolic aspartate Press, London and Chapel Hill (for the International Union of
aminotransferase. The angles φ and ψ were determined Biochemistry and Molecular Biology).
b Torsion angles for the fully extended chain can be designated either
experimentally from X-ray diffraction data at 0.16 nm resolu-
+180° or –180°, the two being equivalent. They are given as φ = –
tion and model building. The majority of conformations are 180° and ψ = +180° to facilitate comparison with the other struc-
those of α helices or of β structure. Glycine residues are
tures.
indicated by filled circles, while all other residues are denoted c Ramachandran, G. N. (1967) Treatise on Collagen, Vol. 1, p. 124,
by an “×”. One of these (green) lies quite far from an allowed Academic Press, New York
area and must give rise to localized strain.104b Extreme lower d Bothφ and ψ are quite variable but φ + ψ = –104°.
limit“allowed” regions by the hard-sphere criteria are shown e For residues other than these indicated the torsion angles are
in outline. From coordinates of Arthur Arnone et al. (unpub- about those of typical β structures.
lished).106

--- Page 66 ---

62 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
A
B
N H
H O
H
R H N H R O H R H N O R R H H N N H R O R H N H N R O H H N R O H
δ–O H R N
N H O H H
N H O O
O
δ+ R H N H R O H N R H H N R H H N H H N H δ+
δ– H H R O R H N O R H N R O R H N R O δ–
O H
N H O H H
N H O O
O
H N H
R H H
N H
N H
δ+
H R H N O H N R H N O R H R N R O R H N H R O R H N H R O
O R H H
O H
O
O
Figure 2-11 The extended chain β pleated sheet structures. (A) Stereoscopic drawing without atomic symbols. (B) Drawing
with atomic symbols. At the left is the antiparallel structure. The 0.70 nm spacing is slightly decreased from the fully extended
length. The amino acid side chains (R) extend alternately above and below the plane of the “accordion pleated” sheet. The
pairs of linear hydrogen bonds between the chains impart great strength to the structure. The chain can fold back on itself
using a “β turn” perpendicular to the plane of the pleated sheet. The parallel chain structure (right side) is similar but with a
less favorable hydrogen bonding arrangement. Arrows indicate chain directions.
exists for polyglycine and resembles that in Fig. 2-11. acids cannot be accommodated without some distor-
Notice that on the left side of this figure, the adjacent tion of the structure. Thus, the peptide chains in silk
chains run in opposite directions; hence, the term fibroin have a repeat distance of 0.70 nm compared
antiparallel (cid:2) structure. The antiparallel arrange- with the 0.72 nm for the fully extended chain (Fig. 2-8).
ment not only gives the best hydrogen bond formation Pauling and Corey108 showed that this shortening of
between chains but also permits a single chain to fold the chain could result from rotation of angle φ by ∼40°
back on itself giving a compact hairpin loop. (to–140°) and rotation of ψ in the opposite direction
by∼45° (to +135°) to give a slightly puckered chain.
Pleated sheets. While a fully extended polygly- The resulting multichain structure (shown in Fig. 2-11)
cine chain is possible, the side chains of other amino is known as a pleated sheet. As in this figure, both

--- Page 67 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 63
A
B HO
OH
+
N
O
O C
O
NH2
O P O N NH2
–O
P O N
O O
NAD+ –O
HO
OH
Figure 2-13 (A) Stereoscopic view of the nucleotide binding domain of glyceraldehyde
phosphate dehydrogenase. The enzyme is from Bacillus stearothermophilus but is homologous
to the enzyme from animal sources. Residues are numbered 0–148. In this wire model all of
the main chain C, O, and N atoms are shown but side chains have been omitted. The large
Figure 2-12 Straight central twisted β sheet, with strands roughly perpendicular to the page, is seen clearly;
(left) and twisted (right) hydrogen bonds are indicated by dashed lines. Helices are visible on both sides of the sheet.
peptide chains in extended The coenzyme NAD+ is bound at the end of the β sheet toward the viewer. Note that the two
β conformations. From phosphate groups in the center of the NAD+ are H-bonded to the N terminus of the helix
Chothia.110 beginning with R10. From Skarzynski et al.111a (B) Structural formula for NAD+.
parallel and antiparallel strands are often present in a Twisted sheets. X-ray diffraction studies have
singleβ sheet within a protein. shown that β pleated sheets are usually not flat but are
Theβ structure is one of the most important sec- twisted. In a twisted sheet the individual polypeptide
ondary structures in proteins. It occurs in about 80% chains make a shallow left-handed helix. However,
of the soluble globular proteins whose structures have when successive carbonyl groups are viewed along the
been determined. In many cases almost the entire direction of the chain, a right-handed twist is seen
protein is made up of β structure. Single strands of (Fig. 2-12).110 Such twisted β sheets are often found in
extended polypeptide chain are sometimes present the globular proteins. An example (Fig. 2-13) is the
within globular proteins but more often a chain folds “nucleotide-binding” domain of a dehydrogenase
back on itself to form a hairpin loop. A second fold enzyme. The twist of the sheet is seen clearly in this
may be added to form an antiparallel “β meander”102 stereoscopic view. When such chains are associated
and additional folds to form β sheets. Beta structures intoβ sheets, whether parallel or antiparallel, and are
are found in silk fibers (Box 2-B) as well as in soluble viewed in a direction perpendicular to the chains and
proteins. looking down the edge of the sheet, a left-handed
“propeller” is seen. Such a propeller is visible in the

--- Page 68 ---

64 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
drawing of carboxypeptidase A (Fig. 2-14). towards the observed right-handed twist.111 Nonpla-
The cause of the twist in β sheets appears to lie narity in the amide groups (Fig. 2-5) may also contrib-
in noncovalent interactions between hydrogen atoms ute. Interstrand interactions seem to be important.111b
on the β-carbon atoms of side chains and the peptide
backbone atoms. For side chains of most L- amino Properties of (cid:2)sheets. In antiparallel β sheets,
acids these interactions provide a small tendency nonpolar residues are often present on one side of the
sheet and polar residues on the other. The nonpolar
side may be buried in the protein, perhaps backed up
against another β sheet of similar structure as in the
carbohydrate-bindinglectin shown in Fig 2-15 to give
a(cid:2) sandwich. To accommodate this packing arrange-
ment, nonpolar and polar residues tend to alternate in
the amino acid sequence. The facing nonpolar surfaces
of the two sheets are essentially smooth. The β strands
in one sheet lie at an angle of ∼30° to those in the other
sheet. The twist of the strands allows pairs of nonpolar
side chains from the two sheets to maintain good van
der Waals contact with each other for a considerable
distance along the strands. Beta sheets of silks (Box
2-B) and of immunoglobulin domains (Fig 2-16B) are
also thought to be associated in a back-to-back fashion.
Parallelβ structures have been found only when there
are five or more strands, some of which may be anti-
parallel to the others. The parallel β structure is appar-
ently less stable than the antiparallel structure. Parallel
strands are usually buried in the protein, being sur-
rounded by either other extended strands or helices.
Chains of hydrogen bonds and amide linkages
Figure 2-14 A “ribbon” drawing of the 307- residue protein- pass across β sheets perpendicular to the chain direc-
hydrolyzing enzyme carboxypeptidase A. In this type of
tion. There are partial positive and negative charges
drawing wide ribbons are used to show β strands and helical
along the outside edges of the sheet where these hydro-
turns while narrower ribbons are used for bends and loops
gen bond chains terminate (Fig. 2-11). The polarity of
of the peptide chains. The direction from the N terminus to
C terminus is indicated by the arrowheads on the β strands. these chains alternates and the positive end of one
No individual atoms are shown and side chains are omitted. peptide bond is relatively near to the negative end of
Courtesy of Jane Richardson.117 the next along the edges of the sheets. These “unsatis-
fied ends” of hydrogen bond chains are often sites of
Figure 2-15 A stereoscopic alpha-carbon
plot showing the three-dimensional structure
of favin, a sugar-binding lectin from the
broad bean (Vicia faba). In this plot only the
α-carbon atoms are shown at the vertices.
The planar peptide units are represented as
straight line segments. Side chains are not
shown. The protein consists of two identical
subunits, each composed of a 20-kDa α chain
and a 20-kDa β chain. The view is down
the twofold rotational axis of the molecule.
In the upper subunit the residues involved
in the front β sheet are connected by double
lines, while those in the back sheet are
connected by heavy solid lines. In the lower
subunit the α chain is emphasized. Notice
how the back βsheet(not the chain) is con-
tinuous between the two subunits. Sites for
bound Mn2+ (MN), Ca2+ (CA), and sugar
(CHO) are marked by larger circles. From
Reeke and Becker.112

--- Page 69 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 65
Figure 2-16 Beta cylinders. (A) Stereo- A 10 10
scopicα-carbon plot of plastocyanin, a
copper-containing electron-transferring 90 90
protein of chloroplasts. The copper atom
at the top is also shown coordinated by the
nitrogen atoms of two histidine side chains.
The side chains of the aromatic residues 30 60 30 60
phenylalanines 19, 29, 35, 41, 70, and 82
and tyrosines 80 and 83 are also shown. 70 40 70 40
Most of these form an internal cluster.
From Guss and Freeman.116 (B) Ribbon 20 80 20 80
drawing of immunoglobulin fold. This
is a common structure in domains of the
immunoglobulins and in many other
50 50
extracellular proteins. Two layers of anti-
parallelβ sheet are stacked face to face to
form a flattened barrel. One disulfide bridge
is always present and is represented as a
thick rod. From J. Richardson.117 (C) Five B
tandem fibronectin type III domains.
These domains, which are found in the
muscle protein titin as well as in
fibronectin, resemble immunoglobulin
domains but lack disulfide bridges. From
Erickson.117a Figure courtesy of Harold P.
Erickson.
C
interaction of polar groups from side chains. Thus, hemerythin (Fig. 16-20), transporter proteins that carry
OH groups of serine or threonine residues, amide hydrophobic ligands,115 and the immunoglobulins in
groups of asparagine and glutamine residues, etc., which each domain contains a β barrel.
often fold back and hydrogen-bond to these ends. The eight-stranded β cylinder of plastocyanin (Fig.
Edges of β sheets can also serve as binding sites 2-16A) is somewhat flattened and can also be regarded
for other polar molecules. For example, substrates as a β sandwich.116,118 However, the β barrel of triose
bind to an edge of a β sheet in the active sites of trypsin phosphate isomerase (see Fig. 2-28) is surrounded by
and other proteases (Chapter 12). Some proteins, eightα helices which provide additional stability and
e.g. the lectin shown in Fig. 2-15, form dimers by a high symmetry. Bacterial outer membranes contain
joining identical edges of a β sheet in antiparallel pores created by very large β cylinders within proteins
orientation.112 calledporins.119,120 The one shown in Fig. 8-20 has 16
strands.
Cylinders and barrels. The twisted β sheets of A single β strand can also be wound into a cylin-
proteins are often curved to form structures known der with the hydrogen bonds running parallel to the
as(cid:2)cylinders or (cid:2) barrels (Fig. 2-16).113,114 Simple helix axis. A right-handed parallel (cid:2) helix of this
cylinders formed by parallel β strands form the back- type has been found in the bacterial enzyme pectate
bones of the electron transport protein plastocyanin, lyase.121,122 The polypeptide chains of the 353-residue
the enzyme superoxide dismutase, the oxygen carrier protein contain seven complete turns of about 22

--- Page 70 ---

66 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
N N
Figure 2-17 Wire model of the tailspike protein of
bacteriophage P22 of Salmonella. Three of these fish-
shaped molecules associate as a trimer to form the
spike. From Steinbacher et al.123
C C
residues each which form a cylindrical parallel β sheet. type of bulge shown in Fig. 2-18, the extra residue is
The cylinder is folded inward into roughly an L-shape glycine with torsion angles of about φ = 85°,ψ = 0°,
with packed side chains filling the remaining inside which are possible only for glycine. In the two β cylin-
space. The tailspikes of bacteriophage P22, a virus ders of trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase (Fig. 12-9),
ofSalmonella,are formed from 666-residue protein there are seven β bulges.
subunits which contain 13 turns of parallel β helix Beta structures are found in many small peptides.
(Fig. 2-17).123 The hormone oxytocin (Fig. 2-4), the antibiotics grami-
The tendency for a β sheet to fold into a cylinder cidin S (Fig. 2-4) and valinomycin (Fig. 8-22), and the
is encouraged in antiparallel β structures by the exist- mushroom peptide antamanide (Box 28-B) are among
ence of a common irregularity called the β bulge.124,125 these. The cyclic structures of these compounds favor
As illustrated in Fig. 2-18, a β bulge contains an extra formation of antiparallel β strands with sharp turns at
residue inserted into one of the chains. In the second the ends. Polypeptide antibiotics that have alternating
A B
O C H H N H
H N
H N R3 R C O
R2 C O C O
R2 C O H N Rx
H N Rx
H H N O 1 H
H
H N H C H H C H
R1 O N O O N
C H C H
H H
O
N N N
H
O
R H
O
β turn
Figure 2-18 Typical β bulges in antiparallel pleated sheets. The residues R , R , and R identify the bulges. (A) A “classic”
1 2 x
β bulge, in which φ and ψ are nearly those of an α helix while other torsion angles are approximately those of regular β
1 1
structures. (B) The G1 bulge in which the first residue is glycine with φ = 85°,ψ = 0°. It is attached to a type II β turn of
1 1
which the glycine (labeled 1) is the third residue.

--- Page 71 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 67
sequences of D and L residues can be coiled into a β Beta propellers. Another major folding pattern is
helix126,127 or a pair of polypeptide chains arranged in a circular array of four to eight “blades” that form a
an antiparallel fashion can form a double stranded β propeller-like structure. Each blade is a small, roughly
helix with an 0.3 to 0.4-nm hydrophilic pore through triangular four-stranded antiparallel β sheet (See Figs.
the center. These peptide antibiotics appear to exert 11-7 and 15-23). Sequences that fold into these blades
their antibacterial action by creating pores through cell can often, but not always, be recognized as WD repeats.
membranes and allowing ions to pass through without These are typically 44- to 60-residue sequences that
control. have the sequence GH (Gly-His) about 11– 24 resi-
dues from the N terminus and WD (Trp-Asp) at the
C terminus.127a,127b This repeat sequence encodes the
BOX 2-B SILKS
The green lacewing fly Chrysopa sequences to find each other and
flava lays its eggs on 1 cm silk stalks form oriented crystalline regions.d
glued to the undersides of leaves. Spiders may produce silk from
It has been proposed, as for other as many as seven different types of
silks, that the peptide chains in the glands. Dragline silk, by which a
stalks are aligned perpendicular to spider itself may descend, is stron-
the long dimension of the fiber and ger than steel but because of the
are folded back on themselves many coiled amorphous regions may be
times to form a β sheet with only ~ 8 stretched by 35%.g– l The most elastic
residues between folds.a The chains silks are those of the catching spirals
ofsilk fibroin, the major protein of of orb-webs.i,j,l They can be stretched
silkworm silk, contain 50 repeats of 200% and contain a variety of repeat-
the sequence:b ed sequences, including GPCC(X) .
n
The latter is similar to sequences in
GAGAGSGAAG(SGAGAG) Y elastin (Section 4), and is able to form
8
type II β bends, which may have
All of the alanine and serine side proline in position 2 and must have
Courtesy of Ralph Buchsbaum
chains of this sequence presumably glycine in position 3 (Fig. 2-24).
protrude on one side of a β sheet while the other A chain of repeated β bend motifs can form a flexible
side has only the hydrogen atoms of the glycine. spring, a β spiral as proposed for elastin. Genes for
This permits an efficient stacking of the sheets with spider silk have been cloned and are being used to
interdigitation of the side chains of the alanine and engineer new proteins with commercial uses, e.g., to
serine residues of adjacent sheets. help anchor cells in regenerating body tissues.d,h,j
However, DNA sequences of silk genes have
revealed a greater complexity. The silk fibroin a Geddes, A. J., Parker, K. D., Atkins, E. D. T., and Beighton, E.
sequence suggests that at bends between β strands (1968)J. Mol. Biol.32, 343 – 368
there are often S – S bridges and the crystalline β sheet b Garel, J.-P. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 105 – 108
c Vollrath, R. (1992) Sci. Am.266(Mar), 70 – 76
domains are interspersed with 100 – 200 residue d Calvert, P. (1998) Nature (London)393, 309 – 311
segments of amorphous proteinb– d whose coiled e Mori, K., Tanaka, K., Kikuchi, Y., Waga, M., Waga, S., and
chains can be stretched greatly. The protein from Mizuno, S. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.251, 217– 228
f van Beek, J. D., Beaulieu, L., Schäfer, H., Demura, M., Asakura,
Bombyx mori consists of 350-kDa heavy chains linked
T., and Meier, B. H. (2000) Nature (London)405, 1077– 1079
by a disulfide bond to 25-kDa light chains.e A silk- g Simmons, A. H., Michal, C. A., and Jelinski, L. W. (1996) Science
wormhousing silk contains polyalanine sequences, 271, 84 – 87
e.g. (Ala) . These evidently form α-helical h Hinman, M. B., and Lewis, R. V. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 19320 –
10– 14
regions.f Silk molecules are synthesized and stored 19324
i Hayashi, C. Y., and Lewis, R. V. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.275, 773 – 784
in glands as a concentrated solution of apparently j Guerette, P. A., Ginzinger, D. G., Weber, B. H. F., and Gosline, J.
globular molecules. The silk is extruded through a M. (1996) Science272, 112 – 115
spinneret, whose diameter is ~ 10 µm, after which k Spek, E. J., Wu, H.-C., and Kallenbach, N. R. (1997) J. Am. Chem.
Soc.119, 5053 – 5054
the silkworm stretches the silk, causing it to form a
l Hayashi, C. Y., and Lewis, R. V. (2000) Science287, 1477– 1479
stiff fiber. Apparently the stretching of the folded
polypeptide chains permits the β-sheet-forming

--- Page 72 ---

68 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
fourthβ strand of one blade followed by the first three and hair. In the α helix both φ and ψ are about –50 to
strands of the next blade. This overlap snaps the –60° and except at the N-terminal helix end, each NH is
blades together to form the propeller. At least one hydrogen bonded to the fourth C=O further down the chain.
tight turn is present in each blade. A seven-bladed All of the N–H and C=O groups of the peptide linkages
propeller is present in the β subunits of the regulatory lie roughly parallel to the helix axis; the N–H groups
GTP-hydrolyzing G proteins, which couple extracel- point toward the N terminus of the chain and the
lular signals to intracellular enzymes and ion channels carbonyl groupstoward the C terminus (Fig. 2-19A).
(Fig. 11-7). A similar β propeller is present in clathrin, The number of amino acid units per turn of the
which forms cage-like enclosures around endocytic helix is ∼3.6, with five turns of the helix containing
vesicles (Chapter 8).127c Six-bladed propellers are 18 residues. The pitch (repeat distance) of the helix,
predicted to occur in many extracellular proteins.127d which can be determined experimentally from X-ray
Aβ propeller binds the coenzyme PQQ in bacterial diffraction data, is 0.54 nm. Polar coordinates for the
dehydrogenases (Fig. 15-23). α helix have been tabulated.130 With L-amino acids,
the right-handed helix, is more stable than the left-
handed helix which has so far not been found in pro-
3. Helices teins. Frequently, however, a few residues have the φ,
ψ angles of this helix. The φ,ψ angles of the α helix
Thealpha helix represents the second major struc- are given in Table 2-3 as –57°,–47°, but are much more
tural element of soluble proteins108,128 and is also found variable in real helices. In erythrocruorin, for which
in many fibrous proteins, including those of muscle an accurate structure determination has been made,131
A Thepitch of a helix is the length of one complete
turn. The translation per residue is the pitch
divided by the number of residues per turn,
0.54/3.6 = 0.15 nm for the α helix.
Heme group with
Fe atom on center
B
Approximate outer
surface when side
chains are included
Figure 2-19 The α helix. (A) The right-handed α helix with vertical hydrogen bonds indicated by dotted lines. The positions
of the amino acid side chains are indicated by the numbers. (B) The conformation of the peptide backbone of myoglobin.129
Five long α helices are indicated as rods. Several shorter helices can also be seen. The overall size of the molecule is approxi-
mately 4.4 × 4.4 × 2.5 nm.

--- Page 73 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 69
the average values are φ = –64°,ψ = –40°. More impor- chains in water may exist as a mixture of α and 3
10
tant is the observation that φ + ψ = 104° within about forms in equilibrium.146 The (cid:7) helix, with 4.4 residues
± 10° for most residues in helices of this and other per turn is of a larger diameter than the α helix and has
proteins.132,133 The deviation from the ideal dimen- only been found in proteins as a single turn, usually at
sions results in part from the hydrogen bonding of a C terminus.132,132a
water molecules or polar protein side chains to the
carbonyl oxygen atoms in the helix.131 Properties of helices. The dipoles of the back-
Helix formation is spontaneous for peptides as bone amide linkages of an α helix are all oriented in
short as 13 residues in water.134,135 Although the the same direction. The positive end of each dipole is
difference in thermodynamic stability between an α associated through hydrogen bonding with the nega-
helix and an unfolded “random coil” conformation tive end of another. This leaves three partial positive
is small, poly-L-alanine peptides form helices in water. charges at the N terminus of the helix and three partial
Glycine destabilizes helices, presumably
because of the increased entropy of the un-
+
folded chain which results from the wider A B
range of the conformational angles φ and ψ for H
H
glycyl residues. Proline destabilizes helices
even more because its restricted φ and ψ an- H C N
gles cause the helix to be kinked.136,137 How- N 1 H N
ever, prolyl residues are often present at ends H C
of helices. Other amino acids all fit into helices N 2 3 C 1
but may stabilize or destabilize the helix C HO 7’ H N 2
C
d gr e o p u e p n s d .1 in 38 g –1 u 40 p o B n u l i k m y m si e d d e i a c t h e a ly in n g e r i o g u hb p o s r w in i g th 3 OC N H 4 6 N C 2 2 7
1
a low dielectric constant stabilize helices by HO N C C5 10’ 3 10 O
strengthening the hydrogen bonds within the N C H (cid:1)
helices.141 H O 5 3
C (cid:7)
Helices of smaller and larger diameter O N
than that of the α helix are possible. The 6 C N O H C 9 H 4
C
most important is the 3 helix (or 3.0 10
helix), which has exactly 10 three residues 10 per O 7 CH N H O 12N
turn.140,142–144 Each NH forms a hydrogen C
H O N 8
bond to the third C=O on down the chain; C
15
thus, the 3 helix is tighter than the α helix. N N C
Although l 1 o 0 ng 3 10 helices are seldom found C H 9 O C 5 O
in proteins, a single turn of this tighter helix 10 N C
frequently occurs as a “defect” at the end of C O H
6
anα helix. A polymer of α-aminoisobutyric 11 N O
acid forms long 3 helices because the α- O H C
10
dimethyl side chains constrain φ and ψ to H N O 12
appropriate values.145 Short helical peptide 13 C
N
C O
C L
L
14 O N L
Figure 2-20 (A) The α helix showing the three chains C H L
of interconnected amide groups and hydrogen bonds Q 1 a
with partial net positive and negative charges at the H O N C 15 N T d IIV
ends. These chains run across the turns of the helical 4 5
polypeptide backbone. (B) Scheme illustrating hydro- N H C 16 O e
gen-bonding pattern for 2 ribbon, 3 helix, α helix,
7 10
andπ helix. (C) The α helix represented as a helical 17 N O H g
wheel. Imagine viewing the helix from the N-terminal C C 7 2 TQ
end of the segment with the lines corresponding to the 18 N EH b Q
O H C
backbone of the peptide. Residues, which are desig-
c 3 6
nated by single letters, are spaced 100° apart since there N 19 E f E
are 3.6 residues/turn. The peptide shown is a 22-residue O C T D E
S
sequence from a “leucine-zipper” domain of a protein
that participates in gene regulation. From Fathallah- – O
Shaykhet al.145a

--- Page 74 ---

70 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
negative charges at the C terminus and creates a “macro- to account for the fact that the X-ray diffraction pattern
dipole.” It has been estimated that each end of the of the keratins of skin and hair indicated a pitch of
helix carries one-half an elementary unit of charge.147–148b 0.51 nm rather than the 0.54 nm expected for an α helix.
However, this may be an overestimate. The partial
charges are connected by three chains of hydrogen
bonds that run across the turns of the helix as is indi-
A
cated in Fig. 2-20A. These chains are polarized and
also possess a large hyperpolarizability,149 i.e., the
polarization of the helix increases more rapidly than
in direct proportion to an applied electrical field.
In a 3 helix, there are just two chains of hydro-
10
gen bonds across the polypeptide chain and running
the length of the helix. The characteristic hydrogen
bonding of the α helix and that of the 3 helix are
10
often both present within a helix. Irregularities with
3 type hydrogen bonds, arising from interactions
10
with amino acid side chains or with solvent molecules,
may cause a helix to be kinked or curved.132 Side
chains of polar residues, including those of Asn, Asp,
Thr, and Ser (and less often Glu, Gln, or His), frequently
fold back and hydrogen bond to the NH and CO groups
that carry the partial charges at the helix ends (Fig.
2-20). The side chain of the third residue in the helix
may also hydrogen bond to the NH of the first resi-
due.133,150–157 The hydrogen bonding of a negatively
charged side chain group to the N-terminal end of the
helix or of a positively charged group to the C-termi-
nal end provides an N-cap or a C-cap which helps
to stabilize the helix by strengthening its hydrogen
bonds.158 However, the most frequent residue at the B
C-terminal end is glycine.151,155,159 Helices often point E Q L
R T Q
toward active sites of enzymes and interactions of the H Q E G
E A
h be e l i i m x d p i o p r o ta le n s t w to i t t h h e s u m b e s c tr h a a t n e i s s u m n o d f e r a g c o ti i o n n g o r f e a th ct e i s o e n may Q c g K L L L R V V N V M e Q ’ b’ K E Y
catalysts.148,149,160 KNS D f d L a’
f’ D SNK
a m re y o m S g t a l a o d c b e k i u i n n p , g w a o l a m f s h o th s e t e l i e c f n i e r t s s i t r i e p n ly r o p o t r e f o i α n te h f i o n e r l s i . w ce h s M . i c a h O n n t y h e p e o r c f o o t t m e h i e n - s s e, A Y E K b E e a M V N V V R L L L L d’ E g’ c Q ’ E
plete three-dimensional structure was worked out by G K E H R
A E E
X-ray crystallography.129 Myoglobin is a small oxygen- R E
carrying protein of muscle. Its structure is closely related GCN4– Jun GCN4 – Fos
to that of hemoglobin of blood. Its 153 amino acid
residues are arranged in eight different α-helical seg-
ments containing from 7 to 26 residues each. These
Figure 2-21 (A) Ribbon drawing of the transcription factor
rodlike helices are stacked together in an irregular
called Max in a complex with DNA. The C termini of the
fashion as shown in Fig. 2-19. Serum albumin (Box 2-A)
peptide chains are at the top.169 Courtesy of S. K. Burley.
has 28 helices organized into three homologous domains.
(B) Helical wheel representation of residues 2–31 of the
In contrast, the filamentous bacterial viruses have pro- coiled coil portion of the leucine zipper (residues 249–281)
tein coats made up of small subunits, each coiled as a of the related transcription factor GCN4 from yeast. The
singleα helix. These are packed in a regular manner view is from the N terminus and the residues in the first two
to form the rodlike virus coats (Fig. 7-7). turns are circled. Heptad positions are labeled a–g. Leucine
side chains at positions d interact with residues d’ and e’ of
the second subunit which is parallel to the first. However,
Coiled coils. In a large family of proteins, two
right-handedα helices are coiled around each other in several residues were altered to give a coiled coil that mimics
the structure of the well-known heterodimeric oncoproteins
a left-handed superhelix (Fig. 2-21).161–167 This coiled
Fos and Jun (see Chapter 11). This dimer is stabilized by ion
coil structure was first suggested by Francis Crick166 pairs which are connected by dashed lines. See John et al.172

--- Page 75 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 71
Crick suggested that two supercoiled α helices inclined often have a parallel orientation, but synthetic pep-
at an angle of 20° to each other would produce the tides have been designed to form antiparallel coiled
apparent shortening in the helix pitch and would also coils.179,179a
permit nonpolar side chains from one strand to fit into
gaps in the surface of the adjacent strand, a knobs- Helix bundles. A third peptide chain can be
into-holes bonding arrangement. Helical strands added to a coiled coil to form a triple-stranded bun-
tend to coil into ropes because a favorable interstrand dle.180–183 An example is the glycoprotein laminin
contact can be repeated along the length of the strands found in basement membranes. It consists of three
only if the strands coil about each other. A coiled coil peptide chains which, for ~600 residues at their C-
can often be recognized by heptad repeats: terminal ends, form a three-stranded coil with heptad
repeats.182,184 Numerous proteins are folded into four
(a-b-c-d-e-f-g) helical segments that associate as four-helix bundles
n
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (Fig. 2-22).185–188 These include electron carriers, hor-
mones, and structural proteins. The four-helix bundle
Here, residues a,d, and g (1, 4, and 7) often carry non- not only is a simple packing arrangement, but also
polar side chains. These come together in the coiled allows interactions between the + and – ends of the
coil as is illustrated in the helical wheel representations macro-dipoles of the helices.
in Fig. 2-21B and provide a longitudinal hydrophobic Membranes contain many largely α-helical proteins.
strip along the helix.167 Charged groups are often Cell surface receptors often appear to have one, two,
present in other locations and in such a way as to or several membrane-spanning helices (see Chapter 8).
provide electrostatic stabilization through interactions The single peptide chain of the bacterial light-operated
between residues within a single α helix170-171a or ion pump bacteriorhodopsin (Fig. 23-45) folds back
between the pair of helices. The latter type of inter- upon itself to form seven helical rods just long enough
action also determines whether the coiled-coil consists to span the bacterial membrane in which it functions.189
of a parallel or antiparallel pair and whether the two Photosynthetic reaction centers contain an α helix
helices are of identical or of differing amino acid bundle which is formed from two different protein
sequence.171b subunits (Fig. 23-31).190 A recently discovered α,α
Recent attention has been focused on a DNA-bind- barrel contains 12 helices. Six parallel helices form
ing structure called the leucine zipper. A pair of an inner barrel and 6 helices antiparallel to the first 6
parallelα helices are joined as a coiled coil at one end form an outer layer (see Fig. 2-29).191–193
but flare out at the other end to bind to DNA. In the
yeast transcription factor GCN4, whose three-dimen-
sional structure has been determined to high resolu-
tion (Fig. 2-21B),172 the d position of the coiled coil is
occupied by leucine and the e and g positions are often
occupied by charged groups that form stabilizing ion
pairs. Residues at positions b,c, and f are generally on
the outside and exposed to solvent.168,171,173 The coiled
coil flares out at the C-terminal ends and carries DNA-
binding groups. The structure of a related transcription
factor is shown in Fig. 2-21A.169
The muscle proteins myosin174 and tropomyosin
also both consist of pairs of identical chains oriented
in the same direction. The two 284-residue tropo-
myosin chains each contain 40 heptads and are linked
by a single disulfide bridge. X-ray crystallographic
studies175,176 and electron microscopy177 show that the
molecule is a rod of 2.0 nm diameter and 41 nm length,
the dimensions expected for the coiled coil. However,
as with other “regular” protein structures, there are
some irregularities. Myosin chains (Chapter 19) contain
156 heptads.
Another group of proteins have parallel coiled
Figure 2-22 Ribbon drawing of an up-and-down four-helix
coils flanked by nonhelical domains in subunits that
bundle in myohemerythrin. The two spheres represent the
associate as filaments. These include the keratins of
two iron atoms which carry an O molecule. They are coordi-
skin as well as the intermediate fiber proteins of the 2
nated by histidine and aspartate side chains. Courtesy of
cytoskeleton (Chapter 7).164,178 Natural coiled coils J. Richardson.117

--- Page 76 ---

72 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
related to that of collagen.201,202 Shorter 4- to 8-residue
4. Polyglycine II and Collagen
segments of left-handed polyproline helix are found in
many proteins.203
In a second form of polyglycine each amino acid
residue is rotated 120° from the preceding one about
a 3-fold screw axis as is shown in the end view of Fig.
2-23A. The angle ψ is about 150° while φ is about –80° 5. Turns and Bends
for each residue. The distance along the axis is 0.31
To form a globular protein, a polypeptide chain
nm/residue and the repeat distance is 0.93 nm. The
must repeatedly fold back on itself. The turns or bends
molecules can coil into either a right-handed or a left-
by which this is accomplished can be regarded as a
handed helix. In this structure, the N–H and C=O
third major secondary structural element in proteins.
groups protrude perpendicular to the axis of the helix
and, as in the β structure, can form H-bonds with Turns often have precise structures, a few of which are
illustrated in Fig. 2-24. As components of the loops of
adjacent chains.
polypeptide chains in active sites, turns have a special
Poly (L-proline) assumes a similar helical structure.
importance for the functioning of enzymes and other
However, the presence of the bulky side chain groups
proteins. In addition, tight turns are often sites for
induces a left-handed helical twist. Collagen, the
modification of proteins after their initial synthesis
principal protein of connective tissue, basement mem-
(Section F).
branes, and other structures, is the most abundant
The(cid:2) turn (Fig. 2-24) is often found in hairpin or
protein in the animal body. Its fundamental unit of
reverse turns at the edges of β sheets (Fig. 2-11) and at
structure is a triple helix of overall dimensions 1.4 x 300
other locations.204–212 If all four residues that contribute
nm which resembles the structure of polyglycine II but
toβ bends are counted, they constitute about one-third
contains only three chains.195 The left-handed helices
of the amino acid residues in most proteins.124 In many
of the individual chains are further wound into a
β turns, the C=O of the first residue hydrogen bonds
right-handed superhelix (Fig. 2-23B,C). Collagen
to the NH of the fourth residue. This hydrogen bond
contains 33% glycine and 21% (proline + hydroxypro-
may be part of the hydrogen bond network of a β
lines). The reason for the high glycine content is that
pleated sheet. The peptide unit between α-carbon
bulky side chain groups cannot fit inside the triple
atoms 2 and 3 of the turn is perpendicular to the sheet.
helix. A hydrogen-bonded cylinder of hydration
There are two possibilities for the orientation of this
surrounds each triple helix and is anchored by hydro-
peptide unit. In a type I turn, the C=O is down when
gen bonds to the –OH groups of the hydroxyproline
the turn is viewed as in Fig. 2-24, while the side chains
residues.196 Sequences of several collagen chains have
been established. One of these contains ∼1050 residues, of residues 2 and 3 point upwards or outward on the
∼1020 of which consist of ∼340 triplets of sequence opposite side of the bend. In a type II turn, the C=O is
up and the NH down. Residue 3 is always glycine in a
GlyXY where Y is usually proline and X is often hydroxy-
type II turn because the side chain would collide with
proline (Hyp).197,198 The commonest triplet is Gly-Hyp-
the C=O group if any other amino acid were present.
Pro.
As is seen in Fig. 2-24, a trans-proline can fit at position
There are several types of collagen. In one type,
2 in a type II turn206 as well as in type I turns. A cis-
two identical chains of one kind are coiled together
proline residue can fit at position 2 or position 3 in a
with a third dissimilar chain to form the triple helix.
type I β turn.137,213
Several of these triple helices associate to form 8-nm
Thetype III β turn is similar to a type I turn but has
microfibrils (Fig 2-23D).199 Once synthesized, collagen
theφ,ψ angles of a 3 helix and the two chains emerg-
is extensively modified and crosslinked. See Chapter 8. 10
ing from the turn are not as nearly parallel as they are
Collagen-like triple helices also occur within other
in type I turns. Beta turns of the less common types I’,
proteins. One of these is protein C1q, a component of
II’, and III’ have a left-handed twist. As can be seen
thecomplement system of blood (Chapter 31). This
in Fig. 2-24, this permits a better match to the twist of
protein interacts with antibodies to trigger a major
strands in a β sheet. Unless glycine is present, these
aspect of the immune response. C1q has six subunits,
bends are less stable because of steric hindrance.214,215
each made up of three different polypeptide chains of
Polar side chain groups such as those of aspartate or
about 200 residues apiece. Beginning a few residues
asparagine often form hydrogen bonds to the central
from the N termini, there are over 80 residues in each
peptide units of β turns.214
chain with collagen-like sequences. The three chains
The tight γ turn215 and the proline-containing β
apparently form a triple helix within each subunit.
turn shown in Fig. 2-24 are thought to be major com-
However, the C-terminal portions are globular in
ponents of the secondary structure of elastin.216–218
nature.200 Collagen-like tails also are present on some
This stretchable polymer, which consists largely of
forms of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (see Chapter
nonpolar amino acids, is the most abundant protein
12C,10). The extensins of plant cell walls contain
of the elastic fibers of skin, lungs, and arteries. The
4-hydroxyproline and evidently have a structure

--- Page 77 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 73
A B
H H H H H H
O C O C
N H N
H C C C N C C C N H
H O N C C O H H H O N C C O H
H H
H H
H H H H H H H H H
N O C H N O C H N O C
H
H C C C N C C C N C C C N
H O N C C O H H H O N C C O H H H O N C C O H
H H H
H H H H H H H H H
N O C H N O C H
H C C C N C C C N
Y H O N C C O H H H O N C C O H
H H
H H
0 0.5 nm
X
C D
* *
500 nm
Figure 2-23 (A) The structure of polyglycine if
viewed down the axis of a helix chain. Note the
threefold symmetry within the structure. Polyproline
forms a similar structure and collagen is thought to be
a triple-stranded “rope” of three peptide chains having
essentially the same structure but in addition contain-
ing a right-handed supercoil. This is illustrated by the crystal structure of a collagen-like peptide shown in B and C. (B) View
similar to that in (A), but showing how three chains form the triple-stranded ropes separated by a cylinder of hydration. The
structure is shown as a wire model. The x’s are water molecules. They form an extensive network of H-bonds to one another
and to peptide groups. From Bella et al.194 C) Electron micrograph of collagen fibrils, each of which consists of many triple-
helical units. Deposited from suspension and shadow cast with chromium. Courtesy of Jerome Gross, M.D. (D) Stereoscopic
view of a collagen-like model peptide. Each of the three parallel 30-residue chains contains a (Pro-Hyp-Gly) “cap” at each
3
end and the 12-residue sequence Ile-Thr-Gly-Ala-Arg-Gly-Leu-Ala-Gly-Pro-Hyp-Gly in the center. This sequence is found in
human type III collagen and includes a site (green asterisk) of known mutations (see Chapter 8). From Kramer et al.194a
Courtesy of Helen Berman.

--- Page 78 ---

74 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
H R2 H R2 O H
X
H
C N C
R3
C
C
N C
C H
H H H
N O C O N C O
Left Right
R1 C O H N R4 R1 C O H N R4
H C C H H C C H Figure 2-25 Right- and left-handed crossover connections
in proteins. These connections are nearly always right-
handed. The broad arrows represent β strands. The
β Turn: Type I β Turn: Type II crossover often contains a helix. Units of two adjacent β
strands (βαβ units) with an α helix between are found
2 O H N H O C frequently in globular proteins.
C C N C 3 H H C1 3C H
H O H
N H C O H C N H 6. Domains, Subunits, and Interfaces
R1 C O H N R4 N C 2 C O Many proteins are organized into tightly folded
H C C H H CH globular“domains” consisting of 50–150 amino acid
residues.117,222–227 Smaller proteins may have 2 or 3
β Turn: Type II
CH3 CH3
domains but large proteins may have more. For exam-
with proline γ Turn ple, the immunoglobulin “heavy chains” (Chapter 31)
have four or five domains similar to that shown in
Fig. 2-16B. The enormous 3000-kDa muscle protein
Figure 2-24 Tight turns found in polypeptide chains. Two
types of β turn are shown. A third variant, the type III or 3 titin contains 260 domains, many of which are of the
turn resembles the type I turn but has the φ,ψ angles of a 3 10 immunoglobulin typeFig. 2-16,C.228,117a In most pro-
10
helix. Type II β turns containing proline and tighter γ turns teins the polypeptide chain folds to form one domain,
are thought to be major structural components of elastin. then passes through a “hinge” to the next. In others,
Anotherβ turn, lacking the hydrogen bond has a cis-proline the C terminus or the N terminus of the polypeptide
residue at position 3. folds back across two or more domains as a kind of
“strap” that helps to hold the protein together. Even
when a protein contains only one domain, it often
consists of two distinct lobes with a cleft between
70-kDa chains are thought to have 70- to 75-residue them. Many proteins, e.g. hemoglobin (Fig. 7-25),
regions in which the polypeptide folds back on itself consist of subunits about the size of the globular
repeatedly with a large number of bends in a broad domains in larger proteins.
left-handed(cid:2) spiral.216,218a The consensus sequence Structural domains of proteins are sometimes
VPGVP, which tends to form a type II β turn with encoded by a single coding segment of DNA i.e., by a
proline in position 2 (Fig. 2-24) is present in long tan- single exon in a split gene. Domains of this type may
dem repeats e.g., (VPGVG) . These extensible regions have served as evolutionarily mobile modules that
11
alternate with short α helices which are crosslinked have spread to new proteins and multiplied during
to other chains. Similar structures are present in silks evolution. For example, the immunoglobulin structural
(Box 2-B) and in proteins of wheat gluten.217a,218b domain is found not only in antibodies but also in a
Besides hairpin turns and broader U-turns, a protein variety of cell surface proteins.229–232
chain may turn out and fold back to reenter a β sheet Whether we deal with domains connected by a
from the opposite side. Such crossover connections, flexible hinge or with subunits, there are interfaces
which are necessarily quite long, often contain helices. between the different parts of the protein. These inter-
Like turns, crossover connections have a handedness faces are often formed largely of nonpolar groups.
and are nearly always right-handed (Fig. 2-25).117,219 However, they frequently contain a small number of
Most proteins also contain poorly organized loops on hydrogen bonds that bridge between one domain and
their surfaces. Despite their random appearance, these another or between one subunit and another. In the
loops may be critical for the functioning of a protein.220 case of hemoglobin, important changes occur in this
In spite of the complexity of the folding patterns, hydrogen bonding and movement occurs along one
peptide chains are rarely found to be knotted.221 of the interfaces between two subunits. Likewise the
active sites of enzymes are often located at interfaces
between domains. During catalysis, movement and
reorganization of the hydrogen bonds and side chain
packing in the interfaces may take place.232a

--- Page 79 ---

D. The Architecture of Folded Proteins 75
The interiors of proteins often contain large numbers
7. Packing of Side Chains
of aromatic side chains which are frequently associated
as pairs or as aromatic clusters.239,240 For example,
In Fig. 2-19B myoglobin is pictured as a cluster of
α-helical rods surrounding the heme core. This picture see the structure of plastocyanin in Fig. 2-16A. Rings
may lie perpendicular one to another or be “stacked”
is incomplete because the space between the rods and
face to face but offset. Oxygen atoms often lie in con-
inside the molecule is tightly packed with amino acid
tact with the edges of aromatic rings.241 The planar
side chains almost all of which are hydrophobic. The
same is true for the β barrels of Fig. 2-16, which are guanidinium groups of arginine side chains often
stack against aromatic rings and amide groups may
filled largely with nonpolar side chains. As the struc-
sometimes do the same.242 It has been suggested that
tures of more and more proteins have been determined,
both aromatic: aromatic and aromatic:oxygen interac-
a consistent pattern has emerged. Within the interior
tions may be associated with additional stabilization
of proteins the side chain groups are packed together
of the protein by ∼4- to 8- kJ/mol. Tyrosine side chain
remarkably well.99,100,222,233–236 Although occasional
–OH groups often stabilize ends of β strands by form-
holes are present, they are often filled by water mole-
ing H-bonds to backbone atoms.243
cules.99,237a The packing density, the volume enclosed
Most polar groups are on the surfaces of proteins,
by the van der Waals envelope divided by the total
volume, is ∼0.75 for the interior of the lysozyme and and those that are not are almost always hydrogen
bonded to other groups in the interior.244 While most
ribonuclease molecules compared with the theoretical
nonpolar groups are inside proteins, they are also
value of 0.74 for close-packed spheres. However,
present in the outer surfaces where they are often
regions with many hydrogen bonds may be less tightly
clustered into hydrophobic regions or“patches.”
packed.238
The latter may be sites of interaction with other pro-
teins or with lipid portions of membranes.
H
8. The Network of Internal Hydrogen Bonds
O O
Ser H
Asp
Thr O Glu C – C The fact that nonpolar groups tend to be buried
Tyr
O O in the interior of proteins suggests that the inside of
a protein might be a flexible blob of oily material. In
fact, the nonpolar groups tend to be densely packed
and aromatic rings often impart considerable rigidity
H H O to the hydrophobic cores. Buried polar groups, which
Lys N H + N A Gl s n n C are invariably hydrogen bonded to other side chain
H groups, to amide groups of the polypeptide back-
H N H
bone,244–247 or to buried water molecules, form a well-
H
defined internal network. When a series of closely
related proteins, for example, those having the same
function in several different species, are compared, the
H H
N hydrogen bonded network is often nearly invariant.
Arg Trp
H This suggests a functional significance. The hydrogen
N H N + N H bonding possibilities for some of the side chain groups
H in proteins are indicated in Fig. 2-26.
H Charged side chains are sometimes buried in the
O interior of proteins, usually together with an ion of
the opposite charge to form a hydrogen-bonded ion
pair.248,248a,248b However, there is sometimes a single
H Tyr
N N charge that is “neutralized” by the interaction with
His
O–
dipoles of polar groups.217 Sometimes an undissociated
N N
H carboxyl group is hydrogen bonded to a carboxylate
ion.249
O
Figure 2-26 Some of the possibilities for hydrogen bonding
C
of side chain groups in proteins. Oxygen atoms can and
frequently do form up to three hydrogen bonds at once. O H –O
Open arrows point from H-atoms and toward electron donor C
pairs.
O

--- Page 80 ---

76 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
A buried carboxyl group of this type will display a pK
a 1. Complex Folding Patterns
value far higher than the normal value.
Arginine side chains are large and able to form Proteins often contain elements of both α and β
multiple hydrogen bonds247,250 as well as salt link-
structure. One of the first of the complex folding
ages251 to different parts of a folded peptide. Cations
motifs to be recognized was a nucleotide-binding
of arginine and lysine are never buried unless in ion
domain identified by Rossmann and associates.260–262
pairs. Protons from strong acids have long been This Rossman fold contains six parallel β strands
known to bind to centers of benzene rings and water
which alternate with six helices. The result of the
can form weak hydrogen bonds to the centers of aro- parallelβ structure is that the helices are also parallel
matic rings.252,253,253a Such bonds also occur within
and that their amino-terminal ends, which carry
proteins and often involve the binding of guanidinium
partial positive charges, are aligned in approximately
groups or of inorganic cations to indole rings of tryp-
the same directions. The positive end of one of the
tophans.253b,253c Protonated imidazole groups may
heliceslies behind the negatively charged phosphate
also bind to aromatic rings.253d
groups148 which characteristically bind at the edge of
the sheet containing the C termini of the β strands.
H This can be seen in Fig. 2-13, which shows binding of
H 2 O– benzene H O the coenzyme NAD to the nucleotide binding domain
hydrogen bond
ofglyceraldehyde phosphatedehydrogenase.
Similar nucleotide-binding domains are found in many
other dehydrogenases whose members constitute a
Another important aspect of the structure of pro-
protein family.
teins is the presence of hydrogen-bonded water
Figure 2-27 depicts topology diagrams for the
moleculesin pockets and cracks. These molecules,
Rossman fold and for two related families of proteins.
as well as a much larger number of water molecules
These families bind the nucleotides called GTP and
bound at the outer surface, are clearly visible from
ATP, respectively. Both are structural relatives of
X-ray studies. They often occur singly, bonded to the
NAD. A major part of the structure of all of the pro-
ends of amide groups, especially to the carbonyl ends. teins in these families consist of β–α units, each one
Internal bends of the peptide chain are almost always containing a β strand followed by a helix. They are
hydrated.254 These water molecules often make two or
more hydrogen bonds to different parts of the protein
or to other water molecules. Clusters of water mole-
cules,49,255,255a sometimes in the form of pentagonal A
rings,256 are often present. NMR spectroscopy has
shown that water molecules bound to protein surfaces
3 2 1 4 5
exchange rapidly with the bulk water in which the
protein is dissolved; the “residence time” on the
C
protein is typically less than a nanosecond. Interior N
water molecules have much longer residence times
B
of 10–2 to 10–8s for a small protein.257 They may be
regarded as part of the protein structure.
2 3 1 4 5 6
E. Folding Patterns and Protein Families C
N
Proteins are folded in many ways. We have already C
C
considered several simple patterns: the antiparallel β
cylinder (Fig. 2-16), the 2-helix coiled coil (Fig. 2-21) and
3 2 1 4 5 6
the 3- and 4-helix bundles (Fig. 2-22). Another simple
motif that has been found repeatedly is the helix–turn
–helix or helix–loop–helix in which two helices at N
variable angles, one to another and with a turn or short
loop between them, form a structural unit. DNA-
bindingrepressors and transcription factors (see Fig. Figure 2-27 Topologies of the folds of three families of
nucleotide binding α/β proteins. Cylinders represent α
2-21 and also Chapter 5)often contain this motif as do
helices and arrows β strands. (A) The ATPase fold for the
many Ca2+-binding proteins. Proteins containing 3–6
clathrin-uncoating ATPase; (B) The G-protein fold that binds
helical segments, often fold into a roughly polyhedral
GTP and is found in ras proteins; (C) The Rossmann fold
shape.258,259 An example is myoglobin (Fig. 2-19B). that binds NAD in several dehydrogenases. From Brändén.262

--- Page 81 ---

E. Folding Patterns and Protein Families 77
A B
Figure 2-28 The eight-fold α/β barrel structure of triose phosphate isomerase. From Richardson. (A) Stereoscopic view.
(B) Ribbon drawing. Courtesy of Jane Richardson.117
classified as α/β proteins. The Rossman fold is com- This barrel can be compared with that of the 12-
posed of six β–α units. Recently a ribonuclease inhibi- helixα,α barrel of a fungal glucoamylase whose struc-
tor protein with 15 consecutive β–α units has been ture is shown in Fig. 2-29. Numerous more complex
characterized.263 Each β–α unit contains several folding patterns have been discovered. They have
residues of leucine. This leucine-rich repeat occurs been classified by Jane Richardson.117,122 Many of the
in many other proteins as well.264,264a,264b proteins described by these folding patterns can be
The(cid:1)/(cid:2) barrel shown in Fig. 2-28 consists of 8 grouped into families and “superfamilies.”227 Chothia
consecutiveβ–α units in a symmetric array.265,266 By suggested that there may be about 1,000 families in
1995 over 40 of these barrels had been identified in a nature;268 over 700, with over 360 distinct folds have
diverse group of enzymes. One bifunctional enzyme been identified.268a
contains two α/β barrels. Although the nature of the
reaction catalyzed varies, the active site is always
found in the center of the barrel at the C-terminal ends 2. Symmetry
of the 8 parallel β strands and therefore between the N
termini of the surrounding helices. The enzyme se- A sometimes puzzling feature of protein structure
quences show no homology and frequent occurrence is the widespread occurrence of an approximate two-
of the 8-stranded barrel may reflect the fact that it is a fold axis of symmetry. This often arises as a natural
natural packing arrangement of β–α units. However, result of association of a pair of irregular subunits
a 10-stranded barrel of this type has also been (Chapter 7). The association is such that rotation
found.267
A B H1
H12
H13
H10
H2
H3
H11 H9
H8
H4
H6
H7 H5
Figure 2-29 Structure of the α,α barrel of a fungal enzyme glucoamylase. (A) side view (stereoscopic); (B) top view. The
active site, which cleaves glucose units from the ends of starch chains, is in the depression in the center of the barrel. Here it is
occupied by an inhibitor. See Aleshin et al.192 Courtesy of Alexander Aleshin.

--- Page 82 ---

78 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
about the twofold axis will cause the two subunits to TABLE 2-4
exchange positions and to remain in an identical Classification of Protein Residues According to
chemical environment. Approximate symmetry is Their Tendencies to Form (cid:1) Helix, (cid:2) Structure, and
often observed also within single peptide chains. For (cid:2) Turnsa
example, in the Rossman fold (Figs. 2-13, 2-27), an
approximate twofold axis passes between the center Helix- β structure-
strands of theβ sheet residues and relates the two flank- Amino forming forming
ing helices, which begin with residues R10 and T100, acid P α tendency P β tendency P t
respectively. The bound NAD+ also possesses an approx-
Glu- 1.51 ++ 0.37 br+ 0.44
imatetwofold axis, but it is not quite symmetrically
Met 1.45 ++ 1.05 + 0.67
placed at the end of the β sheet. Both phospho groups
Ala 1.42 ++ 0.83 i 0.57
are seen to interact with the N terminus of the helix Leu 1.21 ++ 1.30 + 0.53
beginning at residue 10. The small bacterial protein Lys+ 1.16 + 0.74 br 1.01
ferredoxin (Fig. 16-16B) contains two iron-sulfur clus- Phe 1.13 + 1.38 + 0.71
ters related by an approximate 2-fold axis. The two β Gln 1.11 + 1.10 + 0.56
cylinders of elastase (Fig. 12-9) as well as the two sides Trp 1.08 + 1.37 + 1.11
of the flattened β barrel of copper–zincsuperoxide Ile 1.08 + 1.60 ++ 0.58
Val 1.06 + 1.70 ++ 0.30
dismutase269 are approximately related by twofold axes.
Asp- 1.01 w 0.54 br+ 1.26
The enzyme thiosulfate: cyanide sulfurtransferase (Eq. +
His 1.00 w 0.87 i 0.69
24-46) is remarkably symmetric but the active site is +
Arg 0.98 i 0.93 i 1.00
located in just one half. The widespread existence of Thr 0.83 i 1.19 + 1.00
this approximate symmetry suggests a biological Ser 0.77 i 0.75 br 1.56
significance that remains to be discovered. Cys 0.70 i 1.19 + 1.17
Tyr 0.69 br 1.47 ++ 1.25
Asn 0.67 br 0.89 i 1.68
Pro 0.57 br+ 0.55 br+ 1.54
3. Effects of Sequence on Folding
Gly 0.57 br+ 0.75 br 1.68
Studies of synthetic polypeptides as well as exami- ++ =strong former i =indifferent
nation of known protein structures reveal that some + =former br =breaker
amino acids, e.g., Glu, Ala, Leu, tend to promote α w =weak former br+ =strong breaker
h m e o li r x e f o o f r t m en a p ti r o e n s . e n O t t i h n e β rs s , t s r u u c c h tu a r s e , T w yr h , i V le a l G , a ly n , d P r Il o e , , a a n re d a T fr h eq e u c e o n n c fo ie r s m o a f t f i i o n n d a i l n p g a a r a p m ar e t t i e c r u s l a P r α , a P m β i , n a o n d ac P id t ( i β n t a u n r n α ) h a e re li x th , e β
Asn are likely to be found in bends.270,270a,270b The structure, or β turn (in 29 proteins of known structure) divided by
frequencies with which particular amino acids appear the average frequency of residues in those regions. Residues are
in helices, β structure, or turns were first compiled by arranged in order of decreasing tendency toward helix formation.
From Chou, P. V. and Fasman, G. D (1974) Biochemistry13, 222–
245.
40
20
0
-20
-40
Figure 2-30 Plot of hydropathy index versus sequence number for bovine chymotrypsinogen. The indices for individual residues
have been averaged nine at a time. The solid bars at the top of the plot mark interior regions as determined by crystallography.
The solid bars below the plot indicate regions that are on the outside of the molecule. From Kyte and Doolittle.280
xedni
cihtapordyH
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Sequence number

--- Page 83 ---

F. Chemical Modification and Crosslinking 79
Chou and Fasman270 (Table 2-4). These frequencies
F. Chemical Modification and Crosslinking
also differ significantly between parallel and antiparal-
lelβ sheets. Some of the preferences are readily under-
Some newly synthesized proteins, upon folding,
standable. For example, glycine is too flexible to stabilize
are ready to “go to work” immediately but others
a helix, but it can occur in helices between residues
must be modified. Pieces are frequently cut from the
that are better helix formers. Because the peptide link-
ends or out of the center of a folded peptide chain.
age to its nitrogen lacks an NH group, proline can fit
Sometimes the amino and carboxyl termini are con-
into only one of three positions at the N terminus of a
verted to nonionic groups, e.g.,
helix. For the strong helix formers, the β-CH groups
2
fit into the helix well and provide stabilization through
van der Waals interactions. However, the β-methyl O
groups of valine and isoleucine cause crowding. For NH3 + NH C R R=CH3 or long alkyl (2-12)
these residues, a β structure is more favorable than a
helix.271 Side chains of Asp, Asn, Ser, Thr, and Cys can O O
hydrogen bond to backbone amide groups and can
either stabilize or destabilize a helix or β sheet depend- C N H CH2 COO– C NH2 (2-13)
ing upon their location.
It appears that the folding pattern of a peptide
Side chains may be modified in a very large num-
is encoded in the sequence itself.272–274 Thus, when
ber of different ways.282–284 These include acetylation
several residues that favor helix formation are clus-
and other kinds of acylation (Eq. 2-12),285–287methyl-
tered together, a helix may form. Chou and Fasman
ation(Eqs. 2-14, 2-15), phosphorylation (Eq. 2-16),
suggested that when four helix formers out of six
phosphoadenylation,288 formation of sulfate esters
residues are clustered, nucleation of a helix takes
(Eq. 2-17),289,290 and hydrolysis (Eqs. 2-18, 2-19).291 In
place. The helix can then be elongated in both direc-
at least a few proteins some L-amino acid residues are
tions until terminated by a proline or other “helix
converted to D-.292–294
breaker”; additional folding can then occur. If three
out of five β formers are clustered, a β strand may
O
form. If random folding brings two or more of these
COO– C
strands together they may associate to form the nucleus (2-14)
for a β sheet. Some success has been achieved using
OCH3
this approach in predicting whether a given residue CH3
will be found in a helix, a β strand or a loop.275
However, prediction of complete folding patterns is
NH3 + +N CH3
much more difficult. Many new approaches are being CH3 (2-15)
explored.275–279d The problem is an important one.
Although three-dimensional structures have been O
determined for thousands of proteins, sequences are CH2OH CH2 O P O–
known for hundreds of thousands. The number is
growing rapidly. Being able to predict correctly a
O– (2-16)
three-dimensional protein structure will be a major
scientific accomplishment with many practical conse-
quences. CH2 OH CH2 O SO3 –
A way of examining the entire sequence for polar
(2-17)
or nonpolar character of the side chains was introduced
by Kyte and Doolittle.280,281 A hydropathy index O O
based on the polarity of the side chains of a given C + H2O C + NH4 +
residue and of its neighbors in the sequence is plotted Asn, Gln
against residue number (Fig. 2-30). Helices are often side chain NH2 O– (2-18)
found to have an amphipathic character, hydrophobic
on one side and hydrophilic on the other. Such helices NH+ O
can be characterized by a plot such as that in Fig. 2-30.
N C + H2O N C + NH4 +
The hydrophobic side of an amphipathic helix can
pack against a hydrophobic core of a protein, can lie H NH2 H NH2
against a membrane, or can be aligned with other Arginine Citrulline (2-19)
helices to form coiled coils (Fig. 2-21) or to give a
hydrophilic channel with an outer hydrophobic sur-
face that can fit into a cell membrane.

--- Page 84 ---

80 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
Usually, only one or a small number of side chains
1. Disulfide Crosslinkages
of a protein is modified. However, glycoproteins may
contain many different attached sugar molecules. An
The linking together of two different parts of a
example is the glucoamylase shown in Fig. 2-29. In
peptide chain or of two different peptide chains is
several proteins involved in blood clotting (Fig. 12-17),
extremely important to living beings.304,305 One of
as many as 10 glutamic acid side chains are carboxylated
the most widespread of crosslinkages is the disulfide
(Eq. 2-20).
bridge. It forms spontaneously when two –SH groups
H
COO– of cysteine side chains are close together and are oxi-
CH2 CH2 COO– CH2 C dized by O 2 or some other reagent (Eq. 2-22).
COO–
(2-20)
2 CH2 SH H2C CH2
The 216-residue hen egg yolk storage protein S S (2-22)
phosvitin contains 123 serine residues, most of which
have been phosphorylated (Eq. 2-16).295 A basic protein
The disulfide group is inherently chiral, with the
of the myelin sheath of neurons contains as many as 6 preferred torsion angle about the S–S bond being ∼90°.
specific residues of citrulline (Eq. 2-19).296 An adhesive
Both right- and left-handed disulfide bridges occur in
protein from the foot of a marine mollusk contains ∼80
proteins.305,306
repeated sequences containing hydroxy-proline 2,3-
dihydroxyproline and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine
(Dopa).297,298
CH2
Some modification reactions alter the electrical
charge on a side chain and, as a consequence, can S CH2
affect the ways in which the protein interacts with
other molecules. Negative charges added in formation
of clusters of γ-carboxyglutamates (Eq. 2-20) create Two S atoms viewed
strong calcium ion-binding centers in the modified down S—S axis
proteins. Acylation of N termini or of Ser, Thr, or Cys
side chains by long-chain fatty acids provides hydro-
Disulfide linkages are frequently present in pro-
phobic“tails” able to anchor proteins to membrane
teins that are secreted from cells but are less common
surfaces.285,286 Addition of polyprenyl groups to cys-
in enzymes that stay within cells. Perhaps because the
teine side chains near the C-termini has a similar
latter are in a protected environment, the additional
effect.299,300 These and more complex membrane
stabilization provided by disulfide bridges is not
anchors are considered in Chapter 8. While modified
needed. Disulfide bridges are not only found within
amino acids can be found at many places in a protein,
single-subunit proteins but they also link different
they are often located at turns. For example, serine or
peptide chains. For example, the four chains of each
threonine residues in turns are often phosphorylated
immunoglobulin molecule (Chapter 31) are joined by
or glycosylated. Modification of proteins is dealt with
disulfide bridges and each domain within the chains
further in Chapter 10 and at other points in the book.
is stabilized by a disulfide bridge. One of the most
Glycosylation of proteins is considered in Chapter 20.
highly crosslinked proteins known occurs in the kera-
In addition to deliberate enzyme-catalyzed pro-
tin matrix of hair. Breakage of the –S–S– linkages of
cesses, there are nonenzymatic processes that alter
this protein is an essential step in the chemical “per-
proteins. These include the degradative reactions
manent wave” process. A thiol compound is used to
described in Section 5 and also reversible reactions that
reductively cleave the crosslinks and after the hair is
may be physiologically important. For example, the
reset new crosslinks are formed by air oxidation.
N-terminal amino groups of peptides, and other amino
groups of low pK can form carbamates with bicar-
a
bonate (Eq. 2-21).301–303 This provides an important
2. Other Crosslinkages
mechanism of carbon dioxide transport in red blood
cells (Chapter 7) and a way by which CO pressure
2 Another common crosslink is an amide formed
can control some metabolic processes. between the γ-carboxyl group of a glutamic acid side
chain and an amino group from a lysine residue.307
O Thisisopeptide linkage is formed from a residue of
NH3 + + CO2 NH C + H+ gluta-mine through the action of the enzyme trans-
OH (2-21) glutaminase (Eq. 2-23). Isopeptide crosslinks are
found in hair, skin, connective tissue, and blood clots.

--- Page 85 ---

G. Dynamic Properties of Proteins 81
O bulkier tryptophan rings is more limited. Peptide NH
protons in unfolded polypeptide chains undergo rapid
Cα C H3N + Cα
acid or base catalyzed exchange with H O.313 However,
NH2 2
in globular proteins, the rate of exchange of buried
Transglutaminase
NH protons is often orders of magnitude slower.314–316
NH4 +
For most proteins there appears to be little tendency to
O unfold completely and then refold; the major domains
hold together tightly. However, there may be local
Cα C Cα
unfolding, for example, of a helix at the surface of a
N
H (2-23) protein, which will allow more rapid exchange. Using
NMR techniques (Chapter 3), rates of exchange of all
Occasionally an isopeptide linkage joins amino of the individual peptide NH protons within small
groups of lysine side chains to the C-terminal carboxyl proteins can be measured.315 Cracks may open up in
groups of other peptide chains to give branched chains, proteins. This is suggested by the fact that O , I , and
2 2
e.g. see ubiquitin (Box 10-C). Elaborate crosslinks certain other small molecules are apparently able to
derived from lysine are found in collagen and elastin penetrate the protein freely and to quench the fluores-
(Chapter 8). Dityrosine linkages formed by oxidative cence of buried tryptophan side chains (Chapter 23).
joining of the aromatic rings of tyrosine are found in Since packing density tends to be lower at active
insect cuticle and in the plant cell wall extensins202 sites than in the bulk of the protein, it is probable that
(Chapters 20, 25). more conformational alterations occur near active sites
than elsewhere.317 Lumry and Rosenberg318 suggested
that the “defects” of poor packing and poor hydrogen
G. Dynamic Properties of Proteins bonding of some regions of a folded peptide chain
provide a store of potential energy that can be impor-
Sometimes using energy from the cleavage of tant to the functioning of a protein. Even in a very
chemical bonds, sometimes depending only upon well-packed protein domain there are defects. Some
energy provided by the random bombardment by atoms are compressed by the folding of the peptide
solvent molecules, proteins perform their specific chain and are closer together by over 0.04 nm than
functions with amazing speed. A question that has predicted by the van der Waals radii. These packing
long intrigued biochemists is “to what extent do pro- defects have been estimated to destablize the protein
teins stretch or flex, unfold and refold, or undergo by as much as 250 kJ/mol.319 Details of structural
other conformational movements during their action?” heterogeneity within several proteins for which very
To answer this and related questions, many techniques precise structural data are available have been de-
are being applied to study the dynamic properties of scribed.311
proteins.308,309
2. Conformational Changes
1. Motion of Backbone and Side Chains
We have seen that some polypeptides assume an
Even in the crystalline state there is evidence of extendedβ conformation while others form helices.
movement. In the images constructed from X-ray or In some cases, the same protein can do both. For
neutron diffraction experiments side chains on the example, hair can be stretched greatly, the α helices
surfaces of protein molecules are often not clearly of the keratin molecules uncoiling and assuming a β
visible because of rapid rotational movement. Some conformation with hydrogen bonds between chains
segments of the polypeptide chain may be missing instead of within a single chain. Thus, a polymer may
from the image. However, side chain groups within have more than one conformational state in which the
the core of a domain are usually seen clearly. They folding and hydrogen bonding are different.320,321
probably move only in discrete steps. However, they With soluble proteins more than one folded conforma-
may sometimes shift rapidly between different con- tion is possible with different sets of hydrogen bonds
formations, all of which maintain a close-packed and internal hydrophobic interactions. Some of the
interior.310–312 conformations of a globular protein are more stable
Studies of nuclear magnetic resonance spectra than others, and a protein will ordinarily assume one
(Chapter 3) and of polarization of fluorescence (Chapter of the energetically most favorable conformations.
23), have shown that there is rapid though restricted However, there may be other conformations of almost
rotational movement of side chains of proteins in equal energy.
solution. Even buried phenylalanine and tyrosine side A large body of evidence suggests that many pro-
chains often rotate rapidly whereas movement of the teins do exist in two or more different but well-defined

--- Page 86 ---

82 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
conformational states and that the ability of a protein fact that denaturation is sometimes reversible show
to undergo easy conversion from one to another is of that the energy differences between the folded confor-
great biological significance. In some cases such as mations and the open random coil conformation are
that of hemoglobin (Chapter 7), there are changes in usually not great.274,327,328 However, it has been diffi-
the interactions between subunits. Alterations in the cult to establish the amount of stabilization of a folded
hinge regions between domains of immunoglobulins polypeptide chain provided by buried hydrogen
have been seen. In many enzymes, including the bonds328a,328b,328c or the role of cooperatively formed
dehydrogenases (Chapter 15), kinases (Chapter 12), and hydrogen-bonded chains328c,328d or clusters.328c,328d,328e
aspartate aminotransferase (Fig. 2-6), a cleft between Complete denaturation of a protein was generally
two domains appears to open and close.322 In other regarded as an irreversible process prior to 1956 when
cases, more subtle alterations in conformational state, Anfinsen showed that denatured ribonuclease (Chapter
involving mainly changes in the internal hydrogen 12) could refold spontaneously.273 This 124-residue
bonded network together with small localized changes protein contains four disulfide (–S–S–) bridges and
in chain folding, have been observed. thus is tied firmly together. When these bridges are
Conformational alterations in proteins are probably broken reductively in the presence of a denaturing
facilitated by the fact that some hydrogen-bonded agent, the enzyme becomes inactive. Anfinsen found
groups are found within the hydrophobic interior. All that upon reoxidation under appropriate conditions,
of the buried hydrogen atoms suitable for hydrogen bond complete activity reappeared. The molecules had
formation are ordinarily hydrogen bonded to an electron folded spontaneously into the correct conformation,
donor group. However, because oxygen atoms in proteins the one in which the correct one of 105 (7 x 5 x 3 x 1)
each have two unshared electron pairs, there are, in general, possible pairings of the eight –SH groups present
more electron donor groups than there are hydrogen atoms needed to reform the four disulfide bridges had taken
to which they can bind. This sets the stage for a competition place. This observation has had an important influence
between electronegative centers for particular proton suitable on thinking about protein synthesis and folding of
for hydrogen bonding and provides a molecular basis for the polypeptide chains into biologically active molecules.
easy triggering of conformational changes.323 A puzzling problem was posed by Levinthal many
years ago.329 We usually assume that the peptide
chain folds into one of the most stable conformations
3. Denaturation and Refolding possible. However, proteins fold very rapidly. Even
today, no computer would be able, in our lifetime, to
An extreme conformational alteration is the dena- find by systematic examination the thermodynamically
turation of proteins, which may be caused by heating most stable conformation.328 It would likewise be
or by treatment with reagents such as strong acids and impossible for a folding protein to “try out” more than
bases,urea,guanidinium chloride, and sodium a tiny fraction of all possible conformations. Yet folded
dodecyl sulfate (SDS). and unfolded proteins often appear to be in a thermo-
dynamic equilibrium! Experimental results indicate
that denatured proteins are frequently in equilibrium
H2N
H2N NH2 with a compact denatured state or “molten globule”
C O C in which hydrophobic groups have become clustered
H2N N + H2 and some secondary structures exists.330–336 From this
Urea Guanidinium state the polypeptide may rearrange more slowly
chloride through other folding intermediates to the final
“native conformation.”336a,336b
CH3 (CH2)11 OSO3
– Na+
It is generally assumed that within cells the folding
Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
of the peptide chain commences while the chain is still
being synthesized on a ribosome. The growing chain
Denaturation leads to unfolding of a protein to a probably folds rapidly in a random way until it finds
more random conformation. In the denatured state one or more stable conformations which serve as
the amide groups of the peptide chain form hydrogen folding intermediates for slower conversion to the
bonds with surrounding water molecules and with finished protein.337,338 However, any process within
denaturants such as urea or the guanidinium ion a cell is affected by the complex intracellular environ-
rather than with each other.324,325 Denaturants also ment.339 Folding can be catalyzed or inhibited by
diminish the strength of the hydrophobic interactions proteins known as molecular chaperones. Folding
that promote folding.326 Characteristic biochemical may sometimes require isomerization of one or a few
activities are lost and physical properties such as sedi- proline residues from trans to cis.340,341 For example,
mentation constant, viscosity, and light absorption are during the refolding of ribonuclease the isomerization
altered. The ease of denaturation of proteins and the of Pro 93 appears to be a rate-limiting step.342,343 Such

--- Page 87 ---

G. Dynamic Properties of Proteins 83
isomerizations may be assisted by peptidyl-prolyl- and basic amino acid side chains, the properties of
(cis–trans) isomerases (Box 9-F). Disulfide linkages proteins are greatly influenced by pH. At low pH
are sometimes formed incorrectly.344,345 A protein- carboxylates,–S–, and imidazole groups accept protons
disulfide isomerase catalyzes cleavage and reformation causing the overall net charge on the macromolecule
of these bridges, allowing the protein to find the most to be strongly positive. At high pH protons are lost
stable crosslinking arrangement. The actions of these and the protein becomes negatively charged. Electro-
enzymes and of molecular chaperones are considered static repulsion between like charges may cause pro-
further in Chapters 10 and 12. teins to denature at low or high pH. More stable
proteins may be very soluble at low or high pH. Pro-
teins often have a minimum solubility and a maximum
4. Effects of pH and Solvent stability near the isoelectric point, the pH at which
the net charge is zero.336,346,347 Activities of enzymes,
Because polypeptide chains contain many acidic abilities to bind specifically to other proteins, and
BOX 2-C THE NOBEL PRIZES
Many young scientists dream of one day winning a Nobel Prize. Although denounced by some, the much sought and
highly publicized award has, since 1901, been given to an outstanding group of scientists. Many of these have made major
contributions to biochemistry or to techniques important to biochemists. Here is a partial list.
Year Name Prizea Discovery or subject of study
1901 Wilhelm C. Röntgen Physics Discovery of X-rays
1902 Emil H. Fischer Chemistry Synthesis of sugars and purines
1903 Svante A. Arrhenius Chemistry Electrolytic dissociation; a founder of physical chemistry
1903 Antoine Henri Becquerel; Marie S. Curie, and Pierre Curie Physics Discovery and study of radioactivity
1906 Camillo Golgi and S. Ramon y Cajal Physiology/Medicine Discovery of Golgi apparatus
1907 Edward Buchner Chemistry Biochemistry, cell-free fermentation
1910 Albrecht Kossel Physiology/Medicine Isolation of nucleic acid bases
1914 Max von Laue Physics Discovery of X-ray diffraction by crystals
1915 Richard M. Willstätter Chemistry Plant pigments, especially chlorophyll
1915 William H. and William L. Bragg Physics Analysis of crystal structure by X-rays
1919 Jules Bordet Physiology/Medicine Discovery of blood complement; complement fixation test
1920 Walther H. Nernst Chemistry Thermochemistry
1922 Archibald V. Hill and Otto F. Meyerhof Physiology/Medicine Chemistry of muscle contraction
1923 Frederick G. Banting and John J. R. Macleod Physiology/Medicine Discovery of insulin and treatment of diabetes
1926 Theodor Svedburg Chemistry Study of high Mr compounds, development of ultracentrifuge
1927 Heinrich O. Wieland Chemistry Bile acids
1928 Adolf O. R. Windaus Chemistry Sterols and vitamins
1929 Frederick G. Hopkins and Christiaan Eijkman Physiology/Medicine Discovery of vitamins, tryptophan, vitamin B1
1929 Arthur Harden and Hans A. S. von Euler-Chelpin Chemistry Fermenting enzymes, fermentation of sugars
1930 Karl Landsteiner Physiology/Medicine Blood groups A, B, O, Rh
1930 Hans Fischer Chemistry Structures and chemistry of porphyrins, chlorophyll
1931 Otto H. Warburg Physiology/Medicine Respiratory enzymes
1933 Thomas H. Morgan Physiology/Medicine Chromosome theory and chromosome maps
1934 George R. Minot, William P. Murphy, and George H. Whipple Physiology/Medicine Treatment of pernicious anemia
1936 Henry H. Dale and Otto Loewi Physiology/Medicine Acetylcholine release at nerve endings
1937 Albert von Szent-Györgyi Physiology/Medicine Vitamin C
1937 Walter N. Haworth and Paul Karrer Chemistry Carbohydrate structures, structures of carotenoids, flavins, vitamin A
1938 Richard Kuhn Chemistry Carotenoids and vitamins
1939 Gerhard Domagk Physiology/Medicine Prontosil, first antibacterial sulfa drug
1939 Adolf F. J. Butenandt and L. Ruzicka Chemistry Isolation and study of sex hormones, study of polymethylenes, terpenes
1943 E. A. Doisy and Carl Henrik Dam Physiology/Medicine Isolation and study of vitamin K
1945 Alexander Fleming, Ernst B. Chain, and Howard W. Florey Physiology/Medicine Discovery and structure of penicillin
1945 A. J. Virtanen Chemistry Nutritional chemistry
1946 James B. Sumner, J. H. Northrop, and W. M. Stanley Chemistry Crystallization of enzymes and virus proteins
1947 Carl F. Cori and Gerty T. Cori Physiology/Medicine Glycogen metabolism, the Cori cycle
1947 B. A. Houssay and Robert Robinson Chemistry Investigation of plant alkaloids
1948 Arne W. K. Tiselius Chemistry Electrophoresis, study of serum proteins
1950 Phillip S. Hench, Edward C. Kendall, and Tadeus Reichstein Physiology/Medicine ACTH
1952 Selman A. Waksman Physiology/Medicine Discovery of streptomycin
1952 A. J. P. Martin and Richard L. M. Synge Chemistry Paper chromatography
1953 Fritz A. Lipmann and Hans A. Krebs Physiology/Medicine Coenzyme A, citric acid cycle
1954 Linus C. Paulingb Chemistry The nature of the chemical bond
1955 A. H. T. Theorell Physiology/Medicine Oxidative enzymes
1955 Vincent du Vigneaud Chemistry Synthesis of biotin and oxytocin
1957 Daniel Bovet Physiology/Medicine First antihistamine drug
1957 Alexander R. Todd Chemistry Work on nucleotides coenzymes
1958 Joshua Lederberg, George W. Beadle, and Edward L. Tatum Physiology/Medicine One gene-one enzyme hypothesis from genetic studies of neurospora
1958 Frederick Sangerb Chemistry Protein sequencing, insulin

--- Page 88 ---

84 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
numerous physiological processes are controlled by
5. Irreversible Damage to Proteins
effects of pH on proteins.
The solvent for most proteins in nature is water.
Every protein in an organism has its own charac-
However, many enzymes function well in organic
teristic lifetime. No sooner is it synthesized than degra-
solvents if they retain only a small amount of essential
dation begins. Enzyme-catalyzed cleavage of the
structural and catalytic water.348
peptide linkages leads to turnover of proteins but
before this occurs a number of spontaneous damaging
reactions may alter the protein. Prevalent among these
isdeamidation of asparaginylresidues to aspartyl or
BOX 2-C THE NOBEL PRIZES (continued)
Year Name Prizea Discovery or subject of study
1959 Arthur Kornberg and Severo Ochoa Physiology/Medicine Enzymatic synthesis of DNA
1960 F. M. Burnet and P. Medawar Physiology/Medicine Immunological tolerance in animals
1961 Melvin Calvin Chemistry Photosynthesis using 14CO2
1962 Francis H. C. Crick, James D. Watson, and Maurice H. F. Wilkins Physiology/Medicine Molecular structure of DNA
1962 John C. Kendrew and Max F. Perutz Chemistry Structures of protein by X-ray diffraction
1962 Linus C. Paulingb Peace Ending atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons
1964 Konrod E. Bloch and Feodor Lynen Physiology/Medicine Pathways of cholesterol biosynthesis
1964 Dorothy M. Crowfoot Hodgkin Chemistry X-ray structures, vitamin B12
1965 Andre Lwolf, Jacques Monod, and Francois Jacob Physiology/Medicine Messenger RNA, regulation of transcription
1967 Ragnar Granit, Haldan Keffer Hartline, and George Wald Physiology/Medicine Chemistry of vision
1967 Manfred Eigen and Norrish Porter Chemistry Study of high-speed chemical reactions
1968 Robert W. Holley Physiology/Medicine RNA sequence
1968 H. Gobind Khorana and Marshall W. Nirenberg Physiology/Medicine The genetic code
1969 Max Delbrück, Alfred D. Hershey, and Salvador E. Luria Physiology/Medicine Replication and genetic structures of viruses
1970 Julius Axelrod, Bernard Katz, and Ulf von Euler Physiology/Medicine Transmission of nerve impulses, noradrenaline
1970 Luis F. Leloir Chemistry Role of sugar nucleotides in biosynthesis of carbohydrates
1971 Earl W. Sutherland, Jr. Physiology/Medicine Cyclic AMP
1972 Gerald M. Edelman and Rodney R. Porter Physiology/Medicine Structure of antibodies
1972 Christian B. Anfinsen, Sanford Moore, and William H. Stein Chemistry Ribonuclease, structure and activity
1974 Albert Claude, Christian R. de Duve, and George E. Palade Physiology/Medicine Cell structure
1975 David Baltimore, Renato Dulbecco, and Howard M. Temin Physiology/Medicine Reverse transscriptase
1975 John W. Cornforth and Vladimir Prelog Chemistry Stereochemistry of organic molecules and of enzymatic reactions
1977 Rosalyn S. Yalow, Roger C. L. Guillemin, and Andrew V. Schally Physiology/Medicine Radioimmunoassay thyrotropin-releasing hormone
1978 Daniel Nathans, Werner Arber, and Hamilton O. Smith Physiology/Medicine Restriction enzymes
1978 Peter Mitchell Chemistry Biological energy transfer
1980 Paul Berg, Walter Gilbert, and Frederick Sangerb Chemistry Recombinant DNA, methods of sequence determination for DNA
1982 Sune K. Bergstrom, Bergt I. Samuelsson, and John R. Vane Physiology/Medicine Isolation and study of prostaglandins
1982 Aaron Klug Chemistry Development of crystallographic electron microscopy
1983 Barbara McClintock Physiology/Medicine Gene transposition
1984 Niels K. Jerne, Georges J. F. Köhler, and Cesar Milstein Physiology/Medicine Cellular basis of immunology
1984 R. Bruce Merrifield Chemistry Solid-phase synthesis of peptides
1985 Joseph L. Goldstein and Michael S. Brown Physiology/Medicine Control of cholesterol metabolism
1986 Rita Levi-Montalcini and Stanley Cohen Physiology/Medicine Nerve growth factor
1987 Susumu Tonegawa Physiology/Medicine Genetics of antibody formation
1988 Johan Diesenhofer, Robert Huber, and Hartmut Michel Chemistry Three-dimensional structure of a photosynthetic reaction center
1988 Gertrude Elion, George Hitchings, and James Black Physiology/Medicine Principles of drug treatment and design of many important drugs
1989 J. Michael Bishop, Harold E. Varmus, and Joseph E. Murray Physiology/Medicine Origin of retroviral oncogenes
1989 Sidney Altman and Thomas R. Cech Chemistry Catalytic RNA
1991 Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann Physiology/Medicine Functioning of single ion channels in cells
1991 Richard R. Ernst Chemistry High-resolution NMR
1992 Edmond H. Fischer and Edwin G. Krebs Physiology/Medicine Reversible protein phosphorylation in biological regulation
1992 Rudolph A. Marcus Chemistry Theory of electron transfer reactions
1993 Richard J. Roberts and Phillip A. Sharp Physiology/Medicine Discovery of split genes
1993 Michael Smith and Kary B. Mullis Chemistry Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis and polymerase chain reaction
1994 Alfred Gilman and Martin Rodbell Physiology/Medicine “G-proteins”
1995 Edwin B. Lewis, Christiane Nusslein-Volhard, and Eric Wieschaus Physiology/Medicine Homeotic mutations in Drosophila
1995 Paul Crutzen, Sherwood Rowland, and Mario Molina Chemistry Damage to the stratospheric ozone layer
1996 Peter C. Doherty and Rolf M. Zinkernagel Physiology/Medicine Specificity of cell-mediated immune response
1997 Paul D. Boyer and John E. Walker Chemistry Mechanism of ATP synthesis
1997 Jens C. Skou Chemistry Discovery of Na+, K+-ATPase
1997 Stanley B. Prusiner Physiology/Medicine Discovery of prions
1998 Robert F. Furchgott, Louis J. Ignarro, and Ferid Murad Physiology/Medicine Nitric oxide as a signaling molecule
1999 Günter Blobel Physiology/Medicine Intrinsic signals that govern transport and localization of proteins
2000 Arvid Carlsson Physiology/Medicine Identification of dopamine as signaling molecule in brain
Paul Greengard Physiology/Medicine Discovery of the dopamine signaling cascade
Eric R. Kandel Physiology/Medicine Molecular basis of learning
a Prizes are given in Physics, Chemistry, Physiology or Medicine, Literature and Peace.
b Sanger and Pauling each have been awarded two Nobel Prizes.

--- Page 89 ---

H. Design and Engineering of Proteins 85
isoaspartyl groups (Eq. 2-24).349,350 Aspartyl residues
H. Design and Engineering of Proteins
can undergo the same type of cyclization at low pH.
The sequence Asn-Gly is especially susceptible to
Methods of chemical synthesis of polypeptides and
rearrangement according to Eq. 2-24. However, the
of cloning and mutating genes now allow us to alter
peptide torsion angles may be more important in
peptide sequences at will and to design completely
determining whether deamidation occurs. The inter-
new proteins.355–356b The methods are discussed in
mediate succinimide may be racemized easily at the
Chapters 3, 5, and 26. The following are examples.
chiral center marked by the asterisk in Eq. 2-24. Thus, Peptides that form α helices that associate as
the Asn-Gly sequence represents a weak linkage,
coiled coils,357 or as three- or four-helix tetrameric
which is nevertheless present in many proteins.
bundles179a,358–360or amphipathic helices that associate
with lipid bilayers have been made.355,361 More difficult
has been the design of proteins that form β sheets.362–364a
O
H+ Many efforts are being made to understand protein
C stability365–367 by systematic substitutions of one residue
H2C NH2
for another. Addition of new disulfide linkages at
H H
C N positions selected by study of three-dimensional struc-
N tures sometimes stabilizes enzymes.368–371 On the other
H
C O hand elimination of unnecessary cysteine residues can
l-aspara
O
ginyl H
H2C
enhance stability by preventing β elimination351 and
C* N replacement of asparagine by threonine can improve
O
N the thermostability of enzymes by preventing deami-
H
OH–
C dation.372,373
O
l-succinimidyl H H2C N H Artificial mutants of subtilisin373 and of many
O– other enzymes are helping us to understand the mech-
N C anisms of catalysis. Artificially prepared temperature-
H
sensitive mutants (Chapter 26) and naturally occurring
O
mutants are providing new insight into pathways of
l-isoaspartyl
folding of proteins whose three-dimensional structures
(2-24)
are known. For these studies it is necessary to follow a
rational strategy in deciding which of the astronomical
Cystine residues in disulfide bridges are also not
number of possible mutant forms may be of interest.
completely stable but undergo β elimination305,351
For example, residues within active sites may be
(Chapter 13) at slightly alkaline pH values according
changed. Introduction of mutations at random locations
to Eq. 2-25. The free thiol group formed (HSR) is still
can also be useful in finding regions of interest.374
attached to the protein but may sometimes be in a
When mutant proteins can be crystallized, an exact
position to enter into thiol-disulfide exchange reactions
understanding of the effect of the mutation on the
with other S–S bridges causing further degradation.
structure is possible. Sometimes two or more mutations
Methionine side chains in proteins can be oxidized to
may have to be introduced to obtain the desired modi-
O
fication.
sulfoxides: –CH –CH –S–CH and hydroxyl groups It is also possible to incorporate a range of “un-
2 2 3
can be introduced into aromatic rings by oxidation. natural” amino acids in specific sites in a polypeptide
Hydrogen peroxide and other oxidants may be respon- sequence and to observe resulting effects on a protein’s
sible for such oxidation within cells (see Chapter 18). properties.375 A quite different approach is to design
The very long-lived proteins of the lens of the eye are polypeptides that mimic a natural peptide but consist
especially susceptible to deamidation, racemization, ofD-amino acids. The peptide chain is reversed, i.e., the
oxidation, and accumulation of covalently attached N terminus becomes the C terminus and every peptide
blue fluorescent compounds.352–354 linkage is also reversed. The amino acid side chains
preserve their relationships one to another and the back-
bone atoms tend to preserve their hydrogen bonding
H
CH2 S S R
CH2
pattern. Peptides made in this way tend to be resistant
α
to cleavage by enzymes. Some may be useful as
N C N C drugs.376,377
HS SR
H O H O
HS R + S0
(2-25)

--- Page 90 ---

86 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
References
1. Glendening, E. D., Faust, R., Streitwieser, A., 31b. Bella, J., and Berman, H. M. (1996) J. Mol. Biol. 59. Kauzmann, W. (1959) Adv. Prot. Chem.14, 1–63
Vollhardt, K. P. C., and Weinhold, F. (1993) J. 264, 734–742 60. Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and
Am. Chem. Soc.115, 10952–10957 32. Schulz, G. E., and Schirmer, R. H. (1979) Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, New York (p. 393)
2. Gao, Q., Weber, H.-P., Craven, B. M., and Principles of Protein Structure, Springer, New 61. Tanford, C. (1980) The Hydrophobic Effect:
McMullan, R. K. (1994) Acta Crystallogr.B50, York (p. 36) Formation of Micelles and Biological Membranes,
695–703 32a. Platts, J. A., Howard, S. T., and Bracke, B. R. F. 2nd ed., Wiley, New York
3. Hegstrom, R. A., and Kondepudi, D. K. (1990) (1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 2726–2733 62. Abraham, M. H. (1980) J. Am. Chem. Soc.102,
Sci. Am.262(Jan), 108–115 33. Taylor, R., Kennard, O., and Versichel, W. 5910–5912
4. Cahn, R. S., Ingold, C., and Prelog, V. (1966) (1983)J. Am. Chem. Soc.105, 5761–5766 63. Ben-Náim, A. (1980) Hydrophobic Interactions,
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.5, 385–415 34. Murray-Rust, P., and Glusker, J. P. (1984) J. Plenum, New York
5. Eliel, E. L., Wilen, S. H., and Mander, L. N. Am. Chem. Soc.106, 1018–1025 64. Murphy, K. P., Privalov, P. L., and Gill, S. J.
(1994)Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds, 35. Görbitz, C. H., and Etter, M. C. (1992) J. Am. (1990)Science247, 559–561
Wiley, New York Chem. Soc.114, 627–631 65. Muller, N. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 459–
6. Bentley, R. (1969) Molecular Asymmetry in 36. Nelson, D. D., Jr., Fraser, G. T., and 463
Biology, Vol. 1, Academic Press, New York Klemperer, W. (1987) Science238, 1670–1674 66. Spolar, R. S., Livingstone, J. R., and Record, J.,
(pp. 49–56) 36a. Ghanty, T. K., Staroverov, V. N., Koren, P. R., MT. (1992) Biochemistry31, 3947–3955
7. Blackwood, J. E., Gladys, C. L., Loening, K. L., and Davidson, E. R. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 67. Stites, W. E., Meeker, A. K., and Shortle, D.
Petrarca, A. E., and Rush, J. E. 122, 1210 – 1214 (1994)J. Mol. Biol.235, 27–32
(1968)J. Am. Chem. Soc.90, 509–510 36b. Cornilescu, G., Ramirez, B. E., Frank, M. K., 68. Hecht, D., Tadesse, L., and Walters, L. (1993)
8. Hanson, K. R. (1966) J. Am. Chem. Soc.88, Clore, G. M., Gronenborn, A. M., and Bax, A. J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 3336–3337
2731–2742 (1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 6275– 6279 69. Gill, S. J., and Wadsö, I. (1976) Proc. Natl.
9. Lambert, J. B. (1970) Sci. Am.222(Jan), 58–70 36c. Benedict, H., Shenderovich, I. G., Malkina, O. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.73, 2955–2958
10. Klyne, W., and Prelog, V. (1960) Experientia16, L., Malkin, V. G., Denisov, G. S., Golubev, N. 70. Sharp, K. A., Nicholls, A., Fine, R. F., and
521–523 S., and Limbach, H.-H. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Honig, B. (1991) Science252, 106–109
11. Liébecq, C., ed. (1992) Biochemical Nomencla- Soc.122, 1979 –1988 71. Van Oss, C. J. (1994) Interfacial Forces in
ture, Portland Press, London and Chapel Hill, 37. Fersht, A. R., Shi, J., Knill-Jones, J., Lowe, D. Aqueous Media, Dekker, New York
North Carolina (for the International Union of M., Witkinson, A. J., Blow, D. M., Brick, P., 71a. Hummer, G., Garde, S., García, A. E.,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) Carter, P., Woye, M. M. Y., and Winter, G. Pohorille, A., and Pratt, L. R. (1996) Proc. Natl.
12. Chiang, Y., Kresge, A. J., and Tang, Y. S. (1984) (1985)Nature (London)314, 235 – 238 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 8951–8955
J. Am. Chem. Soc.106, 460–462 38. Eriksson, A. E., Baase, W. A., Zhang, X.-J., 72. Israelachvili, J., and Wennerström, H. (1996)
13. Beak, P., Fry, F. S., Jr., Lee, J., and Steele, F. Heinz, D. W., Blaber, M., Baldwin, E. P., and Nature (London)379, 219–225
(1976)J. Am. Chem. Soc.98, 171–179 Matthews, B. W. (1992) Science255, 178–183 73. Radzicka, A., and Wolfenden, R. (1988)
14. Beak, P. (1977) Acc. Chem. Res.10, 186–192 38a. Takano, K., Yamagata, Y., Kubota, M., Biochemistry27, 1664–1670
15. Metzler, D. E., Harris, C. M., Johnson, R. J., Funahashi, J., Fujii, S., and Yutani, K. (1999) 74. Kellis, J. T., Jr., Nyberg, K., Sali, D., and Fersht,
Siano, D. B., and Thomson, J. A. (1973) Biochemistry38, 6623 –6629 A. R. (1988) Nature (London)333, 784–786
Biochemistry12, 5377–5392 39. Lim, W. A., Hodel, A., Sauer, R. T., and 75. Sanger, F. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biochem.57, 1–28
16. Katritzky, A. R., and Karelson, M. (1991) J. Richards, F. M. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 76. Creighton, T. E. (1993) Proteins, Structures and
Am. Chem. Soc.113, 1561–1566 U.S.A.91, 423–427 Molecular Principles, 2nd ed., Freeman, New
17. Blomberg, F., Maurer, W., and Rüterjans, H. 40. Schuster, P., Zundel, G., and Sandorfy, C. York
(1977)J. Am. Chem. Soc.99, 8149–8159 (1976)The Hydrogen Bond, North Holland 77. Kyte, J. (1995) Structure in Protein Chemistry,
18. Walters, D. E., and Allerhand, A. (1980) J. Biol. Publ. Co., Amsterdam (3 vols.) Garland Publ., New York
Chem.255, 6200–6204 41. Luck, W. A. P., and Kleeberg, H. (1978) in 78. Guillemin, R., and Burgus, R. (1972) Sci. Am.
19. Fersht, A. (1977) Enzyme Structure and Photosynthetic Oxygen Evolution (Metzner, H., 227(Nov), 24–33
Mechanism, Freeman, San Francisco, ed), pp. 1–29, Academic Press, London 79. Hochster, R. M., Kates, M., and Quastel, J. H.,
California 42. Edsall, J. T. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 29–31 eds. (1973) Metabolic Inhibitors, Vol. 3,
20. Gabler, R. (1978) Electrical Interactions in 43. Grunwald, E. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc.108, Academic Press, New York (p. 312)
Molecular Biophysics, Academic Press, New 5719–5726 80. Ramachandran, G. N., and Kolaskar, A. S.
York (p. 188) 44. Westhof, E. (1993) Water and Biological (1973)Biochim. Biophys. Acta.303, 385–388
21. Israelachvili, J. N., and McGuiggan, P. M. Macromolecules, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 81. MacArthur, M. W., and Thornton, J. M. (1996)
(1988)Science241, 795–800 45. Kusalik, P. G., and Svishchev, I. M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.264, 1180-1195
22. Salem, L. (1962) Can. J. Biochem. Physiol.40, Science265, 1219–1221 81a. Milner-White, E. J. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 2477–
1287–1298 46. Libnau, F. O., Toft, J., Christy, A. A., and 2482
23. Tsao, Y.-H., Fennell Evans, D., and Kvalheim, O. M. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 82. Moffat, J. B. (1973) J. Theor. Biol.40, 247–258
Wennerström, H. (1993) Science262, 547–550 8311–8316 83. Fersht, A. R. (1971) J. Am. Chem. Soc.93, 3504–
23a. Kurihara, K., and Kunitake, T. (1992) J. Am. 47. Benson, S. W., and Siebert, E. D. (1992) J. Am. 3515
Chem. Soc.114, 10927–10933 Chem. Soc.114, 4269–4276 84. Karle, I. L. (1974) Biochemistry13, 2155–2162
23b. Yang, L., Valdeavella, C. V., Blatt, H. D., and 48. Liu, K., Cruzan, J. D., and Saykally, R. J. (1996) 85. Ovchinnikov, Y. A. (1973) FEBS Lett.29, 31–33
Pettitt, B. M. (1996) Biophys. J.71, 3022– 3029 Science271, 929–933 86. Doonan, S. (1974) FEBS Lett.38, 229–233
24. Warshel, A. (1987) Nature (London)330, 15–16 49. Pauling, L. (1935) J. Am. Chem. Soc.57, 2680 87. Bhown, A. S. (1990) Handbook of Proteins, A & M
25. Honig, B., and Nicholls, A. (1995) Science268, 50. Wittebort, R. J., Usha, M. G., Ruben, D. J., Publ., Birmingham, Alabama
1144–1149 Wemmer, D. E., and Pines, A. (1988) J. Am. 88. Boguski, M., and McEntyre, J. (1994) Trends
26. Meot-Ner, M. M. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.110, Chem. Soc.110, 5668–5671 Biochem. Sci.19, 71
3075–3080 51. Li, J., and Ross, D. K. (1993) Nature (London) 88a. Branden, C., and Tooze, J. (1991) Introduction
27. Loewenthal, R., Sancho, J., Reinikainen, T., 365, 327–329 to Protein Structure, Garland Publ., New York
and Fersht, A. R. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.232, 574– 52. Dyke, T. R., Mack, K. M., and Muenter, J. S. 89. Clements, S., Mehansho, H., and Carlson, D.
583 (1977)J. Chem. Phys.66, 498–510 M. (1975) J. Biol. Chem.260, 13471–13477
28. Gristina, A. G., Oga, M., Webb, L. X., and 53. Saenger, W. (1979) Nature (London)279, 280, 90. Condit, C. M., and Meagher, R. B. (1986)
Hobgood, C. D. (1985) Science228, 990–993 343–344, 848 Nature (London)323, 178–181
29. Jeffrey, G. A., and Saenger, W. (1991) Hydrogen 54. Saenger, W. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. 91. Reynolds, P., Weber, S., and Prakash, L. (1985)
Bonding in Biological Structures, Springer- Chem.16, 93–114 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 168–172
Verlag, Berlin 55. Pribble, R. N., and Zwier, T. S. (1994) Science 92. Rodakis, G. C., and Kafatos, F. C. (1982) Proc.
30. Gilli, P., Bertolasi, V., Ferretti, V., and Gastone, 265, 75–79 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.79, 3551–3555
G. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 909–915 56. Gregory, J. K., Clary, D. C., Liu, K., Brown, M. 93. Young, J. F., Hockmeyer, W. T., Gross, M.,
30a. Jeffrey, G. A. (1997) An Introduction to Hydrogen G., and Saykally, R. J. (1997) Science275, 814– Ballou, W. R., Wirtz, R. A., Trosper, J. H.,
Bonding, Oxford Univ. Press, New York 817 Beaudoin, R. L., Hollingdale, M. R., Miller, L.
31. Derewenda, Z. S., Derewenda, U., and Kobos, 57. Quiocho, F. A., Sack, J. S., and Vyas, N. K. H., Diggs, C. L., and Rosenberg, M. (1985)
P. M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.241, 83–93 (1987)Nature (London)329, 561–564 Science228, 958–962
31a. Wahl, M. C., and Sundaralingam, M. (1997) 58. Pflugrath, J. W., and Quiocho, F. A. (1988) J.
Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 97–102 Mol. Biol.200, 163–180

--- Page 91 ---

87
References
94. Doolittle, R. F. (1987) Of URFS and ORFS: A 124. Richardson, J. S., Getzoff, E. D., and 152. Nicholson, H., Anderson, D. E., Dao-pin, S.,
Primer on How to Analyze Derived Amino Acid Richardson, D. C. (1978) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. and Matthews, B. W. (1991) Biochemistry30,
Sequences, Univ. Science Books, Mill Valley, U.S.A.75, 2574–2578 9816–9828
California 125. Chan, A. W. E., Hutchinson, E. G., Harris, D., 153. Åqvist, J., Luecke, H., Quiocho, F. A., and
95. Doolittle, R. F. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, and Thornton, J. M. (1993) Protein Sci.2, Warshel, A. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
244–245 1574–1590 88, 2026–2030
96. Pearson, W. R., and Lipman, D. J. (1988) Proc. 126. Urry, D. W. (1972) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 154. Lyu, P. C., Wemmer, D. E., Zhou, H. X.,
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 2444–2448 69, 1610–1614 Pinker, R. J., and Kallenbach, N. R. (1993)
97. Holm, L., and Sander, C. (1993) J. Mol. Biol. 127. Nicholson, L. K., and Cross, T. A. (1989) Biochemistry32, 421–425
233, 123–138 Biochemistry28, 9379–9385 155. Viguera, A. R., and Serrano, L. (1995) J. Mol.
98. Lewin, R. (1987) Science237, 1570 127a.Smith, T. F., Gaitatzes, C., Saxena, K., and Neer, Biol.251, 150–160
99. Fleming, P. J., and Richards, F. M. (2000) J. E. J. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24, 181–185 156. Doig, A. J., Chakrabartty, A., Klingler, T. M.,
Mol. Biol.299, 487–498 127b.Garcia-Higuera, I., Fenoglio, J., Li, Y., Lewis, and Baldwin, R. L. (1994) Biochemistry33,
100. Gekko, K., and Hasegawa, Y. (1986) C., Panchenko, M. P., Reiner, O., Smith, T. F., 3396–3403
Biochemistry25, 6563–6571 and Neer, E. J. (1996) Biochemistry35, 13985– 157. Doig, A. J., Macarthur, M. W., Stapley, B. J., and
101. Goodsell, D. S., and Olson, A. J. (1993) Trends 13994 Thornton, J. M. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 147–155
Biochem. Sci.18, 65–68 127c.ter Naar, E., Harrison, S. C., and Kirchhausen, 158. Sali, D., Bycroft, M., and Fersht, A. R. (1988)
102. Schultz, G. E., and Schirmer, R. H. (1979) T. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 1096– Nature (London)335, 740–743
Principles of Protein Structure, Springer-Verlag, 1100 159. Aurora, R., and Rose, G. D. (1998) Protein Sci.
New York 127d.Springer, T. A. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.283, 837–862 7, 21–38
102a.Ramachandran, G. N., Ramakrishnam, C., 128. Pauling, L. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 1060–1063 160. Metzler, D. E. (1979) Adv. Enzymol.50, 1–40
and Sasisekharan, V. (1963) J. Mol. Biol.,7, 95– 129. Kendrew, J. C. (1969) Sci. Am.205(Dec), 96–110 161. Lupas, A. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21,
99 130. Arnott, S., and Dover, S. D. (1967) J. Mol. Biol. 375– 382
103. Ramachandran, G. N., Venkatachalam, C. M., 30, 209–212 161. Lupas, A. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 375–
and Krimm, S. (1966) Biophys. J.6, 849–872 131. Steigemann, W., and Weber, E. (1979) J. Mol. 382
103a.Karplus, P. A. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 1406 –1420 Biol.127, 309–338 162. Kohn, W. D., Mant, C. T., and Hodges, R. S.
104. Sasisekharian, V., Lakshminarayanan, A. V., 132. Barlow, D. J., and Thornton, J. M. (1988) J. Mol. (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 2583–2586
and Ramachandran, G. N. (1967) in Conformation Biol.201, 601–619 163. Fraser, R. D. B., MacRae, T. P., Parry, D. A. D.,
of Biopolymers, Vol. 2 (Ramachandran, G. N., 132a.Rajashankar, K. R., and Ramakumar, S. (1996) and Suzuki, E. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
ed), p. 641–654, Academic Press, New York Protein Sci.5, 932 –946 U.S.A.83, 1179–1183
104a.Gunasekaran, K., Ramakrishnan, C., and 133. Harper, E. T., and Rose, G. D. (1993) 164. Johnson, L. D., Idler, W. W., Zhou, X.-M.,
Balaram, P. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.264, 191–198 Biochemistry32, 7605–7609 Roop, D. R., and Steinert, P. M. (1985) Proc.
104b.Herzberg, O., and Moult, J. (1991) Proteins11, 134. Chakrabartty, A., Schellman, J. A., and Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 1896–1900
223–229 Baldwin, R. L. (1991) Nature (London)351, 165. Cooper, D., and Sun, T.-T. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.
105. Milner-White, E. J., Bell, L. H., and Maccallum, 586–588 261, 4646–4654
P. H. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.228, 725 – 734 135. Creamer, T. P., and Rose, G. D. (1995) Protein 166. Crick, F. H. C. (1953) Acta Crystallogr.6, 689–
106. Rhee, S. (1990) High resolution X-ray diffraction Sci. U.S.A.4, 1305–1314 697
studies of cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase 136. Dempsey, C. E. (1992) Biochemistry31, 4705– 167. Vazquez, S. R., Kuo, D. Z., Bositis, C. M.,
[Ph.D. Dissertation], University of Iowa, Iowa 4712 Hardy, L. W., Lew, R. A., and Humphreys, R.
City, Iowa 137. Ramachandran, G. N., and Mitra, A. K. (1976) E. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 7406–7410
107. Dunbrack, R. L., Jr., and Karplus, M. (1993) J. J. Mol. Biol.107, 85–92 168. O’Shea, E. K., Llemm, J. D., Kim, P. S., and
Mol. Biol.230, 543–574 138. Blaber, M., Zhang, X.-j, and Matthews, B. W. Alber, T. (1991) Science254, 539–544
108. Pauling, L., and Corey, R. B. (1951) Proc. Natl. (1993)Science260, 1637–1639 169. Ferré-D’Amaré, A. R., Prendergast, G. C., Ziff,
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.37, 729–740 139. Chakrabartty, A., Kortemme, T., and Baldwin, E. B., and Burley, S. K. (1993) Nature (London)
109. Rich, A. (1994) Nature (London)371, 285 R. L. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 843–852 363, 38–44
110. Chothia, C. (1973) J. Mol. Biol.75, 295–302 140. Toniolo, C., and Benedetti, E. (1991) Trends 170. Lyu, P. C., Marky, L. A., and Kallenbach, N. R.
111. Chou, K.-C., Némethy, G., and Scheraga, H. Biochem. Sci.16, 350–353 (1989)J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 2733–2734
A. (1983) Biochemistry22, 6213–6221 141. Avbelj, F., and Moult, J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 171. Graddis, T. J., Myszka, D. G., and Chaiken, I.
111a.Skarzynski, T., Moody, P. C. E., and Wonacott, 755–764 M. (1993) Biochemistry32, 12664–12671
A. J. (1987) J. Mol. Biol.193, 171–187 142. Karpen, M. E., De Haseth, P. L., and Neet, K. 171a.Fairman, R., Chao, H.-G., Lavoie, T. B.,
111b.Wang, L., O’Connell, T., Tropsha, A., and E. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 1333–1342 Villafranca, J. J., Matsueda, G. R., and
Hermans, J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.262, 283–293 143. Fiori, W. R., Miick, S. M., and Millhauser, G. Novotny, J. (1996) Biochemistry35, 2824–2829
112. Reeke, G. N., Jr., and Becker, J. W. (1986) L. (1993) Biochemistry32, 11957–11962 171b.Kohn, W. D., Kay, C. M., and Hodges, R. S.
Science234, 1108–1111 144. Smythe, M. L., Huston, S. E., and Marshall, G. (1998)J. Mol. Biol.283, 993–1012
113. Murzin, A. G., Lesk, A. M., and Chothia, C. R. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 11594–11595 172. John, M., Briand, J.-P., Granger-Schnarr, M.,
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.236, 1369–1381 145. Bavosa, A., Benedetti, E., Di Blasio, B., and Schnarr, M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269,
114. Murzin, A. G., Lesk, A. M., and Chothia, C. Pavone, V., Pedone, C., Toniolo, C., and 16247–16253
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.236, 1382–1400 Bonora, G. M. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 173. Zhou, N. E., Kay, C. M., and Hodges, R. S.
115. LaLonde, J. M., Bernlohr, D. A., and U.S.A.83, 1988–1992 (1992)Biochemistry31, 5739–5746
Ranaszak, L. J. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1240–1241 145a.Fathallah-Shaykh, H., Wolf, S., Wong, E., 174. Cohen, C., and Parry, D. A. D. (1986) Trends
116. Guss, J. M., and Freeman, H. C. (1983) J. Mol. Posner, J. B., and Furneaux, H. M. (1991) Proc. Biochem. Sci.11, 245–248
Biol.169, 521–563 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 88, 3451–3454 175. Phillips, G. N., Jr., Fillers, J. P., and Cohen, C.
117. Richardson, J. S. (1981) Adv. Prot. Chem.34, 146. Miick, S. M., Martinez, G. V., Flori, W. R., (1986)J. Mol. Biol.192, 111–131
167–339 Todd, A. P., and Millhauser, G. L. (1992) 176. Mo, J., Holtzer, M. E., and Holtzer, A. (1993)
117a.Erickson, H. P. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Nature (London)359, 653–655 Protein Sci.2, 128–130
U.S.A.91, 10114–10118 147. Wada, A. (1976) Adv. Biophys.9, 1–63 177. Xie, X., Rao, S., Walian, P., Hatch, V., Phillips,
118. Redinbo, M. R., Cascio, D., Choukair, M. K., 148. Hol, W. G. J., van Duijnen, P. T., and Berendsen, G. N., Jr., and Cohen, C. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.
Rice, D., Merchant, S., and Yeates, T. O. (1993) H. J. C. (1978) Nature (London)273, 443–446 236, 1212–1226
Biochemistry32, 10560–10567 148a.Hol, W. G. J., Halie, L. M., and Sander, C. 178. Eckert, R. L. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
119. Weiss, M. S., and Schulz, G. E. (1993) J. Mol. (1981)Nature (London)294, 532–536 85, 1114–1118
Biol.231, 817–824 148b.Lockhart, D. J., and Kim, P. S. (1992) Science 179. Gernert, K. M., Surles, M. C., Labean, T. H.,
120. Kreusch, A., and Schulz, G. E. (1994) J. Mol. 257, 947–951 Richardson, J. S., and Richardson, D. C. (1995)
Biol.243, 891–905 149. Levine, B. F., and Bethea, C. G. (1976) J. Chem. Protein Sci.4, 2252 –2260
121. Yoder, M. D., and Jurnak, F. (1995) FASEB J.9, Phys.65, 1989–1993 179a.Monera, O. D., Zhou, N. E., Lavigne, P., Kay,
335–342 150. Gray, T. M., and Matthews, B. W. (1984) J. Mol. C. M., and Hodges, R. S. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.
122. Richardson, J. S. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1237–1239 Biol.175, 75–81 271, 3995– 4001
123. Steinbacher, S., Seckler, R., Miller, S., Steipe, 151. Richardson, J. S., and Richardson, D. C. (1988) 180. Lovejoy, B., Choe, S., Cascio, D., McRorie, D.
B., Huber, R., and Reinemer, P. (1994) Science Science240, 1648–1652 K., DeGrado, W. F., and Eisenberg, D. (1993)
265, 383–385 Science259, 1288–1293

--- Page 92 ---

88 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
References
181. Harbury, P. B., Kim, P. S., and Alber, T. (1994) 213. Gierasch, L. M., Deber, C. M., Madison, V., 243. Hemmingsen, J. M., Gernert, K. M.,
Nature (London)371, 80–83 Niu, C.-H., and Blout, E. R. (1981) Biochemistry Richardson, J. S., and Richardson, D. C. (1994)
182. Efimov, V. P., Nepluev, I. V., Sobolev, B. N., 20, 4730–4738 Protein Sci.3, 1927–1937
Zurabishvili, T. G., Schulthess, T., Lustig, A., 214. Rees, D. C., Lewis, M., and Lipscomb, W. N. 244. Teeter, M. M. (1991) Ann. Rev. Biophys.
Engel, J., Haener, M., Aebi, U., Venyaminov, S. (1983)J. Mol. Biol.168, 367–387 Biophys. Chem.20, 577–600
Y., Potekhin, S. A., and Mesyanzhinov, V. V. 215. Sapse, A.-M., Mallah-Levy, L., Daniels, S. B., 245. McDonald, I. K., and Thornton, J. M. (1994) J.
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.242, 470–486 and Erickson, B. W. (1987) J. Am. Chem. Soc. Mol. Biol.238, 777–793
183. Lieberman, M., Tabet, M., and Sasaki, T. 109, 3526–3529 246. Bordo, D., and Argos, P. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.
(1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 5035–5044 216. Urry, D. W. (1993) Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 243, 504–519
184. Utani, A., Nomizu, M., Timpl, R., Roller, P. P., 32, 819–841 247. Shimoni, L., and Glusker, J. P. (1995) Protein
and Yamada, Y. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 217. Sandberg, L. B., Soskel, N. T., and Leslie, J. G. Sci.4, 65–74
19167–19175 (1981)N. Engl. J. Med.304, 566–579 248. Dao-pin, S., Anderson, D. E., Baase, W. A.,
185. Robinson, C. R., and Sligar, S. G. (1993) 217a.Tatham, A. S., and Shewry, P. R. (2000) Trends Dahlquist, F. W., and Matthews, B. W. (1991)
Protein Sci.2, 826–837 Biochem. Sci.25, 567–571 Biochemistry30, 11521–11529
186. Steif, C., Weber, P., Hinz, H.-J., Flossdorf, J., 218. Gotte, L., Volpin, D., Horne, R. W., and 248a.Kumar, S., and Nussinov, R. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.
Cesareni, G., and Kokkinidis, M. (1993) Mammi, M. (1976) Micron7, 95–102 293, 1241–1255
Biochemistry32, 3867–3876 218a.Urry, D., Luan, C.-H., and Peng, S. (1995) 248b.Strop, P., and Mayo, S. L. (2000) Biochemistry
187. Redfield, C., Boyd, J., Smith, L. J., Smith, R. A. Ciba. Found. Symp.192, 4–30 39, 1251–1255
G., and Dobson, C. M. (1992) Biochemistry31, 218b.van Dijk, A. A., de Boef, E., Bekkers, A., van 249. Sawyer, L., and James, M. N. G. (1982) Nature
10431–10437 Wijk, L. L., van Swieten, E., Hamer, R. J., and (London)295, 79–80
188. Harris, N. L., Presnell, S. R., and Cohen, F. E. Robillard, G. T. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 649–656 250. Borders, C. L., Jr., Broadwater, J. A., Bekeny, P.
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.236, 1356–1368 219. Sternberg, M. J. E., and Thornton, J. M. (1976) A., Salmon, J. E., Lee, A. S., Eldridge, A. M.,
189. Chou, K.-C., Carlacci, L., Maggiora, G. M., J. Mol. Biol.105, 367–382 and Pett, V. B. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 541–548
Parodi, L. A., and Schulz, M. W. (1992) Protein 220. Leszczy´nski, J. F., and Rose, G. D. (1986) 251. Mrabet, N. T., Van den Broeck, A., Van den
Sci.1, 810–827 Science234, 849–855 brande, I., Stanssens, P., Laroche, Y., Lambeir,
190. Rees, D. C., Komiya, H., Yeates, T. O., Allen, J. 221. Liang, C., and Mislow, K. (1994) J. Am. Chem. A.-M., Matthiissens, G., Jenkins, J., Chiadmi,
P., and Feher, G. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biochem.58, Soc.116, 11189–11190 M., van Tilbeurgh, H., Rey, F., Janin, J., Quax,
607–633 222. Chothia, C. (1984) Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 537– W. J., Lasters, I., De Maeyer, M., and Wodak, S.
191. Aleshin, A. E., Hoffman, C., Firsov, L. M., and 572 J. (1992) Biochemistry31, 2239–2253
Honzatko, R. B. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.238, 575– 223. Resnick, D., Pearson, A., and Krieger, M. 252. Dougherty, D. A. (1996) Science271, 163–168
591 (1994)Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 5–8 253. Mitchell, J. B. O., Nandi, C. L., McDonald, I.
192. Aleshin, A. E., Firsov, L. M., and Honzatko, 224. Shoyab, M., Plowman, G. D., McDonald, V. L., K., Thornton, J. M., and Price, S. (1994) J. Mol.
R. B. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 15631–15639 Bradley, J. G., and Todaro, G. J. (1989) Science Biol.239, 315–331
193. Harris, E. M. S., Aleshin, A. E., Firsov, L. M., 243, 1074–1076 253a.De Wall, S. L., Meadows, E. S., Barbour, L. J.,
and Honzatko, R. B. (1993) Biochemistry32, 225. Doolittle, R. F. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, and Gokel, G. W. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121,
1618–1626 287– 314 5613– 5614
194. Bella, J., Eaton, M., Brodsky, B., and Berman, 226. Berman, A. L., Kolker, E., and Trifanov, E. N. 253b.Gallivan, J. P., and Dougherty, D. A. (1999)
H. M. (1994) Science266, 75–81 (1994)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 4044–4047 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 9459– 9464
194a.Kramer, R. Z., Bella, J., Mayville, P., Brodsky, 227. Orengo, C. A., Jones, D. T., and Thornton, J. 253c.Wouters, J. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 2472 – 2475
B., and Berman, H. M. (1999) Nature Struct. M. (1994) Nature (London)372, 631–634 253d.Fernández-Recio, J., Romero, A., and Sancho,
Biol.6, 454– 457 228. Pan, K.-M., Damodaran, S., and Greaser, M. L. J. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.290, 319 –330
195. Brodsky, B., and Shah, N. K. (1995) FASEB J.9, (1994)Biochemistry33, 8255–8261 254. Rose, G. D., Young, W. B., and Gierasch, L. M.
1537–1546 229. Doolittle, R. F., and Bork, P. (1993) Sci. Am. (1983)Nature (London)304, 654–657
196. Redeker, V., Levilliers, N., Schmitter, J.-M., Le 269(Oct), 50–56 255. Watenpaugh, K. D., Margulis, T. N., Sieker, L.
Caer, J.-P., Rossier, J., Adoutte, A., and Bré, 230. Baron, M., Norman, D. G., and Campbell, I. C., and Jensen, L. H. (1978) J. Mol. Biol.122,
M.-H. (1994) Science266, 1688–1691 D. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 13–17 175–190
197. Miller, A. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 13–18 231. Mulichak, A. M., Tulinsky, A., and 255a.Nakasako, M. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.289, 547–564
198. Eyre, D. R. (1980) Science207, 1315–1322 Ravichandran, K. G. (1991) Biochemistry30, 256. Teeter, M. M. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
199. Parry, D. A. D., and Craig, A. S. (1979) Nature 10576–10588 U.S.A.81, 6014–6018
(London)282, 213–215 232. Bork, P., Holm, L., and Sander, C. (1994) J. 257. Otting, G., Liepinsh, E., and Wüthrich, K.
200. Porter, R. R., and Reid, K. B. M. (1979) Adv. Mol. Biol.242, 309–320 (1991)Science254, 974–980
Prot. Chem.33, 1–71 232a.Bogan, A. A., and Thorn, K. S. (1998) J. Mol. 258. Murzin, A. G., and Finkelstein, A. V. (1988) J.
201. Ashford, D., and Neuberger, A. (1980) Trends Biol.280, 1–9 Mol. Biol.204, 749–770
Biochem. Sci.5, 245–248 233. Tsai, J., Taylor, R., Chothia, C., and Gerstein, 259. Chothia, C. (1989) Nature (London)337, 204–205
202. Chen, J., and Varner, J. E. (1985) Proc. Natl. M. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.290, 253–266 260. Buehner, M., Ford, G. C., Moras, D., Olsen, K.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 4399–4403 233a.Gerstein, M., and Chothia, C. (1996) Proc. W., and Rossmann, M. G. (1974) J. Mol. Biol.
203. Adzhubei, A. A., and Sternberg, M. J. E. (1994) Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 10167–10172 90, 25–49
Protein Sci.3, 2395–2410 234. Varadarajan, R., and Richards, F. M. (1992) 261. Rossmann, M. G., Liljas, A., Branden, C.–I.,
204. Richardson, J. S. (1985) Nature (London)316, Biochemistry31, 12315–12327 and Banaszak, L. J. (1975) The Enzymes, 3rd ed.,
102–103 235. Allewell, N. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, Vol. 11, Academic Press, New York (p. 61)
205. Hutchinson, E. G., and Thornton, J. M. (1994) 417–418 262. Brändén, C. (1990) Nature (London)346, 607–608
Protein Sci.3, 2207–2216 236. Lim, W. A., Farruggio, D. C., and Sauer, R. T. 263. Kobe, B., and Deisenhofer, J. (1995) Nature
206. Venkatachalam, C. M. (1968) Biopolymers6, (1992)Biochemistry31, 4324–4333 (London)374, 183–186
1425–1436 237. Hubbard, S. J., and Argos, P. (1994) Protein Sci. 264. Kobe, B., and Deisenhofer, J. (1994) Trends
207. Perczel, A., Foxman, B. M., and Fasman, G. D. 3, 2194–2206 Biochem. Sci.19, 415–421
(1992)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 8210–8214 237a.Hubbard, S. J., and Argos, P. (1996) J. Mol. 264a.Kajava, A. V. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.277, 519 – 527
208. Yan, Y., Tropsha, A., Hermans, J., and Erickson, Biol.261, 289 –300 264b.Kobe, B., and Kajava, A. V. (2000) Trends
B. W. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 238. Hunt, N. G., Gregoret, L. M., and Cohen, F. E. Biochem. Sci.25, 509–515
7898–7902 (1994)J. Mol. Biol.241, 214–225 265. Farber, G. K., and Petsko, G. A. (1990) Trends
209. Perczel, A., McAllister, M. A., Császár, P., and 239. Hunter, C. A., and Sanders, K. M. (1990) J. Biochem. Sci.15, 228–234
Csizmadia, I. G. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, Am. Chem. Soc.112, 5525–5534 266. Reardon, D., and Farber, G. K. (1995) FASEB J.
4849–4858 240. Burley, S. K., and Petsko, G. A. (1985) Science 9, 497–503
210. Mattos, C., Petsko, G. A., and Karplus, M. 229, 23–28 267. Uhlin, U., and Eklund, H. (1994) Nature
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.238, 733–747 241. Thomas, K. A., Smith, G. M., Thomas, T. B., (London)370, 533–539
211. Hynes, T. R., Hodel, A., and Fox, R. O. (1994) and Feldmann, R. J. (1982) Proc. Natl. Acad. 268. Chothia, C. (1992) Nature (London)357, 543–544
Biochemistry33, 5021–5030 Sci. U.S.A.79, 4843–4847 268a.Zhang, C., and DeLisi, C. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.
212. Haque, T. S., Little, J. C., and Gellman, S. H. 242. Flocco, M. M., and Mowbray, S. L. (1994) J. 284, 1301–1305
(1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 4105–4106 Mol. Biol.235, 709–717 269. McLachlan, A. D. (1980) Nature (London)285,
267–268

--- Page 93 ---

89
References
270. Chou, P. Y., and Fasman, G. D. (1974) 302. Rothgeb, T. M., England, R. D., Jones, B. N., 335. Dobson, C. M., Evans, P. A., and Radford, S.
Biochemistry13, 222–245 and Gurd, R. S. (1978) Biochemistry17, 4564– E. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 31–37
270a.Myers, J. K., Pace, C. N., and Scholtz, J. M. 4571 336. Yang, A.-S., and Honig, B. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.
(1997)Biochemistry36, 10923 –10929 303. Lorimer, G. H. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 237, 602–614
270b.Spek, E. J., Olson, C. A., Shi, Z., and 65–68 336a.Baker, D. (2000) Nature (London)405, 39 – 42
Kallenbach, N. R. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 304. Friedman, M. (1977) Protein Crosslinking, Vol. 2, 336b.Dinner, A. R., Sali, A., Smith, L. J., Dobson, C.
5571– 5572 Plenum, New York M., and Karplus, M. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.
271. Minor, D. L., Jr., and Kim, P. S. (1994) Nature 305. Torchinsky, Y. M. (1981) Sulfur in Proteins, 25, 331–339
(London)367, 660–663 Pergamon, Oxford 337. Udgaonkar, J. B., and Baldwin, R. L. (1988)
272. Richards, F. M. (1991) Sci. Am.264(Jan), 54–63 306. Harrison, P. M., and Sternberg, M. J. E. (1994) Nature (London)335, 694–699
273. Anfinsen, C. B. (1973) Science181, 223–230 J. Mol. Biol.244, 448–463 338. Roder, H., Elöve, G. A., and Englander, S. W.
274. Dill, K. A., Bromberg, S., Yue, K., Fiebig, K. 307. Folk, J. E., and Finlayson, J. S. (1977) Adv. Prot. (1988)Nature (London)335, 700–704
M., Yee, D. P., Thomas, P. D., and Chan, H. S. Chem.31, 1–133 339. Gething, M.-J., and Sambrook, J. (1992) Science
(1995)Protein Sci.4, 561– 602 308. Gurd, F. R. N., and Rothgeb, T. M. (1979) Adv. 355, 33–45
275. Rost, B., Schneider, R., and Sander, C. (1993) Prot. Chem.33, 73–165 340. Odefey, C., Mayr, L. M., and Schmid, F. X.
Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 120–123 309. Karplus, M., and McCammon, J. A. (1983) (1995)J. Mol. Biol.245, 69 –78
276. Wako, H., and Blundell, T. L. (1994) J. Mol. Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 263–300 341. Chazin, W. J., Kördel, J., Drakenberg, T.,
Biol.238, 693–708 310. Caspar, D. L. D., Clarage, J., Salunke, D. M., Thulin, E., Brodin, P., Grundström, T., and
277. Yi, T.-M., and Lander, E. S. (1993) J. Mol. Biol. and Clarage, M. (1988) Nature (London)332, Forsén, S. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
232, 1117–1129 659–662 86, 2195–2198
278. Monge, A., Friesner, R. A., and Honig, B. (1994) 311. Smith, J. L., Hendrickson, W. A., Honzatko, 342. Lin, L.-N., and Brandts, J. F. (1987) Biochemistry
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 5027–5029 R. B., and Sheriff, S. (1986) Biochemistry25, 26, 3537–3543
279. Smith, C. K., Withka, J. M., and Regan, L. 5018–5027 343. Herning, T., Yutani, K., Taniyama, Y., and
(1994)Biochemistry33, 5510–5517 312. Frauenfelder, H., Sligar, S. G., and Wolynes, Kikuchi, M. (1991) Biochemistry30, 9882–9891
279a.Lacroix, E., Viguera, A. R., and Serrano, L. P. G. (1991) Science254, 1598–1603 344. Chatrenet, B., and Chang, J.-Y. (1993) J. Biol.
(1998)J. Mol. Biol.284, 173 – 191 313. Buck, M., Radford, S. E., and Dobson, C. M. Chem.268, 20988–20996
279b.Gotoh, O. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.264, 823 – 838 (1994)J. Mol. Biol.237, 247–254 345. Talluri, S., Rothwarf, D. M., and Scheraga, H.
279c.Dandekar, T., and Argos, P. (1996) J. Mol. Biol. 314. Kim, K.-S., Fuchs, J. A., and Woodward, C. K. A. (1994) Biochemistry33, 10437–10449
256, 645– 660 (1993)Biochemistry32, 9600–9608 346. Pace, C. N. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 14–17
279d.Jones, D. T. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.292, 195– 202 315. Rohl, C. A., and Baldwin, R. L. (1994) 347. Yang, A.-S., and Honig, B. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.
280. Kyte, J., and Doolittle, R. F. (1982) J. Mol. Biol. Biochemistry33, 7760–7767 231, 459–474
157, 105–132 316. Spyracopoulos, L., and O’Neil, J. D. J. (1994) 348. Hartsough, D. S., and Merz, K. M., Jr. (1993)
281. Reyes, V. E., Phillips, L., Humphreys, R. E., J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 1395–1402 J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 6529–6537
and Lew, R. A. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 317. Huber, R. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 271–276 349. Aswad, D. W., and Johnson, B. A. (1987)
12854–12858 318. Lumry, R., and Rosenberg, A. (1974) Colloques Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 155–158
282. Wold, F. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 58–59 Internationaux du C.N.R.S.246, 53 350. Brennan, T. V., and Clarke, S. (1993) Protein
283. Graves, D. J., Martin, B. L., and Wang, J. H. 319. Mao, B., Pear, M. R., McCammon, J. A., and Sci.2, 331–338
(1994)Co-and post-translational modification of Northrup, S. H. (1981) J. Mol. Biol.151, 199–202 351. Volkin, D. B., and Klibanov, A. M. (1987)
proteins, Oxford Univ. Press, New York 320. Brack, A., and Spach, G. (1981) J. Am. Chem. J. Biol. Chem.262, 2945–2950
283a.Angeletti, R. H., ed. (1998) Protein, Analysis Soc.103, 6319–6323 352. Wells-Knecht, M. C., Huggins, T. G., Dyer, D.
and Design, Academic Press, San Diego, 321. Frauenfelder, H., Parak, F., and Young, R. D. G., Thorpe, S. R., and Baynes, J. W. (1993)
California (1988)Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.17, J. Biol. Chem.268, 12348–12352
284. Yan, S. C. B., Grinnell, B. W., and Wold, F. 451–479 353. Luthra, M., Ranganathan, D., Ranganathan,
(1989)Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 264–268 322. Gerstein, M., Lesk, A. M., and Chothia, C. S., and Balasubramanian, D. (1994) J. Biol.
285. Berthiaume, L., Deichaite, I., Peseckis, S., and (1994)Biochemistry33, 6739–6749 Chem.269, 22678–22682
Resh, M. D. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 6498–6505 323. Kretsinger, R. H., and Nockolds, C. E. (1973) 354. Lubec, G., Weninger, M., and Anderson, S. R.
286. McIlhinney, R. A. J. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci. J. Biol. Chem.248, 3313–3326 (1994)FASEB J.8, 1166–1169
15, 387–391 324. Liepinsh, E., and Otting, G. (1994) J. Am. 355. Kaiser, E. T. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12,
287. Violand, B. N., Schlittler, M. R., Lawson, C. Chem. Soc.116, 9670–9674 305–309
Q., Kane, J. F., Siegel, N. R., Smith, C. E., 325. Scholtz, J. M., Barrick, D., York, E. J., Stewart, 355a.Beasley, J. R., and Hecht, M. H. (1997) J. Biol.
Kolodziej, E. W., and Duffin, K. L. (1994) J. M., and Baldwin, R. L. (1995) Proc. Natl. Chem.272, 2031– 2034
Protein Sci.3, 1089–1097 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 185–189 356. Oxender, D. E., and Fox, C. F., eds. (1987)
288. Hilz, H., Fanick, N., and Klapproth, K. (1986) 326. Kamoun, P. P. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, Protein Engineering, Liss, New York
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 6267–6271 424–425 356a.Dahiyat, B. I., and Mayo, S. L. (1997) Science
289. Hortin, G., Fok, K. F., Toren, P. C., and Strauss, 327. Dill, K. A., and Shortle, D. (1991) Ann. Rev. 278, 82 – 87
A. W. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 3082–3085 Biochem.60, 795–825 356b.DeGrado, W. F., Summa, C. M., Pavone, V.,
290. Bateman, A., Solomon, S., and Bennett, H. P. J. 328. Baker, D., and Agard, D. A. (1994) Biochemistry Nastri, F., and Lombardi, A. (1999) Ann. Rev.
(1990)J. Biol. Chem.265, 22130–22136 33, 7505–7509 Biochem.68, 779–819
291. Takahara, H., Tsuchida, M., Kusubata, M., 328a.Sharp, K. A., and Englander, S. W. (1994) 357. Bryson, J. W., Betz, S. F., Lu, H. S., Suich, D. J.,
Akutsu, K., Tagami, S., and Sugawara, K. Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 526– 529 Zhou, H. X., O’Neil, K. T., and DeGrado, W. F.
(1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 13361–13368 328b.Pace, C. N., Shirley, B. A., McNutt, M., and (1995)Science270, 935–941
292. Kreil, G. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 10967–10970 Gajiwala, K. (1996) FASEB J.10, 75– 83 358. Nautiyal, S., Woolfson, D. N., King, D. S., and
293. Mor, A., Amiche, M., and Nicolas, P. (1992) 328c.Sippl, M. J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.260, 644 – 648 Alber, T. (1995) Biochemistry34, 11645– 11651
Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 481–485 328d.Meyer, E. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 1543– 1562 359. Betz, S. F., Liebman, P. A., and DeGrado, W. F.
294. Kreil, G. (1994) Science266, 996–997 328e.Hill, R. B., Hong, J.-K., and DeGrado, W. F. (1997)Biochemistry36, 2450– 2458
295. Prescott, B., Renugopalakrishnan, V., (2000)J. Am. Chem. Soc.122, 746 – 747 360. Handel, T. M., Williams, S. A., and DeGrado,
Glimcher, M. J., Bhushan, A., and Thomas, G. 329. Levinthal, C. (1968) J. Chim. Phys.-Chim. Biol. W. F. (1993) Science261, 879–885
J., Jr. (1986) Biochemistry25, 2792–2798 65, 44–45 361. Struthers, M. D., Cheng, R. P., and Imperiali,
296. Wood, D. D., and Moscarello, M. A. (1989) J. 330. Lattman, E. E., Fiebig, K. M., and Dill, K. A. B. (1996) Science271, 342–345
Biol. Chem.264, 5121–5127 (1994)Biochemistry33, 6158–6166 362. Yan, Y., and Erickson, B. W. (1994) Protein Sci.
297. Waite, J. H., Housley, T. J., and Tanzer, M. L. 331. Mark, A. E., and van Gunsteren, W. F. (1992) 3, 1069–1073
(1985)Biochemistry24, 5010–5014 Biochemistry31, 7745–7748 363. Quinn, T. P., Tweedy, N. B., Williams, R. W.,
298. Taylor, S. W., Waite, J. H., Ross, M. M., 332. Peng, Z., and Kim, P. S. (1994) Biochemistry33, Richardson, J. S., and Richardson, D. C. (1994)
Shabanowitz, J., and Hunt, D. F. (1994) J. Am. 2136–2141 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 8747–8751
Chem. Soc.116, 10803–10804 333. Hagihara, Y., Tan, Y., and Goto, Y. (1994) J. Mol. 364. Hecht, M. H. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
299. Clarke, S. (1992) Ann. Rev. Biochem.61, 355–386 Biol.237, 336–348 U.S.A.91, 8729–8730
300. Marshall, C. J. (1993) Science259, 1865–1866 334. Yu, Y., Makhatadze, G. I., Pace, C. N., and 364a.Kortemme, T., Ramírez-Alvarado, M., and
301. Mroz, E. A. (1989) Science243, 1615 Privalov, P. L. (1994) Biochemistry33, 3312–3319 Serrano, L. (1998) Science281, 253–256

--- Page 94 ---

90 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
References
365. Kellis, J. T., Jr., Nyberg, K., and Fersht, A. R.
(1989)Biochemistry28, 4914–4922
366. Goldenberg, D. P. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biophys.
Biophys. Chem.17, 481–507
367. Alber, T. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biochem.58, 765–798
368. Katz, B. A., and Kossiakoff, A. (1986) J. Biol.
Chem.261, 15480–15485
369. Pantoliano, M. W., Ladner, R. C., Bryan, P. N.,
Rollence, M. L., Wood, J. F., and Poulos, T. L.
(1987)Biochemistry26, 2077–2082
370. Wetzel, R. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 478–
482
371. Mitchinson, C., and Wells, J. A. (1989)
Biochemistry28, 4807–4815
372. Ahern, T. J., Casal, J. I., Petsko, G. A., and
Klibanov, A. M. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A.84, 675–679
373. Estell, D. A., Graycar, T. P., Miller, J. V.,
Powers, D. B., Burnier, J. P., Ng, P. G., and
Wells, J. A. (1986) Science233, 659–663
374. Loeb, D. D., Swanstrom, R., Everitt, L.,
Manchester, M., Stamper, S. E., and
Hutchison, C. A., III. (1989) Nature (London)
340, 397–440
375. Mendel, D., Ellman, J. A., Chang, Z., Veenstra,
D. L., Kollman, P. A., and Schultz, P. G. (1992)
Science266, 1798–1802
376. Brady, L., and Dodson, G. (1994) Nature
(London)368, 692–694
377. Liu, N., Deillon, C., Klauser, S., Gutte, B., and
Thomas, R. M. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 1214–1220

--- Page 95 ---

91
Study Questions
1. Name all of the isometric tripeptides which could 11. Compare the following: the diameters of (a) a
be formed from one molecule each of tyrosine, carbon atom in an organic molecule (b) a bacterial
alanine, and valine. cell, e.g. of E. coli (c) a human red blood cell (d) a
ribosome (e) the length of a peptide unit in an
2. What functional groups are found in protein side extended polypeptide chain (f) the length of the
chains? Of what importance to protein structure carbon atom chain in an 18-carbon fatty acid.
and function are (a) hydrophobic groups, (b)
acidic and basic groups, (c) sulfyhydryl groups? 12. Compare: (a) the length of a peptide unit (residue)
in a polypeptide in an extented (β) conformation.
3. If placed in water and adjusted to a pH of 7, will (b) the length by which an α helix is extended by
the following migrate toward the anode or the the addition of one amino acid unit (c) the length
cathode if placed in an electrical field? of one turn of an α helix. (d) the diameter of an α
(a) Aspartic acid, (b) alanine, (c) tyrosine, (d) helix (both using atom centers in the backbones
lysine, (e) arginine, (f) glutamine. and using van der Waals radii) for a poly-l-alanine
helix.
4. Draw the following hydrogen-bonded structures:
(a) A dimer of acetic acid. 13. What are: albumins, globulins, protamines,
(b) A tyrosine–carboxylate bond in the interior of scleroproteins, glycoproteins, lipoproteins?
a protein.
(c) A phosphate–guanidinium ion pair in an 14. Where are the following found and what are their
enzyme–substrate complex. functions? Gamma globulin, hemocyanin, pepsin,
glucagon, ferritin, phosphorylase.
5. Contrast the properties of the amino acids with
those of the saturated fatty acids with respect to 15. List the nutritionally essential amino acids for
solubility in water and in ether and to physical human beings. Compare these needs with those
state. of other species, including lactic acid bacteria,
malaria parasites, green plants, etc.
6. Describe in as much detail as you can the charac-
teristic properties of (a) β sheets, (b) α helices, (c) 16. Define: chiral, enantomer, diastereomer, epimer,
turns in peptide chains, and (d) collagen. anomer (see Chapter 4), prochiral (see Chapter 9).
What is meant by the statement that biochemical
7. Predict whether the following peptide segments reactions are stereochemically specific? Why is
will be likely to exist as an α helix or as part of a β such stereospecificity to be expected in organisms
structure within a protein: (which are constructed from asymmetric units)?
(a) Poly-l-leucine See Chapter 9 for further discussion.
(b) Poly-l-valine
(c) Pro-Glu-Met-Val-Phe-Asp-Ile 17. What are disulfide bridges and of what signifi-
(d) Pro-Glu-Ala-Leu-Phe-Ala-Ala cance are they in protein structure?
8. Describe three ways in which a side chain of a 18. What is meant by “denaturation” of a protein?
serine residue can fold back and hydrogen bond to Mention several ways in which denaturation can
a C=O or N–H group of the backbone and two be brought about. How is denaturation explained
ways by which an asparagine side chain can do in terms of structure?
the same. There are yet other possibilities.
19. A chain of l-amino acids can form either a right-
9. Compare structural features and properties of the handed or a left-handed helix. From the
following proteins: silk fibroin, α-keratin, col- Ramachandran diagram in Fig. 2-9, can you say
lagen, and bovine serum albumin. anything about the relative stabilities of right and
left-handed helices? What do you predict for
10. In what way do the solubilities of proteins usually polyglycine?
vary with pH? Why?
20. What similarities and differences would you
predict for two proteins of identical amino acid
sequence but one made from all l-amino acids and
the other from all d-amino acids?

--- Page 96 ---

92 Chapter 2. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
Study Questions
21. Complete the following peptide structure for l-
seryl-l-valyl-l-asparaginyl—etc. Extend the chain
H
in the C-terminal direction to form a beta turn
with the chain coming back to form a beta sheet.
Add a third segment of peptide parallel to the + N 2
folded back chain to form a 3-stranded beta sheet. H 3 N 1 N 3
Indicate all hydrogen bonds correctly. Draw the
side chains of the seryl and asparaginyl residues in H
positions 1 and 3 so that they form proper hydro-
gen bonds to groups in the peptide backbone.
N
22. Complete the following structure to form a short
C
segment of alpha helix. Extend the chain by at N
C
least three residues. Form all hydrogen bonds C
correctly. Add at least three side chains with the N
correct chirality at the alpha carbon positions.
C
Add one electrically charged side chain and show
C
how it interacts with the peptide backbone at
N
either the C- or N-terminus to help stabilize the
C
helix.
C
N
C
C
van der Waals surface
23. What is the relationship between Ångstrom units
N
(Å) and nanometers (nm)? Give the indicated
distance in Å or nm. H H
H
C H
O
H
C C H
N C N HH
C
H O HC O
H
H+
H N H
CH
H
HC
C 2
CH 2 C CH 2
Phenylanine C H 2 C Lysine
side chain C side chain
van der
CH 2 Waals
surface

--- Page 97 ---

93
Study Questions
24. Draw three residues of a polypeptide chain
constructed of l-amino acids using the top tem-
H O
plate of the two below. Now, using the second
template, whose polypeptide chain begins at the
N
right, use the same three residues, numbering from H + 3N 1 2 N 3 Polypeptide
the C-terminus using d-amino acids. This is know
as a retro-inverso polypeptide. O H O
O H
Compare the outer surface of of the standard
polypeptide and its retro-inverso analog. How –O 2 N Retro-inverso
would your answer be affected by the presence of 1 N 3 N polypeptide
threonine or isoleucine in the peptides?
O H O H
If the two polypeptides were folded into a hairpin
loop of β structure how would the exterior sur-
faces compare? How would the hydrogen bond-
ing compare?
What possible value can you imagine for retro-
inverso polypeptides in design of drugs? See
Brady and Dodson, Nature368, 692–694 (1994) or
Guichard et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 9765–
9769 (1994)

--- Page 98 ---

94 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
A Laue X-ray diffraction pattern from a protein crystal. A stationary
crystal is irradiated with very intense white, multiwavelength X rays
from a synchrotron source. The diffraction pattern is rich in infor-
mation. A single 0.1 ms X-ray pulse may provide a pattern with
enough information to determine a three-dimensional structure.
The pattern consists of thousands of diffraction spots arranged on
intersecting rings. The coordinates of the diffraction spots together
with their measured intensities provide the necessary information
for structure determination. Courtesy of Louise Johnson.
Contents
95 A. Understanding pH and Electrical Charges on 129 G. Microscopy
Macromolecules 132 H. X-ray and Neutron Diffraction
95 1. Strengths of Acids and Bases: the pKa's 137 I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
96 2. Titration Curves 137 1. Basic Principles of NMR Spectroscopy
97 3. Buffers 138 Band widths
98 B. Isolating Compounds 138 The chemical shift
98 1. Fractionation of Cells and Tissues 139 Scalar coupling (J coupling)
100 2. Separations Based on Molecular Size, Shape, and 140 2. Nuclei Other Than Hydrogen
Density 140 Deuterium (2H)
100 Dialysis, ultrafiltration, and perfusion 140 Carbon - 13
chromatography 140 Nitrogen - 15
100 Centrifugation 140 Phosphorus - 31
101 3. Separations Based on Solubility 140 Fluorine - 19
102 4. Separation by Partition 141 Some Other Nuclei
103 5. Ion Exchange Chromatography 141 3. Fourier Transform Spectrometers and
104 6. Affinity Chromatography Two-Dimensional NMR
106 7. Electrophoresis and Isoelectric Focusing 141 Free induction decay
108 C. Determining the Relative Molecular Mass, M 141 Relaxation times T1 and T2
r
108 1. Ultracentrifugation 142 Two-dimensional and multidimensional
108 Sedimentation velocity NMR spectra
112 2. Gel Filtration and Gel Electrophoresis 145 4. Three-Dimensional Structures and Dynamics
112 3. Mass Spectrometry of Proteins
115 D. Determining Amino Acid Composition and 145 Assignment of resonances
Sequence 145 NOEs and distance constraints
115 1. Cleavage of Disulfide Bridges 147 5. Other Information from NMR Spectra
116 2. Hydrolysis and Other Chain Cleavage Reactions 147 NMR titrations
116 Selective enzymatic hydrolysis 148 Observing exchangable protons
117 Nonenzymatic cleavages 148 Exchange rates of amide protons
118 Separating the peptides 149 Solid-state NMR and other topics
118 3. Determining Amino Acid Sequence 149 J. The Protein Data Bank, Three-Dimensional
118 The Edman degradation Structures, and Computation
119 Protein sequences from the genes
119 Mass spectrometry in sequencing 150 References
119 4. Locating Disulfide Bridges 157 Study Questions
120 5. Detecting Products
122 6. Absorption of Light Boxes
123 E. Quantitative Determinations and Modification 102 Box 3-A Quantitative Estimation of Protein
Reactions of Side Chain Groups Concentrations
123 1. Reactions of Amino Groups 107 Box 3-B Sorting and Analyzing Single Cells
125 2. Reactions of SH Groups 110 Box 3-C Isotopes in Biochemical Investigations
126 3. Reactions of Other Side Chains 116 Box 3-D The Proteome
127 4. Affinity Labeling 121 Box 3-E Ninhydrin
127 F. Synthesis of Peptides 122 Box 3-F Biosensors and Electronic Noses
127 1. Solid-Phase Peptide Synthesis
128 2. Combinatorial Libraries Tables
99 Table 3-1 Practical pK Values for Some Useful Buffer
Compounds a at 25°C and Ionic Strength 0.1
117 Table 3-2 Specifities of Commonly Used Protein-
Hydrolyzing Enzymes
141 Table 3-3 Approximate Chemical Shift Ranges in
1H- and in 15N- NMR Spectra
149 Table 3-4 Selected World Wide Web Servers
Related to Protein Structures and
Sequences

--- Page 99 ---

95
3
Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
How have chemists deduced the thousands of For strong acids K is high and for weak acids it is low.
a
structural formulas that we write for the substances Since the values of K vary by many orders of magni-
a
found in nature? The answer is far too complex to tude it is customary to use as a measure of the acid
give here in detail. However, the separation of com- strength pK This is the negative logarithm of K (pK
a. a a
pounds, the analysis of mixtures, and the unraveling = – log K ) . For very strong acids pK is less than zero,
a a
of structures remain essential parts of biochemistry. while very weak acids have pK values as high as 15 or
a
A “minireview” of methods, with emphasis on proteins, more.
follows. Additional procedures having to do primarily In the biochemical literature the strength of a base is
with carbohydrates, nucleic acids, or lipids are given nearly always given by the pK of the conjugate acid. Thus,
a
in Chapters 4, 5, and 8, respectively. A– in Eq. 3-1 is a base and HA its conjugate acid. The
base could equally well be uncharged A and its conju-
gate acid HA+. In both cases Eq. 3-2 would hold. This
A. Understanding pH and Electrical Charges defines the strength of both the acid HA and the base
on Macromolecules A–. It follows that strong bases have weak conjugate
acids with high pK values, while weak bases have
a
Proteins, nucleic acids, and carbohydrates all con- strong conjugate acids with low pK values.
a
tain acidic or basic functional groups. The strengths For a compound containing several acidic groups
of the acidic groups vary over a broad range from that we define a series of consecutive dissociation constants
of the strongly acidic phosphate and sulfate esters to K ,K ,K , etc. For the sake of simplicity we will omit
1a 2a 3a
that of the very weakly acidic alcoholic – OH group. the a’s and call these K ,K ,K ,....
1 2 3
The net electrical charge, as well as the spatial distri-
bution of the charged groups, affects the properties of
a macromolecule greatly. Therefore, it will be worth- K K K
1 2 3
while for us to consider some aspects of acid–base H A H A HA A (3-3)
3 2
chemistry before discussing other topics.
If there are n consecutive dissociation constants there
1. Strengths of Acids and Bases: the pK ’s will be n + 1 ionic species H A, H A, etc. Notice that
a 3 2
H A could be a neutral molecule with H A, HA, and A
3 2
The strength of an acid is usually described by the bearing changes of – 1, – 2, and – 3, respectively. Alter-
acid dissociation constant K natively, H A might carry 1, 2, or 3 positive changes.
a 3
In every case the mathematical expressions will be the
HA = A– + H+ (3-1) same. For this reason the charges have been deliber-
ately omitted from Eq. 3-3 and others that follow.
K = [A–][H+] / [HA] (3-2) Each constant in Eq. 3-3 is defined as in Eq. 3-2, i.e.,
a
K = [HA][H +] / [H A], etc. Keep in mind that there
2 2

--- Page 100 ---

96 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
are significant differences between the apparent equi- scribe the pH dependence of enzymatic action.
librium constants (concentration equilibrium constants) Notice that in Eq. 3-3 single arrows have been
that we ordinarily use and thermodynamic equilibri- used rather than the pairs ( ) that are often em-
um constants that are obtained by extrapolation to ployed to indicate reversible equilibria. This is done
zero ionic strength.1 A related complication is the so that the direction of the arrow indicates whether we are
uncertainity associated with the measurement of pH. using a dissociation constant or an association constant.
This is often considered a measurement of hydrogen The use of single arrows in this manner to indicate
ion activity but this is not a correct statement. (The how the equilibrium constants are to be written is a
matter is considered briefly in Chapter 6). However, good practice when dealing with complex equilibria.
for all practical purposes, in the range of about pH
4–10 the pH can be equated with – log [H+].
Often only one of the ionic forms of Eq. 3-3 will be 2. Titration Curves
important in a biochemical reaction. A particular ionic
species may be the substrate for an enzyme. Likewise, When a neutral amino acid is titrated with acid,
an enzyme–substrate complex in only a certain state the carboxylate groups become protonated and acid is
of protonation may react to given products. In these taken up. Likewise titration with base removes protons
cases, and whenever pH affects an equilibrium, it is from the protonated amino groups and base is taken
useful to relate the concentration [A] of a given ionic up. If we plot the number of equivalents of acid or
i
form of a compound to the total of all ionic forms [A] base that have reacted with the neutral amino acid
t
using Eqs. 3-4 and 3-5. versus pH, a titration curve such as that shown in Fig.
3-1 is generated. The curve for histidine contains three
[A] = [A] / F (3-4) steps; the first corresponds to the titration of the car-
i t i
boxylate group with acid, the second to the titration
[A] = [A] + [HA] + [H A] + ... [H A] (3-5) of the protonated imidazole of the side chain, and the
t 2 n
third to the titration of the protonated amino group
For Eq. 3-4, A = H A, A = H A, etc. and F , F , with base. Each step is characterized by a midpoint
1 n 2 n-1 1 2
etc. are the Michaelis pH functions,2,3 which were proposed that is equal to the pK value for the group being
a
by L. Michaelis in 1914. For the case represented by titrated. The ends of the curve at low and high pH,
Eq. 3-3 there are four ionic species and therefore four which are drawn with a dashed line, are obtained only
Michaelis pH functions which have the following form after corrections have been applied to the data. If only
(Eq. 3 - 6). Here, K ,K , etc. are the usual consecutive the equivalents of acid or base added rather than the
1 2
acid dissociation constants. numberreacted are plotted, we obtain the solid line
shown in Fig. 3-1. We see that at the low pH end there
F = 1 + K / [H+] + K K / [H+]2 + K K K / [H+]3 is no distinct end point. As we add more acid to try to
1 1 1 2 1 2 3
complete the titration, the correction that must be
F = [H+]/K + 1 + K / [H+] + K K / [H+]2 applied to the data becomes increasingly greater. The
2 1 2 2 3
difference between the dashed and solid lines reflects
F = [H+]2/K K + [H+]/K + 1 + K / [H+] the fact that at the low pH end much of the acid added
3 1 2 2 3
is used to simply lower the pH. Therefore, we have a
F = [H+]3/K K K + [H+]2/K K [H+]/K + 1 large free [H +]. Similarly, at the high pH end we have
4 1 2 3 2 3 + 3
(3-6) a high free [OH –].
The exact shapes of the ends of the titration curve
If there are only three ionic forms the first three of depend heavily on the total concentration. Likewise,
these equations will apply if the final term is dropped the magnitude of the correction required to obtain a
from each. The student should be able to verify these plot of equivalents of acid or base reacted varies with
equations and to write the appropriate pH functions the concentration and is smaller the higher the concen-
for other cases. Since these relationships are met so tration of the substance being titrated (see problems 2
often in biochemistry it is worthwhile to program a and 3 at the end of this chapter). An important rule in
computer to evaluate the Michaelis pH functions and doing acid-base titrations, especially when very small
to apply them as needed. From Eq. 3-4 it can be seen samples are available, is to use the highest possible
thatthe reciprocal of the Michaelis pH function for a given concentration of sample in the smallest possible volume
ionic form represents the fraction of the total compound in and to titrate with relatively concentrated acid or base.
that form and that the sum of these reciprocals for all Because of the difficulty of adequately correcting titra-
the ionic forms is equal to one. Examples of the use tion curves at low pH it is hard to estimate the pK values
a
of the Michaelis pH functions in this book are given in of the carboxyl groups of amino acids accurately from
Eq. 6-50, which relates the Gibbs energy of hydrolysis titration. An additional experimental difficulty exists
of ATP to the pH, and in Eqs. 9-55 to 9-57, which de- at the high pH end because of the tendency for basic

--- Page 101 ---

97
9.2
2
6.0
1
0
1
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
pH
eniditsih
fo
elom
rep
dedda
stnelaviuqE
HOaN
lCH
A. Understanding pH and Electrical Charges on Macromolecules
H COO–
H
+
3N
H COO–
H2N
N
N
N
H COO– H N
+ H
H COOH H3N
+
H3N H
N
H
N
1.8
H
N+
H
N+ Figure 3-1 Titration curve for
histidine. The solid line represents
the uncorrected titration curve for
3 mM histidine monohydrochloride
titrated with 0.2 M HCL to lower
pH or with 0.2 M NaOH to higher
pH assuming pK values of 1.82,
a
6.00, and 9.17. The dashed line
represents thecorrected curve
showing the number of protons
bound or lost per mole of histidine
monohydrochloride.
solutions to absorb CO from the air. Sometimes for- and log [H+] with – pH and rearranging we obtain Eq.
2
maldehyde is added to shift the apparent pK of the 3-7 (the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation). It is some-
a
amino groups to lower values and make the titration times useful to rewrite this as Eq. 3-8, where α is the
more satisfactory. fraction of the acid that is dissociated at a given pH.
Despite the difficulties, real proteins can be titrated
successfully to estimate the numbers of carboxyl, histi-
dine, tyrosine, and other groups.4 An example is
pH– pK = log ([A]/[HA]) (3-7)
shown in Fig. 3-2. The experimental data have been a
fitted with a theoretical curve based on the pK a ’s of pH– pK = log [α/(1–α)];
the carboxyl, histidine, tyrosine, and amino groups as a
determined by NMR measurements.5 Account has α = [A] / [HA] + [A] = 10(pH–pKa)
been taken of the effect of the electrical field created by 1 + 10(pH–pKa) (3-8)
the many charged groups in distorting the curve from
that obtained by summing the theoretical titration
curves of the component groups. However, when there Logarithms to the base 10 are used in both equations.
are multiple acid–base groups that are close together These equations are useful in preparing buffers and in
in a protein, a more complex situation involving tauto- thinking about what fraction of a substance exists in a
merism arises. This is discussed in Chapter 6. given ionic form at a particular value of pH. From Eq.
Titration curves based on plots of light absorption 3-7 it is easy to show that when the pH is near the pK
a
versus pH or of NMR chemical shifts versus pH (see relatively large amounts of acid or base must be added
Fig. 3-29) are often useful. They have the important to change the pH if the concentrations of the buffer
advantage that no special correction for free acid or pair A and HA are high.
base is needed at low or high pH. Buffers are often added to maintain a constant
pH in biochemical research6 and naturally occurring
buffer systems within body fluids and cells are very
3. Buffers important (Box 6-A). Among the most important
natural buffers are the proteins themselves, with the
A mixture of a weak acid HA and of its conjugate imidazole groups of histidine side chains providing
base A constitutes a buffer which resists changes in much of the buffering capacity of cells around pH 7
pH. This can be seen most readily by taking logarithms (Figs. 3-1 and 3-2). Table 3-1 lists some useful bio-
of both sides of Eq. 3-2. By replacing log K with – pK chemical buffers and their pK values. Here are a few
a a

--- Page 102 ---

98 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
0
Figure 3-2 Acid–base titration curve for hen lysozyme at 0.1 ionic strength
and 25°C. , initial titration from the pH attained after dialysis; , back
titration after exposure to pH 1.8; , back titration after exposure to pH 11.1.
The solid curve was constructed on the basis of “intrinsic” pK values based
a
on NMR data. From Kuramitsu and Hamaguchi5
elucelom
nietorp
rep
detaicossid
+H
which can be removed by vacuum
evaporation or lyophilization.8
B. Isolating Compounds
5
Before structural work can
begin, pure substances must be
separated from the complex mixtures
in which they occur in cells and
10 tissues.4,13– 24 Often, a substance
must be isolated from a tissue in
which it is present in a very low
concentration. After it is isolated in
pure form, if it is a large molecule,
15
it must often be cut up into smaller
pieces which are separated, purified,
and identified. Accurate quantita-
tive analysis is required to deter-
20 mine the ratios of these fragments.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Considerable ingenuity may then
pH have to be exercised in putting the
pieces of the jigsaw puzzle back
together to determine the structure
of the “native” molecule. Many
books, a few of which are cited
here,4,13– 23,25 – 45 provide instructions.
There are also journals and other
periodicals dedicated to biochemical
methods.46– 53
practical hints about buffer preparation. Buffers con-
taining monovalent ions tend to change pH with dilution 1. Fractionation of Cells and Tissues
less than do those with multivalent ions such as HPO 2–
4
or HP O 3–. The pK values of carboxylic acids and of A fresh tissue or a paste of packed cells of a micro-
2 7 a
phosphoric acid, or of its organic derivatives, change organism, usually collected by centrifugation, may be
very little with change in temperature. The pH of a the starting material.23,54– 57 Tissue is often ground in
buffer prepared with such components is nearly inde- a kitchen-type blender or, for gentler treatment, in a
pendent of temperature (Table 3-1). However, the pK specialhomogenizer. The popular Potter–Elvehjem
a
of the – NH + group changes greatly with temperature. homogenizer is a small apparatus in which a glass or
3
Buffer composition can be calculated readily from Eq. plastic pestle rotates inside a tight-fitting mortar tube
3-8 and pK values from Table 3-1. It is convenient (see standard laboratory equipment catalogs for pic-
a
to keep in the laboratory standardized (to ~ 1% error) tures). Microbial cells are frequently broken with
1 M HCl and 1 M NaOH for use in buffer preparation. supersonic oscillation (sonication) or in special pres-
Compositions calculated from Eq. 3-8 will usually sure cells. It is important to pay attention to the pH,
yield buffers of pH very close to those expected. buffer composition, and, if subcellular organelles are
Final adjustment with HCl may be needed if the pH to be separated, the osmotic pressure. To preserve the
is more than one unit away from a pK value. When integrity of organelles, 0.25 M sucrose is frequently
a
two buffering materials are present, the composition used as the suspending medium, and MgCl as well
2
should be calculated independently for each. The as a metal complexing agent such as ethylenediamine-
measurement of pH should always be done with great tetraacetate (EDTA) (Table 6-10) may be added. Solu-
care because it is easy to make errors. Everything ble enzymes are often extracted without addition of
depends upon the reliability of the standard buffers sucrose, but reducing compounds such as glutathione
used to calibrate the pH meter.7 Often, especially (Box 11-B), mercaptoethanol, or dithiothreitol (Eq. 3-23)
during isolation of small compounds, it is desirable to may be added. The crude homogenate may be strained
work in the neutral pH region with volatile buffers, e.g., and is usually centrifuged briefly to remove cell frag-
trimethylamine and CO or ammonium bicarbonate, ments and other “debris.” Large-scale purification of
2

--- Page 103 ---

B. Isolating Compounds 99
TABLE 3-1
Practical pK Values for Some Useful Buffer Compounds at 25°C and Ionic Strength 0.1a
a
Compound pK Grams per mole d(pK ) / dT Charge on conjugate base
a a
Citric acid (pK ) 192 – 1
1
Formic acid 3.7 0 – 1
Citric acid (pK ) 4.45 192 – 0.0016 – 2
2
Acetic acid 4.64 60 0.0002 – 1
Succinic acid (pK ) 5.28 118 0 – 2
2
Citric acid (pK ) 5.80 192 0 – 3
3
3,3-Dimethylglutaric acid 5.98 160 0.006 – 2
Piperazine (pK ) (5.68) 6.02 86 0
1
Cacodylic acid (dimethylarsinic acid) 6.1 138 – 1
MESb 6.1 195 – 0.011
BIS-TRISb 6.41 209 – .017
Carbonic acid (pK ) 6.4c
1
Pyrophosphoric acid (pK ) 6.76 178 -2
3
Phosphoric acid (pK ) 6.84 98 – .0028 – 2
2
PIPESb 6.90 353 – .0085 – 2
Imidazole 7.07 68 – .020 0
BESb 7.06 213 – .016 – 1
Diethylmalonic acid 7.2 136
TESb 7.37 279 – .020 – 1
HEPESb 7.46 238 – .014 – 1
N-Ethylmorpholine 7.79 115 – .022 0
Triethanolamine 7.88 149 –.020 0
TRICINEb 8.02 178 – .021 – 1
TRISb 8.16 121 –.031 0
Glycylglycine 8.23 132 –.028 –1
BICINEb 8.26 163 –.018 –1
4-Phenolsulfonic acid 8.70 174 –.013 –2
Diethanolamine 9.00 105 – .024 0
Ammonia 9.2 – 0.031 0
Boric acid 9.2 – 0.008 mixed
Pyrophosphoric acid (pK ) 9.41 178 -3
4
Ethanolamine 9.62 61 – .029 0
Glycine (pK ) 9.8 75 – 0.025 – 1
2
Piperazine (pK ) 9.82 86 0
2
Carbonic acid (pK ) 10.0 – 0.009 – 2
2
Piperidine 11.1 85 0
a Based on compilation by Ellis and Morrison9 with additional data from Good et al.10,11 and Dawson et al.12 The Good buffers have dipolar
ionic constituents. Since no form is without electrically charged groups they are unlikely to enter and disrupt cells.
b Abbreviations used:
BES N,N-Bis(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid
BICINE N,N-Bis(2-hydroxyethyl)glycine
BIS-TRIS Bis(2-hydroxyethyl)iminotris(hydroxymethyl)methane
HEPES N-2-Hydroxyethylpiperazine-N’-2-ethanesulfonic acid
MES 2-(N-Morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid
PIPES Piperazine-N,N’-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid)
TES N-Tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid
TRICINE N-Tris(hydroxymethyl)methylglycine
TRIS Tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane
c For CO (solid) + HO→ H+ + HCO–, apparent pK.
2 2 3 a

--- Page 104 ---

100 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
proteins is often initiated with such a crude homogenate. smaller molecules are retarded because of diffusion
Cell organelles are also often separated by centri- into the gel, while the larger molecules pass through
fugation. In one procedure a homogenate in 0.25 M unretarded (Fig. 3-3). Sephadex G-25 excludes all but
sucrose (isotonic with most cells) is centrifuged for salts and compounds no larger than a simple sugar
10 min at a field of 600 – 1000 times the force of gravity ring. Sephadex G-200, which is much less crosslinked,
(600– 1000 g) to sediment nuclei and whole cells. The permits separation of macromolecules in the range of
supernatant fluid is then centrifuged another 10 min 5– 200 kDa. As is explained in Section B, gel filtration
at ~ 10,000 g to sediment mitochondria and lysosomes. also provides an important way of estimating M for
r
Finally, centrifugation at ~ 100,000 g for about an hour proteins and other macromolecules.
yields a pellet of microsomes (p. 14),58 which contains
both membrane fragments and ribosomes. Each of the
separated components can be resuspended and recen-
trifuged to obtain cleaner preparations of the organelles.
The sedimented particles can often be solubilized by
chemical treatment, for example, by the addition of
either ionic or nonionic detergents. Membrane proteins
can be isolated following solubilization in this way
(Chapter 8). The soluble supernatant fluid remaining
after the highest speed centrifugation provides the
starting material for isolation of soluble enzymes and
many small molecules.
0
800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500
2. Separations Based on Molecular Size,
Shape, and Density ml
The simplest way to separate very large dissolved
Figure 3-3 Separation of oligosaccharides by gel filtration.
molecules is to let the small ones pass through a suit-
The sugars dissolved in distilled water were passed through
able sieve which may be a membrane with holes or a
a column of Sephadex G-25. The peaks contain (right to
bed of gel particles. If the size of the particles approaches
left) glucose, cellobiose, cellotriose, etc. From Flodin and
that of the holes in the sieve, the rate of passage will Aspberg.64
depend upon shape as well as size.
Dialysis, ultrafiltration, and perfusion chro-
matography. In dialysis59 and ultrafiltration,60 a thin Centrifugation. Centrifuges of many sizes and
membrane, e.g., made of cellulose acetate (cellophane) speeds are used in the laboratory to remove debris as
and containing holes 1–10 nm in diameter (typically well as to collect precipitated proteins and other mate-
5 nm), is used as a semipermeable barrier. Small rials at various steps in a purification scheme. The most
molecules pass through but large ones are retained. remarkable are the ultracentrifuges which produce
Dialysis depends upon diffusion and can be hastened forces greater than 4 x 105 times that of gravity. They
by adequate stirring. Ultrafiltration requires a pressure can be used both for separation of molecules and for
difference across the membrane. The more sophisticated determination of M (see Section C).
r
procedures of gel filtration and perfusion chromato- When macromolecules in a solution are subjected
graphy were introduced in 1959.61–65 A column is to an ultracentrifugal field they are accelerated rapidly
packed with material such as the crosslinked dextran to a constant velocity of sedimentation. This is expressed
Sephadex, polyacrylamide gels (such as the Bio-Gel P as a sedimentation constant s, which is the rate (cm/s)
Series), or agarose gels (e.g., Bio-Gels A and Sepharoses). per unit of centrifugal force. The unit of s is the second
These come in the form of soft beads, the interior net- but it is customary to give it in Svedberg units, S (1S =
work of which is a three-dimensional network of poly- 10–13s). Sizes of particles are often cited by their S values.
mer strands (Fig. 4-10). Recently porous beads of hard The sedimentation constant is affected by the sizes,
crosslinked polystyrene, glass, or various other silicate shapes, and densities of the particles as is discussed
materials have been employed.66– 68 The interstices further in Section C. If carried out at constant velocity
between strands, whose size depends upon the degree an equilibrium will eventually be attained in which
of crosslinking introduced chemically into the gel, are sedimentation is just balanced by diffusion and a
small enough to exclude large molecules but to admit smooth concentration gradient forms from the top to
smaller ones. If a mixture of materials of different the bottom of the centrifuge cell or tube. Concentra-
molecular size is passed through such a column the tion gradients can also be formed by centrifuging a
gnidaer
retemorefretnI
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000

--- Page 105 ---

B. Isolating Compounds 101
concentrated solution of small molecules.13,69,70 Such the salt ions interact with the charged groups on the
a concentration gradient is also a density gradient protein surfaces and interfere with strong electro-
which can be made very steep. For example, a gradient static forces that are often involved in binding protein
with over a 10% increase in density from top to bottom molecules together in the solid state. Some salts,
can be created using 6 M cesium chloride (CsCl) and including CaCl and NaSCN, which bind to proteins,
2
is widely used in DNA separations. If DNA is added are especially effective in salting in.75,76 Addition of
prior to centrifugation it will come to rest in a narrow high concentrations of salt causes precipitation of most
band or bands determined by the buoyant densities proteins from aqueous solutions. The most effective
of the species of DNA present (see Chapter 5). After and most widely used materials for this “salting out”
centrifugation, which is usually done in a plastic tube, of proteins are (NH ) SO and Na SO . Because the
4 2 4 2 4
a hypodermic needle is inserted through the bottom salt ions interact so strongly with water, the protein
of the tube and the contents are pumped or allowed molecules interact less with water and more with
to flow by gravity into a fraction collector. each other. A similar intramolecular effect may cause
Another type of gradient centrifugation (zone the stabilization of proteins of halophilic bacteria by
centrifugation) utilizes a preformed gradient to sta- 1– 4 M KCl.77
bilize bands of cell fragments, organelles, or macro- Different proteins precipitate at different concen-
molecules as they sediment.71– 74 For example, RNA trations of an added salt. Hence, a fraction of proteins
can be separated into several fractions of differing precipitating between two different concentrations of
sedimentation constants in a centrifuge tube that con- salt can be selected for further purification (Fig. 3-4).
tainssucrose ranging in concentration from 25% at Protein concentrations can be estimated as described
the bottom to 5% at the top. This is prepared by a in Box 3-A.
special mixing device or “gradient maker” prior to
centrifugation. The solution of RNA is carefully layered
on the top, the tube is centrifuged at a high speed for
several hours, and the different RNA fractions sepa-
rate into slowly sedimenting sharp bands. A 20–60%
gradient of sucrose or glycerol may be used in a similar
way to separate organelles.58
3. Separations Based on Solubility
Some fibrous proteins are almost insoluble in
water and everything else can be dissolved away.
c c
More often soluble proteins are precipitated from 1 2
Concentration of (NH)SO
aqueous solutions by adjustment of the pH or by 42 4
addition of large amounts of salts or of organic solvents.
The solubility of any molecule is determined both by
Figure 3-4 Hypothetical behavior of a solution containing
the forces that hold the molecules together in the solid
three proteins, A, B, and C, upon ammonium sulfate frac-
state and by interactions with solvent molecules and tionation. The concentration of protein remaining in the
with salts or other solutes that may be present.58a solution is plotted against ammonium sulfate concentration
Proteins usually have many positively and nega- (usually expressed as % saturation). Addition of ammonium
tively charged groups on their surfaces. If either a sulfate to concentration c will precipitate largely protein B,
1
positive or a negative charge predominates at a given which can be removed by centrifugation. Addition of addi-
tional salt to c will precipitate largely protein C, while A
pH the protein particles will tend to repell each other 2
remains in solution.
and to remain in solution. However, near the isoelec-
tric point (pI), the pH at which the net charge is zero
(see Section 7), the solubility will usually be at a mini-
mum. The pH of a tissue extract may be adjusted Precipitation methods are popular first steps in
carefully to the pI of a desired protein. Any protein purification of proteins because they can be carried
that precipitates can be collected by centrifugation and out on a large “batch” scale. The amounts of ammo-
redissolved to give a solution enriched in the protein nium sulfate used are often expressed as percentage
sought. Some proteins, such as those classified (by an saturation, i.e., as a percentage of the amount required
old system) as globulins, are insoluble in water but to saturate the solution (4.1 M at 25°). Convenient
are readily “salted in” by addition of low concentra- tables are available12,78 that permit one to weigh out
tions (e.g., up to 0.1 M) of salts. Low concentrations of the correct amount of solid ammonium sulfate to give
salts increase the solubility of most proteins because a desired percentage saturation or to go from one
noitartnecnoc
nietorP
C
B
A

--- Page 106 ---

102 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
percentage saturation to a higher one. usually liquid. Small molecules may be separated by
Proteins are often stabilized by low concentrations countercurrent distribution in which a material is
of simple alcohols or ketones76 and by higher concen- repeatedly partitioned between two immiscible liquid
trations of polyhydroxy alcohols, such as glycerol77 phases, one more polar than the other. New portions
and sucrose,78 and also by certain inert, synthetic of both liquids are moved by a machine in a “counter-
polymers such as polyethyleneglycol (PEG).79 The current manner” between the equilibration steps or are
latter is a widely used precipitant. The polyhydroxy- moved continuously through coiled tubes.80– 82,82a
alcohols and PEG are all hydrated but tend not to A similar result is accomplished by using as one
interact strongly with the protein molecules. On the phase a solid powder or fine “beads” packed in a verti-
other hand, simple alcohols may denature proteins by cal column or spread in a thin layer on a plate of glass.
their interaction with nonpolar regions.77 The methods are usually referred to as chromatogra-
phy, a term proposed by Tswett to describe separation
of materials by color. In 1903 Tswett passed solutions
4. Separation by Partition of plant leaf pigments (chlorophylls and carotenes) in
nonpolar solvents such as hexane through columns of
Many of the most important separation methods alumina and of various other adsorbents and observed
are based on repeated equilibration of a material be- separation of colored bands which moved down the
tween two separate phases, at least one of which is column as more solvent was passed through. Individual
BOX 3-A QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATION OF PROTEIN CONCENTRATIONS
Biochemists often need to estimate the content Less sensitive but very simple and precise is
of protein in a sample. For example, in devising a measurement of the light absorption around 280
purification procedure for an enzyme it is customary nm. This is discussed in the main text in Section
to estimate the number of units of enzyme activity D,6. For a typical protein an absorbance of 1.0 at
(as defined in Chapter 9) per milligram of protein 280 nm corresponds to a protein concentration of
(U/ mg). As progress is made in the purification 1 mg / ml.h The very old biuret method is also
this ratio increases. It becomes constant with respect useful for samples containing 1– 10 mg / ml of pro-
to additional purification attempts, when a homoge- tein. The violet color that arises upon addition of
neous enzyme is obtained. copper sulfate to an alkaline solution of a peptide
One of the most widely used and most sensitive or protein is recorded at 540 – 560 nm.h The color is
protein assays (for 0.1– 1 mg/ml of protein) is the especially intense for longer polypeptides. The
colorimetric procedure of Lowry.a– c It makes use of name of the method arises from the fact that biuret
a phosphomolybdic–phosphotungstic acid reagent gives a similar colori (see also Eq. 6-85).
(the Folin–Ciocalteu reagent) which is reduced by
proteins in the presence of alkaline Cu2+ to charac-
O O
teristic“blue oxides” whose color can be monitored
at 750 nm. Much of the color comes from the reduc- C C
ing action of tyrosine and tryptophan. The color H 2 N N NH 2
H
yield varies greatly from protein to protein and users
Biuret
may have trouble with reproducibility. A related
method utilizes bicinchoninic acid which forms
a purple color (measured at 362 nm) with the Cu+1
that is formed by reduction of alkaline Cu2+ by the a Lowry, O. H., Rosebrough, N. J., Farr, A. L., and Randall, R. J.
(1951)J. Biol. Chem.193, 265–275
protein.d– f This reagent is easier to use than that of b Peterson, G. L. (1979) Anal. Biochem.100, 201–220
the Lowry procedure and gives stable and repro- c Larson, E., Howlett, B., and Jagendorf, A. (1986) Anal. Biochem.
ducible readings. 155, 243–248
d Smith, P. K., Krohn, R. I., Hermanson, G. T., Mallia, A. K.,
A third widely used procedure, introduced by
Gartner, F. H., Provenzano, M. D., Fujimoto, E. K., Goeke, N.
Bradfordg and modified by others, measures the
M., Olson, B. J., and Kenk, D. C. (1985) Anal. Biochem.150, 76–85
binding of the dye Coomassie brilliant blue whose e Davis, L. C., and Rodke, G. A. (1987) Anal. Biochem.161, 152–156
peak absorption shifts from 465 nm to 595 nm upon f Hill, H. D., and Straka, J. G. (1988) Anal. Biochem.170, 203–208
g Bradford, M. M. (1976) Anal. Biochem.72, 248–254
binding. The change occurs within two minutes
h Fruton, J. S., and Simmonds, S. (1958) General Biochemistry, 2nd
and is stable. However, the color yield varies from
ed., Wiley, New York (p. 130)
one protein to another. i Layne, E. (1957) Methods Enzymol.III, 450–451

--- Page 107 ---

B. Isolating Compounds 103
pure pigments could be eluted from the column by field flow fractionation.101 Here a suitable external
continued passage of solvent. This important method field (e.g., electrical, magnetic, and centrifugal) or a
is called adsorption chromatography. It is assumed thermal gradient is imposed on the particles flowing
that the pigments are absorbed on the surface rather through a narrow channel.
than being disssolved in the solid material. A related For volatile materials vapor phase chromatography
method is hydrophobic interaction chromatography (gas chromatography) permits equilibration between
of proteins.83– 86 The packing material is similar to that the gas phase and immobilized liquids at relatively
described in Section 6 (Affinity Chromatography) but high temperatures. The formation of volatile deriva-
bears long-chain alkyl groups that can interact with tives, e.g., methyl esters or trimethylsilyl derivatives
the hydrophobic patches on surfaces of proteins. A of sugars, extends the usefulness of the method.103,104
very different adsorbent that is very useful in separa- A method which makes use of neither a gas nor a
tion of proteins is carefully prepared microcrystalline liquid as the mobile phase is supercritical fluid
hydroxylapatite.87,88 It presumably functions in part chromatography.105 A gas above but close to its
by ion exchange. critical pressure and temperature serves as the solvent.
Column packing materials such as silica gel The technique has advantages of high resolution, low
contain a large amount of water, and separation involves temperatures, and ease of recovery of products.
partition between an immobilized aqueous phase in Carbon dioxide, N O, and xenon are suitable solvents.
2
the gel and a mobile, often organic, solvent flowing
through the column. Usually materials elute sooner
when they are more soluble in the mobile phase than 5. Ion Exchange Chromatography
in the aqueous phase. These methods are closely related
to perfusion chromatography, which is described in Separation of molecules that contain electrically
Section 2. charged groups is often accomplished best by ion
Aromatic amino acids, lipids, and many other exchange chromatography.105a The technique depends
materials can be separated on reversed-phase columns upon interactions between the charged groups of the
in which nonpolar groups, usually long-chain alkyl molecules being separated and fixed ionic groups on
groups, are covalently attached to silica gel, alumina,
or other inert materials.66,80 The mobile phase is a
more polar solvent, often aqueous, and gradually
made less polar by addition of an organic solvent.
In reversed-phase chromatography more polar com-
pounds migrate faster through the system than do
nonpolar materials, which experience hydrophobic
interaction with the solid matrix.
Many traditional chromatographic methods in-
cluding reversed-phase chromatography have been
adapted for use in automatic systems which employ
columns of very finely divided solid materials such as
silica, alumina, or ion exchange materials coated onto
fine glass beads.89– 91 These high-performance liquid
chromatographic (HPLC) systems often utilize pres-
sures as high as 300 atmospheres. Separations are often
RF
sharper and faster than with other chromatographic
methods.92– 97 Reversed-phase columns in which the
solid matrix may carry long (e.g. C ) hydrocarbon
18
chains have been especially popular for separation
both of peptides and of proteins. Proteins may also
be separated by gel filtration, ion exchange, or other
procedures with HPLC equipment. Figure 3-5 Photograph of a two-dimensional thin layer
A sheet of high-quality filter paper containing (silica gel) chromatogram of a mixture of flavins formed by
adsorbed water serves as the stationary phase in irradiation of ~ 10 µg of the vitamin riboflavin. The photo-
paper chromatography. However, thin-layer graph was made by the fluorescence of the compounds
chromatography, which employs a layer of silica gel under ultraviolet light. Some riboflavin (RF) remains. The
arrows indicate the location of the sample spot before chro-
or other material spread on a glass or plastic plate, has
matography. Chromatography solvents: a mixture of acetic
often supplanted paper chromatography because of its
acid, 2-butanone, methanol, and benzene in one direction
rapidity and sharp separations (Fig. 3-5).16,96a,98– 100
andn-butanol, acetic acid, and water in the other. See Tread-
An approach that requires no stationary phase at all is wellet al.102

--- Page 108 ---

104 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
an immobile matrix. Separation depends upon small
differences in pK values and net charges and upon
a
varying interactions of nonpolar parts of the molecules
being separated with the matrix. Since changes in pH
can affect both the charges on the molecules being
separated and those of the ion exchange material, the
affinities of the molecules being separated are strongly
dependent on pH. For example, proteins and most
amino acids are held tightly by cation exchangers at
low pH but not at all at high pH.
Aqueous solutions are usually employed and the
columns are packed with beads of ion exchange
resins, porous materials containing bound ionic
groups such as – SO –,– COO –,– NH +, or quaternary
3 3
nitrogen atoms. Synthetic resins based on a cross-
linked polystyrene are usually employed for separation
of small molecules. For larger molecules chemical
derivatives of cellulose or of crosslinked dextrans
(Sephadex), agarose, or polyacrylamide are more
appropriate. Positively charged ions, such as amino
acids in a low pH solution, are placed on a cation
exchange resin such as Dowex 50, which contains
dissociated sulfonic acid groups as well as counter
ions such as Na+, K +, or H +. The adsorbed amino
acids are usually eluted with buffers of increasing pH
containing sodium or lithium ions. The procedure,
1.0
0.5
Asp
0.4
Tyr Lys
0.3 MetSO
Gly Phe
Glu Ala Leu
Thr
Ile His
CySOH
0.2 3 Ser Val
NH Arg
3
Met Try
Cys
0.1
Pro
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 50 100 150
Figure 3-6 Separation of amino acids by cation-exchange chromatography on a sulfonated polystyrene resin in the Na+ form
by the method of Moore and Stein.110 The amino acids were detected by reaction with ninhydrin (Box 3-C); areas under the
peaks are proportional to the amounts. Two buffers of successively higher pH are used to elute the amino acids from one
column, while a still higher pH buffer is used to separate basic amino acids on a shorter column. From Robyt and White.13
mn
075
ta
ecnabrosbA
which was developed by Moore and Stein,106– 109 is
widely used for automatic quantitative analysis of
amino acid mixtures obtained by hydrolysis of a pro-
tein or peptide (Fig. 3-6).110 – 113
Ion exchange chromatography of proteins and
peptides is often done with such ion exchange materials
as carboxymethyl-Sephadex and phosphocellulose,
which carry negatively charged side chains or diethyl-
aminoethylcellulose (DEAE-cellulose), which carries
positively charged amino groups.114 These materials
do not denature proteins or entrap them and have a
large enough surface area to provide a reasonable
absorptive capacity. The mobile phase is usually
buffered. For anion exchangers the pH should be
above ~ 4.4 to keep most carboxylate side chains on the
proteins ionized. The pH may be increased to pH 7–10,
where most histidine imidazolium ions have dissociated,
increasing the mobility of many proteins. For cation
exchange the pH is usually buffered below pH 6 or 7
(Fig. 3-6).115,116
6. Affinity Chromatography
In this technique the chromatographic absorbent
is designed to make use of specific biochemical inter-
pH 3.25, 0.2N Na citrate pH 4.25, 0.2N Na citrate pH 5.28, 0.35
N Na citrate
150 cm column
15 cm column
Effluent (ml)

--- Page 109 ---

B. Isolating Compounds 105
actions to “hook” selectively a particular macromolecule R' N C N R"
or group of macromolecules.117 – 122 Affinity chromato- O–
Carbodiimide
graphy is used in many ways, including the purifica-
R C
tion of enzymes, antibodies, and other proteins that O
HN R"
bind tightly to specific small molecules. O
R C O C
Because of their open gel structure (Fig. 4-10) agar-
ose derivatives in bead form provide a good solid O N R'
support matrix. The hydroxyl groups of the agarose Agarose O C NH(CH2)n NH2 H
N R"
are often linked to amino compounds. In one widely
used procedure119 the agarose is treated with cyanogen O C
bromide (Br – C ≡N) in base to “activate” the carbohy-
N R'
drate (Eq. 3-9, step a). Then the amino compound is O O H
added (step b). The isourea product shown is the major
one with agarose gels but dextran-based matrices tend Agarose O C NH (CH2)n NH C R
(3-10)
to react by steps c–e.
Absorbents containing a large variety of R groups
of shapes specifically designed to bind to the desired
proteins can be made in this way. If the coupling is Many other means of preparation of adsorbents
done with a diamine [R = (CH )  NH ], the resulting for affinity chromatography are also available.121,122
2 n 2
ω-aminoalkyl agarose can be coupled with other com- For example, 1,1'-carbonyl-diimidazole can be used
pounds by reaction with carbodiimide (Eq. 3-10). For to couple a diamine to the matrix (Fig. 3-11). This
reaction in nonaqueous medium dicyclohexylcarbodi- reagent has the advantage that it does not depend
imide (R” = cyclohexyl) is often used, but for linking upon the relatively unstable isourea linkages formed
groups to agarose a water-soluble reagent such as by Eq. 3-9 to hold the specific affinity ligands.121
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide is
recommended.120 Carbodiimides are widely used for
forming amide or phosphodiester linkages in the N N
N C N
laboratory. The formation of an amide with a side
chain of ω-aminoalkyl agarose can be pictured as in O
Eq. 3-10. 1,1'-carbonyl-diimidazole
Matrix OH
H
N Imidazole
CNBr Br– R-NH
OH O C N 2 O C NH R O
N
Matrix O C N
a b
OH OH OH
R-NH
Polysaccharide Cyanate An isourea; major 2
matrix esters product from agarose
Imidazole
c
O
O
Matrix O C NH R
O C NH2 O (3-11)
C NH
OH O
An example of a successful
Carbamates minor Imidocarbonates
application of affinity chromatogra-
inert products
phy is the isolation of the enzyme
R-NH cytidine deaminase from cells of E.
2
d
coli. Cytidine was linked covalently
via long spacer arms to the agarose
O
beads as in the following diagram:
O O C NH R
HO
2
C N R
e
O OH
Major products
from dextrans (3-9)

--- Page 110 ---

106 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
NH2 O
7. Electrophoresis and Isoelectric Focusing
N N The methods considered in this section make use
H
of movement of molecules in an electrical field. Sepa-
ration depends directly upon differences in the net
O N
charge carried by molecules at a fixed pH. The net
HOCH
2 O charge for compounds containing various combina-
tions of acidic and basic groups can be estimated by
O
Spacer arm considering the pK a of each group and the extent to
OH OH NH which that group is dissociated at the selected pH
Cytidine using Eqs. 3-3 to 3-5. At some pH, the isoelectric
point (pI), a molecule will carry no net charge and
will be immobile in an electric field. At any other pH
HN it will move toward the anode (+) or cathode (–). The
pH at which the protein carries no net charge in the
O
complete absence of added electrolytes is called the
O isoionic point.129
Electrophoresis, the process of separating mole-
Agarose
cules, and even intact cells130 (Box 3-B), by migration in
an electrical field, is conducted in many ways.28,131– 140
A cell extract was subjected to ammonium sulfate Inzone electrophoresis, a tiny sample of protein
fractionation and the dialyzed protein was then poured solution, e.g., of blood serum, is placed in a thin line
through the affinity column which held the cytidine on a piece of paper or cellulose acetate. The sheet is
deaminase molecules because of their affinity for the moistened with a buffer and electrical current is passed
cytidine structures that were bound to the agarose. through it. An applied voltage of a few hundred volts
The protein was eluted with a borate buffer; the borate across a 20-cm strip suffices to separate serum proteins
formed complexes with the adjacent hydroxyl groups in an hour. To hasten the process and to prevent diffu-
of the cytidine and thereby released the protein. After sion of low-molecular-weight materials, a higher volt-
passage of the protein through an additional column age may be used. Two to three thousand volts may
of DEAE-Sephadex the deaminase had been purified be applied to a sample cooled by water-chilled plates.
1700-fold compared to the crude extract.123 Large-scale electrophoretic separations may be con-
Another technique is to engineer genes to place a ducted in beds of starch or of other gels.
polyhistidine“tag” at the C terminus of a protein chain. One of the most popular and sensitive methods
Commercial cloning vehicles and kits are available for for separation of proteins is electrophoresis in a column
this purpose.124 The protein produced when the engi- filled with polyacrylamide or agarose gel or on a
neered gene is expressed can be captured by the affini- thin layer of gel on a plate. The method depends
ty of the polyhistidine tag for Cu2+, Ni2+, Co2+, or Zn2+ upon both electrical charge and molecular size and
held in chelated form on an affinity column.124– 127 has been referred to as electrophoretic molecular
A surprising discovery was that certain dyes, for sieving.28,133,135– 137,141 – 143 Polyacrylamide gel electro-
example Cibachron blue, when covalently coupled to a phoresis is often carried out in the presence of ~ 1%
suitable matrix, often bind quite specifically to proteins of the denaturing detergent sodium docecyl sulfate
that have a nonpolar binding pocket near a positive which coats the polypeptide chain rather evenly. This
charge.128 This includes many enzymes that act on method, which is often referred to as SDS–PAGE,
nucleotides. has the advantage of breaking up complex proteins
composed of more than one subunit and sorting the
resultant monomeric polypeptide chains according to
molecular mass (see Box 3-C). A disulfide-reducing
O NH2
reagent (see Eq. 3-23) such as ~ 1% 2-mercaptoethanol
SO3H
is usually present but may be omitted to permit detec-
SO3H SO3H tion of crosslinked peptides.
Capillary electrophoresis is increasingly popu-
N
lar144– 149a and can be used to separate attomole
O NH NH NH
amounts.150 It can be used not only for separation of
N N
proteins but also for rapid estimation of the net charge
on a protein.151 The separation is conducted in tubes
Cl
with internal diameters as small as 10 –15µm and as
Cibacron blue F3GA
short as 1 cm. Multiple channels cut into a glass chip

--- Page 111 ---

B. Isolating Compounds 107
BOX 3-B SORTING AND ANALYZING SINGLE CELLS
It is often important to examine and analyze
individual cells.a For example, large numbers of
single blood cells can be tested for the presence of
specific antigenic determinants that arise by muta-
tion. This permits assessment of the frequency of
these mutations.b The complex chemical processing
of neuropeptides can be studied on the contents of a
single neuron (Chapter 30) using mass spectrometry.c
Several methods for separating cells have been
devised. These include electrophoresisd or use of
magnetic microspheres.b Micromanipulation can
sometimes be used to select single cells for analysis.
The most impressive technique is flow cytometry,e,f
which is used daily on human blood samples in
clinical laboratories. A suspension of cells is passed
at a high rate of flow through a narrow capillary of
~ 0.2 mM diameter. The sample stream, which is
surrounded by a larger “sheath” stream, has a
Electropherogram of major proteins from a single erythro-
cyte. Peaks A, B, and C are carbonic anhydrase (~ 7 amol),
methemoglobin (~ 5 amol), and hemoglobin A (~ 450 amol),
0
as identified from migration times relative to standards.a
Courtesy of Edward S. Yeung.
Flow cytometric histogram of fluorescently labeled live a Yeung, E. S. (1994) Acc. Chem. Res.27, 409–414
and dead E. coli bacteria. The dye kit (BacLightTM) that b Jovin, T. M., and Arndt-Jovin, D. J. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5,
was used stains membrane-compromised dead bacteria 214–219
with a red fluorescing dye and live bacteria with a green c Li, K. W., Hoek, R. M., Smith, F., Jiménez, C. R., van der Schors,
R. C., van Veelen, P. A., Chen, S., van der Greef, J., Parish, D. C.,
fluorescing dye. Cells were analyzed on an EPICS XL
Benjamin, P. R., and Geraerts, W. P. M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269,
cytometer (Coulter Corporation). By integrating the area
30288–30292
under each population it was possible to discern the d Bauer, J. (1994) Cell Electrophoresis, CRC Press, Boca Raton,
percentage of dead (54), dying (16), and live (30) bacteria Florida
within a mixed population. The use of fluorescent dyes e Shapiro, H. M. (1995) Practical Flow Cytometry, 3rd ed., Wiley-
such as these has proven useful for studying various Liss, New York
mechanisms employed by the food industry for killing f Darzynkiewicz, Z., Robinson, J. P., and Crissman, H. A., eds.
microorganisms in food products and for studying a (1994)Flow Cytometry, 2nd ed., Academic Press, San Diego
variety of bacteria derived from seawater, soil, plant
materials, and laboratory-grown cultures. Courtesy of
Kristi Harkins.
ecnecseroulF
smaller diameter of ~ 20 µm. One or more laser
beams are used to record information about each
cell over a period of a few microseconds as the cells
pass by at a rate of as much as 105 cells / s.
Flow cytometers developed from simpler cell
counters, but now they are used to record cell size
(from light scattering), optical absorbance, fluores-
cence, and phosphorescence. The optical properties
are often enhanced by staining. The use of two dyes
that fluoresce at different wavelengths permits the
construction of two-dimensional plots as in the
accompanying figure.
Capillary electrophoresis is one of the tech-
niques able to separate constituents of single cells
and is illustrated in the second figure.
C
A
B
9 12 15
Time (min)
tnuoC
E. coli
Dead
Dying
L
o
g re
d
flu
Live
o
re
sc
e
n c
e
Log green fluorescence

--- Page 112 ---

108 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
can be used.152
1. Ultracentrifugation
Whereas in conventional zone electrophoresis
most of the electrical current is carried by the buffer, in
Some of the most reliable methods for determining
isotachophoresis153,154 the ions being separated carry
M depend upon analyticalultracentrifuges. These
most of the current. In isoelectric focusing,28,155– 157 a r
instruments, capable of generating a centrifugal field
pH gradient is developed electrochemically in a verti-
as much as 4 x 105 times that of gravity, were devel-
cal column or on a thin horizontal plate between an
oped in the 1920s and 1930s by T. Svedburg and asso-
anode and a cathode. The pH gradient in a column is
ciates in Uppsala, Sweden.179– 181 Driven by oil
stabilized by the presence of a density gradient, often
turbines, the instruments were expensive and difficult
formed with sucrose, and the apparatus is maintained
to use, but by 1948 a reliable electrically driven ma-
at a very constant temperature. Proteins within the
chine, the Beckman Model E ultracentrifuge, came into
column migrate in one direction or the other until they
widespread use. It has had a major impact on our
reach the pH of the isoelectric point where they carry
understanding of proteins, on methods of purification
no net charge and are “focused” into a narrow band.
of proteins, and on our understanding of interactions
As little as 0.01 pH unit may separate two adjacent
of protein molecules with each other and with small
protein bands which are located at positions corre-
molecules.182,183 Nevertheless, it was not until 1990
sponding to their isoelectric points. A newer develop-
that a truly “user-friendly” analytical untracentrifuge
ment is the use of very narrow pH gradients that are
became available.180,184– 186 The Beckman Model XL-A
immobilized on a polyacrylamide matrix.158– 160 With
centrifuge has a very small rotor driven by an air-
this technique some hemoglobin mutants differing
cooled induction motor and is computer controlled.
only in substitution of one neutral amino acid for
Data are recorded automatically in digital form and
another have been separated.161 Special techniques are
computer programs are available to carry out the
needed for highly basic proteins.162
necessary computations. The instrument can record
A two-dimensional method in which proteins are
ultraviolet-visible spectra at multiple radial positions
separated by isoelectric focusing (preferably with an
in the sample cell (Fig. 3-7).
immobilized pH gradient) in the first dimension and
A straightforward determination of M is obtained
by SDS-gel electrophoresis in the second has become a r
by centrifuging until an equilibrium distribution of the
popular and spectacularly successful method for
molecules of a protein or other macromolecular mate-
studying complex mixtures of proteins (Box 3-C).163– 166
rial is obtained and by recording the variation in con-
Over 2000 proteins can be separated on a single plate.
centration from the center to the periphery of the
A similar procedure but without SDS can be used to
centrifuge cell177,183,185,187– 190 (see also Section A,2).
examine undenatured proteins.167– 169 Computer-
Using short cells, this sedimentation equilibrium
assisted methods are being developed to catalog the
can be attained in 1– 5 hours instead of the 1– 2 days
thousands of proteins being identified in this way170–
needed with older instruments. For a single compo-
172 and also to allow rapid identification of spots by
nent system the concentration distribution at equilibri-
mass spectrometry. The technique can be applied to
um is given by Eq. 3-12.
intact proteins in subpicomole quantities, even in
whole cell lysates,150,173,173a or an enzyme such as
trypsin can be used to cut the proteins into pieces on c(r) = c(a) exp [M(1-vρ)ω2 (r2–a2) / 2RT] (3-12)
the gel plate and the mixtures of peptides can be ana-
lyzed by mass spectrometry.174– 176 Capillary electro-
Here c(r) is the concentration c at the radial position r
phoresis or capillary isoelectric focusing can be applied
(measured from the centrifuge axis), a is the radial
before samples are sent to the mass spectrometer.
distance of the meniscus, M is the molecular mass in
daltons, and v is the partial specific volume in ml/gram.
For most proteins v varies from 0.69 – 0.75. It is the
C. Determining the Relative Molecular Mass, reciprocal of the density of the particle. Rho (ρ) is the
M
r density (g/ml) of the solvent. A plot of log c(r) against
r2 is a straight line of slope M (1-vρ) / 2RT. The com-
The evaluation of M is often of critical importance.
r puter can also accommodate mixtures of proteins of
Minimum values of M can often be computed from
r differing molecular masses, interacting mixtures,
the content of a minor constituent, e.g., the trypto-
etc.185,191
phan of a protein or the iron of hemoglobin. However,
physicochemical techniques provide the basis for most
Sedimentation velocity. The relative molecular
measurements.177 Observations of osmotic pressure or
massM can also be measured from observation of the
light scattering can also be used and provide determi- r
velocity of movement of the boundary (or boundaries
nations of M that are simple in principle, but which
r for multicomponent systems) between solution and
have pitfalls.178
solvent from which the macromolecules have sedi-

--- Page 113 ---

C. Determining the Relative Molecular Mass, M 109
r
Toroidal using Eq. 3-14.
grating
D(cm2 s−1) = k T f = RT Nf (3-14)
B
By combining Eqs. 3-13 and 3-14 we obtain the Sved-
berg equation:
Reference
detector
RTs
M
D(1 v ) (3-15)
Filter
Here R is in the cgs (cm-gram-second) unit of 8.31 x 107
erg mol–1 deg–1. Using this equation the relative molec-
Sample/reference
cell assembly ular mass M r , which is numerically the same as M, can
be evaluated from the sedimentation constant s. Since
s,D, and v must all be measured with care, the method
is demanding. It is often necessary to measure s and D
at several concentrations and to extrapolate to infinite
Imaging system for
radial scanning dilution. It is also customary to correct the data to give
the values s° and D° expected at 20°C in pure
20,w 20,w
Aperture water at infinite dilution.
Wavelength slit
Xenon To the extent that we can regard protein molecules
flash as spherical we can substitute for f in Eq. 3-13 the fric-
lamp
PM tube tional coefficient of a sphere:
f = 6πηr (3-16)
sphere h
Here r is the hydrated radius or Stokes radius of the
Figure 3-7 The scanning absorption optical system of the h
protein. On this assumption s will be expected to
Beckman Optima™ XL-A ultracentrifuge. Courtesy of
Beckman Coulter. increase with the relative molecular mass approxi-
mately as M2 / 3. A plot of log s against log M should
r r
be a straight line. Figure 3-8 shows such a plot for a
number of proteins. The plots for nucleic acids, which
mented. This boundary, which can be visualized by can often be approximated as rods rather than spheres,
optical methods, is quite sharp initially, but it broadens fall on a different line from those of proteins. Further-
with time, because of diffusion, as the macromolecules more, the sedimentation constant falls off more rapidly
sediment. with increasing molecular mass than it should for
A molecule in a centrifuge is acted upon not only spheres.
by the applied centrifugal force but also by an opposing From analysis of a variety of well-characterized
buoyant force that depends upon the difference in proteins, Squire and Himmel192 observed that if pro-
density of the sedimenting particles and the solvent teins are assumed to contain 0.53 g H O per gram of
2
and by a frictional drag, which is proportional to a protein and to have a mean value for v of 0.730 g / cm3
frictional coefficientf. Setting the sum of these forces the value ofM can be predicted by Eq. 3-17 with the
r
to zero for the hydrodynamic steady state yields Eq. standard deviation indicated. Here, S is the sedimen-
3-13, which defines the sedimentation constants. tation constant in Svedberg units (10 – 13s).
M = 6850 S3 / 2 ) 0.090 M (3-17)
v M(1 v ) r r
s
2r Nf (3-13) For proteins with various values of v, Eq. 3-18 applies.
Here f is the frictional coefficient which is difficult to M = 922 [S / (1–vρ)]3 / 2 ) ± 0.066 M (3-18)
r r
predict or to measure but is often assumed to be the
same as the frictional coefficient that affects diffusion.
It can be obtained from the diffusion coefficient D

--- Page 114 ---

110 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
BOX 3-C ISOTOPES IN BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Both stablea and radioactiveb– e isotopes are
Maximum energy
widely used in chemical and biological investiga- (MeV) of radiation
tions. The study of metabolism was revolutionized
by the introduction of isotopic tracers. In one of the Isotope Half-life β γ
first biological experiments with the stable isotope
15N (detected by mass spectrometry), Schoenheimer 2H (deuterium) Stable
and associates in 1937 established the previously 3H (tritium) 12.26 years 0.018
unsuspected turnover of protein in living tissues 11C 20.4 min (β+)
(Chapter 24, Section B). In 1937 Ruben et al. reported
0.511
the uptake of radioactive 11CO by plants.f A few
2 13C Stable
years later Calvin and associates first traced the
14C 5730 years 0.156
pathway of carbon in photosynthesis using the
much longer lived 14CO (Box 17-F). Wood and 13N 9.96 min 1.2 (β+)
2
Werkman, in 1941, employed the stable isotope 13C 0.511
in studies of bacterial and mammalian metabolism 15N Stable
(Box 17-C). The radioactive 32P and 35S have served 15O 20.4 min (β+)
to elucidate the metabolism of phosphorus and
0.511
sulfur. Titrium (3H) has been used to label many
18O Stable
organic substances including thymine, which has
18F 110 min (β+)
been used extensively in the study of nucleic acid
0.511
metabolism. Radioactive isotopes provide the basis
for sensitive analytical procedures such as radio- 22Na 2.6 years 0.55
immunoassays of minute quantities of hormones 1.28
(Box 31-D). Through radioautography these iso- 32P 14.3 days 1.71
topes facilitate numerous analytical procedures (see 35S 87.2 days 0.167
accompanying photo) and have provided the basis
36Cl 3 x 105 years 0.716
for important end-group methods used in sequence
40K 1.3 x 109 years 1.4
determination of polynucleotides (Eq. 5-24).
1.5
Several isotopes used in biochemistry are listed
45Ca 165 days 0.26
in the following table. For each radioactive isotope,
the half-life is given, as is the type of particle emit- 59Fe 45 days 0.46
ted, and the energy of the particle. Gamma rays, 1.1
such as those given off in decay of 125I or 131I, are 65Zn 250 days 0.32
very penetrating and easy to count precisely, as is 1.14
the energetic β radiation from 32P. On the other
90Sr 29 years 0.54
hand,3H (tritium) is relatively difficult to detectg
125I 60 days 0.036
but its weak β particle, which can travel only a
131I 8.06 days 0.61
short distance through a sample, makes it uniquely
0.36
suitable for radioautography on a microscopic scale.
Positrons (β+) travel some distance, e.g., up to a
few millimeters in the case of 13N. They are then (dpm). Radiolabeled substances ordinarily contain
destroyed by reacting with an electron to produce a only a small fraction of the unstable isotope together
pair of γ rays of energy 0.511 MeV, equal to the sum with a larger number of unlabeled molecules. Com-
of the rest masses of an electron plus a positron. pounds are usually sold in millicurie or microcurie
The half-life (Eq. 9-4) determines the isotopic abun- quantities and with a stated specific activity as mCi
dance needed to achieve a given radiation rate, a mmol–1. For example, a compound labeled at a single
practical matter in providing a sufficient rate of position with 3H and having a specific activity of
decay to permit counting with an acceptably low 50 mCi mmol–1 would contain about 0.17% 3H at
statistical error. Even very short-lived isotopes such that position.
as13N, have proved useful as tracers.h The amount Because of the development of new NMR tech-
of an isotope giving 3.7 x 1010 disintegrations per niques and improvements in mass spectrometry
second (this is 1 g of pure radium, 0.3 mg of 3H, or stable isotopes, such as 2H,13C,19F, and 31P, are
0.22 g of 14C) is known as the curie (Ci). One milli- being used more frequently to study metabolism.j
curie (mCi) provides 2.22 x 109 disintegrations / min Carbon-13 containing compounds can fulfill many

--- Page 115 ---

C. Determining the Relative Molecular Mass, M 111
r
BOX 3-C ISOTOPES IN BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS (continued)
Isoelectric focusing → Radioautogram showing the separa-
tion of proteins of E. coli labeled with
14C amino acids. From O’Farrell.i
S e p Twenty-five µl of sample containing
a ra 180,000 cpm and ~10 µg of protein
tio
n were subjected to isoelectric focusing
a
cco in a 2.5 x 130-mm tube containing
rd
polyacrylamide gel to separate pro-
in
g
to
teins according to isoelectric point.
m The gel was then extruded from the
o
le column and was placed on one edge
cu
la of a slab of polyacrylamide gel. Then
r
w SDS electrophoresis in the second
e
ig
h dimension separated the proteins
t
(S according to size. Over 1000 spots
D
S e could be seen in the original radio-
le
ctro autogram, which was obtained by
p placing a piece of photographic film
h
o re over the gel slab and exposing it to
sis)
→
the radiation for 875 hours. For
details see O’Farrell.i
of the same tracer functions as 14C. Even the radio- chemistry of enzymatic reactions, an impressive
active3H nucleus can be utilized for in vivo NMR.k,l example being the synthesis and use of chiral acetate
Although radioisotope labeling is very sensitive, it (Chapter 13)n and chiral phosphate groups (Chapter
gives little information unless compounds are iso- 12). Specific isotopic properties provide the basis
lated and laboriously degraded to determine the for NMR (Section G).
positions of the labels. NMR spectroscopy is less
sensitive but can give direct chemical information a Matwiyoff, N. A., and Ott, D. G. (1973) Science181, 1125–1132
about the positions of 13C in compounds within b Wang, C. H., Willis, D. L., and Loveland, W. D. (1975) Radio-
living cells. A compound containing only 13C in one tracer Methodology in the Biological, Environmental, and Physical
Sciences, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey
or in many positions can be safely administered to c Wang, Y., ed. (1969) Handbook of Radioactive Nuclides, CRC Press,
human individuals as well as to other organisms Cleveland, Ohio
and spectra of products that arise can be observed. d Thornburn, C. C. (1972) Isotopes and Radiation in Biology,
Butterworth, London
High-resolution deuterium NMR spectroscopy has
e Slater, R. J., ed. (1990) Radioisotopes in Biology: A Practical
been used to follow 2H incorporated at C-1, C-2, or
Approach, IRL Press, Oxford
C-6 positions in glucose.m f Ruben, S., Hassid, W. Z., and Kamen, M. D. (1939) J. Am. Chem.
As a result of metabolic reactions an isotope Soc.61, 661–663
g Bransome, J., ed. (1970) Liquid Scintillation Counting, Grune &
may appear at more than one position in a product,
Stratton, New York
yielding two or more isotope isomers or isotopomers. h Cooper, A. J. L. (1985) Adv. Enzymol.57, 251–356
These are seen individually by NMR spectroscopy i O’Farrell, P. H. (1975) J. Biol. Chem.250, 4007–4021
and the concentration and isotope labeling patterns j Wolfe, R. R. (1992) Radioactive and Stable Isotope Tracers in
Biomedicine, Wiley, New York
of the labeled compounds can be followed over a
k Newmark, R. D., Un, S., Williams, P. G., Carson, P. J., Morimo-
period of time. The use of this isotopomer analysis
to, H., and Klein, M. P. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.87,
in studies of the citric acid cycle is illustrated in Box 583–587
17-C and its use in studies of glucose metabolism is l Bergerat, A., Guschlbauer, W., and Fazakerley, G. V. (1991) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.88, 6394–6397
considered in Chapter 17, Section L.
mAguayo, J. B., Gamcsik, M. P., and Dick, J. D. (1988) J. Biol.
A change in isotopic mass, especially from 1H to
Chem.263, 19552–19557
2H or 3H, often produces a strong effect on reaction n Cornforth, J. W. (1976) Science193, 121–125
rates and the study of kinetic isotope effects has
provided many insights into the mechanisms of
enzymatically catalyzed reactions. Isotopes have
permitted a detailed understanding of the stereo-

--- Page 116 ---

112 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
This suggests a proportionality between σ and the
molecular radius. In fact, Eq. 3-21, in which a and b
are constants provides a fairly good approximation for
σ and V is correlated approximately with log M as
e r
shown in Fig. 3-9.193,194
σ = a logr + b (3-21)
h
A series of reference proteins of known molecular
masses are used to calibrate the column and M for
r
104 105 106 107 108 109 an unknown protein is estimated from its position on
Relative molecular mass, M the graph.195,196 Another modification of the method
r
depends upon chromatography in a high concentration
of the denaturing salt guanidinium chloride. The
assumption is made that proteins are denatured into
Figure 3-8 Plots of the logarithm of the sedimentation
random coil conformations in this solvent.196
constantsagainst the logarithm of the molecular weight for
a series of proteins and nucleic acids: ( ) globular proteins,
Probably the most widely used method for deter-
( ) RNA, and ( ) DNA. Proteins include a lipase (milk),
mining the molecular mass of protein subunits is gel
cytochrome c, ribonuclease (pancreatic), lysozyme (egg electrophoresis in the presence of the denaturing
white), follicle-stimulating hormone, bacterial proteases, detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The protein
human hemoglobin, prothrombin (bovine), malate dehydro- molecules are not only denatured but also all appear
genase,γ-globulin (horse), tryptophanase (E. coli), glutamate to become more or less evenly coated with detergent.197
dehydrogenase (chicken), and cytochrome a. Double- The resulting rodlike molecules usually show a uniform
stranded DNA molecules are those of bacteriophage φX174
dependence of electrophoretic mobility on molecular
(replicative form), T ,λ , T , and T , and that of a papilloma
7 b2 2 4 mass (plotted as log M). An example is shown in Fig.
virus. The RNA molecules are tRNA, rRNA, and mRNA of r
3-10. Again, the molecular mass of the protein under
E. coli, and that of turnip yellow mosaic virus.190a,191a
investigation is estimated by comparison of its rate of
migration with that of a series of marker proteins.195,198
2. Gel Filtration and Gel Electrophoresis 3. Mass Spectrometry
Several newer methods of molecular mass deter- Mass spectrometry has played a role in bio-
mination were developed in the 1960s–1980s. One is chemistry since the early 1940s when it was introduced
gel filtration. A column of gel beads such as Sephadex for use in following isotopic labels during metabo-
is prepared carefully and is calibrated by passing a lism.199–200c However, it was not until the 1990s that
series of protein solutions through it. The volume V suitable commercial instruments were developed to
e
at which a protein peak emerges from the column can permit mass spectrometry using two new methods
be expressed as the sum of two terms (Eq. 3-19) in of ionization. The techniques are called matrix-
assisted laser desorption / ionization time-of-flight
V e = V o + σV i (3-19) ( m M as A s L s D pe I c - t T ro O m F e ) t r a y n . delectrospray ionization (ESI)
In the MALDI technique a pulsed laser beam
whichV is the void volume, i.e., the elution volume strikes a solid sample and heats, vaporizes, and ionizes
o
that is observed for very large particles that are com- compounds with little decomposition.201– 209 Proteins
pletely excluded from the gel, and V is the internal or other biopolymers are mixed with a “matrix” that
i
volume within the beads of gel. The value of σ is absorbs the heat of the laser beam. The protein sample
inversely related to the diffusion constant D, which together with the matrix is dried. Most proteins form
for a spherical particle D is related by Eq. 3-20 to the crystals and the laser beam is directed toward individ-
Stokes radius r . This equation comes directly from ual protein crystals or aggregates. Various materials
h
Eqs. 3-16 and 3-14. are used for the matrix. Compounds as simple as
glycerol, succinic acid, or urea can be used with an
infrared laser. For proteins an ultraviolet nitrogen
k T
r = B laser tuned to 337 nm is usually employed with an
h 6πηD
(3-20)
ultraviolet light-absorbing matrix such as hydroxy-
benzoic acid, 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, α-hydroxy-
s31–01
fo
stinu
ni
0s
w,02
100
50
10
5
1

--- Page 117 ---

113
250
Sucrose
Glucagon
230
210
Cytochrome c
Myoglobin
190
Chymotrypsinogen
170 Ovalbumin
Ovomucoid
Malate dehydrogenase
150 Bovine serum albumin E. coli phosphatase
Transferrin
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
Lactoperoxidase
Fetuin Lactate dehydrogenase
130 Serum albumin dimer Aldolase
Yeast alcohol dehydrogenase Fumarase
Ceruloplasmin Catalase
110 γ-Globulins
Apoferritin
R-Phycoerythrin β-Galactosidase
α-Conarachin
90 Ferritin
Fibrinogen
Urease
70 α-Crystallin Blue dextran
104 105 106
Relative molecular mass, M
r
cinnamic acid, or sinapinic acid (Chapter 25). The
matrix ionizes, desorbs from the surface, and transfers
energy to the crystalline protein, causing it to ionize
and desorb from the surface. Oligosaccharides and
oligonucleotides can be ionized in a similar way.
MALDI spectra are relatively simple (Fig. 3-11),
often containing a single major peak corresponding to
the singly charged molecular ion [M + H]+ of mass m + 1
and perhaps a doubly charged molecular ion [M + 2H]2+
of mass (m + 2)/2. For oligomeric proteins the major
peak is often that of the monomer with weaker peaks
for oligomers. The instrument can also be adjusted to
generate negative ions whose detection is useful for
study of phosphorylated peptides, many oligosaccha-
rides, and oligonucleotides. With a TOF spectrometer
there is no upper limit to the mass range and masses
of over 100 kDa can be measured to about ± 0.1%.
Femtomole quantities can be detected.
The MALDI method is especially useful for complex
mixtures of peptides and can be utilized in peptide
sequencing. The technique is also appropriate for
studying mixtures of glycoproteins. Negative-ion
MALDI can be applied to oligonucleotide mixtures.
Further improvements in resolution in both MALDI
).lm(
V e
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
V/V
O
e
Figure 3-9 Elution volume of various proteins on a column of Sephadex G-200 as a function of molecular mass. The right-
hand vertical axis shows the ratio of the elution volumes to that of blue dextran, a high-molecular-mass polysaccharide that is
excluded from the internal volume. After Andrews.193
7
6 1
5 2
4 3
4
3
Nitrogenase
Fe-protein 5
2
6
1
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Figure 3-10 Estimation of the molecular mass of the poly-
peptide chain of the nitrogenase Fe-protein using SDS-poly-
acrylamide electrophoresis; from a set of four standard
curves. The marker proteins are (1) catalase, (2) fumarase,
(3) aldolase, (4) glyceraldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase,
(5)α-chymotrypsinogen A, and (6) myoglobin. (ο) indicates
position of azoferredoxin. From Nakos and Mortenson.195
4–01
×
M
,ssam
ralucelom
evitaleR
r
C. Determining the Relative Molecular Mass, M
r
Electrophoretic mobility

--- Page 118 ---

114 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
and ESI methods are anticipated as a result of develope- by a voltage difference of about 5 kV between the elec-
ment of Fourier transform mass spectrometers.202 trospray needle and the sampling orifice (the counter-
In ESI mass spectrometry201,203– 205,210 – 213 the sample, electrode). The process results in the formation of
dissolved in an appropriate solvent (usually a 50:50 singly and / or multiply charged molecular ions which
mixture of methanol and water for proteins), is infused are guided into the analyzer for mass analysis. For
directly into the ionization chamber of the spectrometer proteins every arginine, lysine, and histidine may bind
through a fused silica capillary. At the end of the capil- a hydrogen ion to form a variety of positive ions. A
lary the solution is subjected to electrical stress created 100-kDa protein may easily bind 100 protons bringing
ytisnetni
evitaleR
Figure 3-11 Matrix-assisted laser
desorption / ionization time-of-
flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spec-
trum of bovine erythrocyte Cu-Zn
10 15716
superoxide dismutase averaged
9 over ten shots with background
smoothing. One-half µl of solution
8 containing 10 pmol of the enzyme
in 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate
7 was mixed with 0.5 µl of 50 mM α-
cyanohydroxycinnamic acid
6 7870.3
dissolved in 30% (v / v) of acetoni-
5 trile-0.1% (v / v) of trifluoroacetic
acid. The mixture was dried at 37°
4 C before analysis. The spectrum
shows a dimer of molecular mass
3
of 31,388 Da, singly charged and
8095.6
doubly charged molecular ions at
2 31388
15,716, and 7870 Da, respectively.
1 The unidentified ion at mass
8095.6 may represent an adduct of
0 the matrix with the doubly
6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 charged molecular ion. Courtesy
m/z× 10–3 of Louisa Tabatabai.
16952.9± 2.6
100 100 80
60
40
80
20
Figure 3-12 Positive
0
ion electrospray mass
16.4 17.0 17.6
60 M× 10–3 spectrum of horse
apomyoglobin (M
r
16,950.4). The net
charge on each ion as
40 well as the mass to
charge ratio m/z is
indicated at the top of
each peak. The inset
20
shows a computer
“deconvolution” of the
spectrum with the
0 calculated value of
molecular mass. Cour-
tesy of Kamel Harrata.
ecnadnuba
evitaleR
+17 997.9 11 + 3 1 0 5 .8 +14 1211.7
+19
893.3
+13
1304.8
+20
848.7 +12
1413.8
+21 +11
808.6 1542.2
+10 +22 1695.9
771.9
+9
+24 1884.5
707.4
+25
679.4
600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
m/z

--- Page 119 ---

D. Determining Amino Acid Composition and Sequence 115
them/z ratio for the fully charged protein to 1000, linkages must be broken even to get the protein into
well below the maximum m/z ratio of ~ 2400 for a solution. Oxidation with performic acid (Eq. 3-22) has
typical quadrupole mass spectrometer. Since not all been used on ribonuclease but is not often employed
basic groups are protonated the spectra consist of because the performic acid also oxidizes tryptophan
families of peaks of differing m/z (Fig. 3-12). For a residues.
single pure protein the molecular mass can be calculated
from the ratio of m/z values from any pair of adjacent
peaks. It is better, especially if there is a mixture of P1 CH2 S S CH2 P2
proteins, to use a computer to extract M.214 The accu-
r O
racy can be quite high, typically ± 0.01%: one mass unit
H C
in 10,000.
O OH
Some complexity arises from the fact that each
carbon atom in a protein contains about 1% of 13C. P1 CH2 SO3 – + P2 CH2 SO3 – (3-22)
This means that for a protein of mass > 10 kDa there
will be a confusing array of peaks in the mass spectrum
and it may be difficult to pick out the relatively minor Reduction by dithiothreitol or dithioerythritol
“monoisotopic” peak that arises from molecules con- (Eq. 3-23) is usually successful.
taining only 12C,1H,14N,16O, and 32S. In fact, the peak
representing the most abundant mass will be a few
m
(se
a
e
s s
S
u
tu
n
d
it
y
s
Q
hi
u
g
e
h
s
e
t
r
io
t
n
h a
1
n
5 )
t
.
h
N
e m
ew
o n
c
o
o
i
m
so
p
t
u
op
te
i
r
c
p
p
r
e
o
a
g
k
r
.
a
21
m
5,2
s
16 Protein 1 CH2
HO CH2 SH
S C
have been devised to assist in the analysis. Use of 13C H
H
and15N-depleted nutrients also extends the applica- S C
bility of mass spectrometry.217 Protein 2 CH2 HO CH2 SH
Electrospray mass spectrometry utilizes a soft Dithiothreitol
ionization technique at nearly atmospheric pressure.
As a result, intact molecular ions are formed in high
2 Protein CH2SH HO CH2
yield. The instrument can be interfaced readily to C S
H
HPLC or capillary electrophoresis columns and sub-
H
femtomole amounts of proteins can be detected. A C S
disadvantage is that salt concentrations must be kept
HO CH2
(3-23)
low (< mM) and that the protein tends to bind Na+, K+,
and anions that may confuse interpretation of spectra.
Upon oxidation these dithiols cyclize to form stable
disulfides, driving the reaction to completion. These
D. Determining Amino Acid Composition and same compounds are also widely used to protect SH
Sequence groups in enzymes against accidental oxidation by
oxygen and to dissolve highly crosslinked insoluble
When they are first isolated, proteins are usually proteins. Mercaptoethanol, HS – CH – CH – OH, may
2 2
characterized by M, isoelectric point, and other easily be used for the same purposes but requires higher
r
measured properties. Among these is the amino acid concentrations and has a disagreeable odor.
composition112 which can be determined by completely Once cleaved, disulfide bridges may be prevented
hydrolyzing the protein to the free amino acids. Later, from reforming by conversion of the resulting thiol
it is important to establish the primary structure or groups to stable derivatives, e.g., with iodoacetate and
amino acid sequence.51 This has been accomplished iodacetamide (Eq. 3-24).
traditionally by cutting the peptide chain into smaller
pieces that can be characterized easily. However, most
protein sequences are now deduced initially from the –
P CH2 SH I CH2COO
corresponding DNA sequences, but further chemical
(I CH2CONH2)
characterization is often needed.
P CH2 S CH2 COO – H++ I –
1. Cleavage of Disulfide Bridges ( CH2 CONH2) (3-24)
Before a polypeptide chain can be degraded it is
usually necessary to break any disulfide bridges.218– 220 A better reagent is acrylonitrile (Eq. 3-25).
For some proteins such as the keratins of hair, these

--- Page 120 ---

116 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
P CH2 SH peptidase, cleaves peptide chains at a rapid rate only
if the carbonyl group of the amide linkage cleaved is
H2C CH CN
contributed by one of the basic amino acids lysine,
Acrylonitrile
arginine, or aminoethylcysteine (see Fig. 12-10). If the
protein is treated with maleic anhydride (Eq. 3-26),
P CH2 S CH2 CH2 CN (3-25)
In modern sequencing methods vinylpyridine, O
which reacts in a similar way, is often used. It can be
detected during amino acid analysis or sequencing
after derivatization with phenylisothiocyanate (Eq. 3-30). R NH3 + + O
Lysine
side chain
+
2H
O
H2C CH N H
–
R N C CH CH COO
Vinylpyridine (3-26)
O
2. Hydrolysis and Other Chain Cleavage BOX 3-D THE PROTEOME
Reactions
The ability to separate rapidly and detect
Most biopolymers are inherently unstable with minute amounts of proteins has spawned a new
respect to cleavage to monomer units by reaction with concept: The proteome is envisioned as a record
water. Hydrolysis can be catalyzed by protons, by of all proteins being actively synthesized by a cell
hydroxyl ions, or by the protein-hydrolyzing enzymes – or of all genes being actively “expressed.”a– c
that are discussed in Chapter 12. Complete hydrolysis The concept evolved from efforts to automate the
of proteins is usually accomplished by heating under cataloging of spots on two-dimensional gels such
nitrogen with 6 M HCl at 150°C for 65 min. Some as that shown in Box 3-B where each spot repre-
amino acids, especially tryptophan, are destroyed sents a single protein. The ability to unambigu-
and the amides in the side chains of asparagine and ously identify the spots by mass spectroscopy has
glutamine are converted to the free acids. Some pep- brought new optimism to the attempt to use gels
tide linkages such as Val-Val are very resistant and automatically to analyze all of the proteins
tend to be incompletely hydrolyzed. No procedure formed by a cell.a,c The methods are potentially
has been found which gives the ideal complete hydro- very important to developing new diagnostic
lysis. Use of 4 M methanesulfonic acid containing procedures for human medicine. Watching
3-(2-aminoethyl)indole instead of 6 M HCl gives less changes in the proteome, including posttransla-
decomposition of tryptophan.221 Base-catalyzed hydro- tional modifications in proteins, as cells develop
lysis of proteins also gives good yields of tryptophan and grow will provide new insights into bio-
but causes extensive racemization of amino acids.222 chemical regulation.
Complete enzymatic digestion of proteins can be A similar concept is that of a complete tran-
accomplished with a mixture of enzymes including scriptional map, a record of all of the different
proteases produced by fungi (Pronase). However, the RNA molecules being synthesized by a cell.d,e
enzymes attack each other, making quantitative analy- These include many different mRNAs, each of
sis difficult. The problem can be circumvented by which may give rise to more than one protein, as
immobilizing the hydrolytic enzymes in a column of well as many RNAs with other functions.
agarose gel. The protein to be hydrolyzed
is passed through the gel and the constituent amino a Kahn, P. (1995) Science270, 369 – 370
acids emerge from the bottom of the column.223,224 b Swinbanks, D. (1995) Nature (London)378, 653
c Shevchenko, A., Jensen, O. N., Podtelejnikov, A. V., Sagliocco,
F., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., Mortensen, P., Shevchenko.A,
Selective enzymatic hydrolysis. The traditional
Boucherie, H., and Mann, M. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
strategy in sequence determination is to cut protein
U.S.A.93, 14440–14445
chains into smaller pieces which can be separated by d Richard, G.-F., Fairhead, C., and Dujon, B. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.
chromatography or electrophoresis and sequenced 268, 303–321
e Schena, M., Shalon, D., Heller, R., Chai, A., Brown, P. O., and
individually. Enzymatic cleavage is especially useful
Davis, R. W. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 10614–
because of its specificity. Trypsin, a so-called endo-
10619

--- Page 121 ---

D. Determining Amino Acid Composition and Sequence 117
the lysine residues are protected and trypsin will for a protein, “overlapping” peptide fragments must
cleave only at the Arg-X positions. If the resultant be found that contain sequences from ends of two
peptides are separated and held at pH 3.5 overnight, different tryptic fragments. In this way the tryptic
the blocking groups are hydrolyzed off and a second peptides can be placed in the order in which they
trypsin treatment can be used to cleave at the Lys-X occurred in the native protein. This tedious procedure
positions.225 The number of cleavage sites for trypsin is rarely used today. Peptide sequencing is still impor-
can be increased by converting an – SH group to a tant but is usually coordinated with gene sequencing,
positively charged one by aminoethylation (Eq. 3-27).226 X-ray structure determination, or mass spectroscopy
The reaction can be accomplished either with ethyl- which minimize the need for overlapping fragments.
eneimine (caution: carcinogen) as shown in this equa- While trypsin cuts the peptide linkages Lys-X and
tion or by bromoethylamine, which eliminates Br– to Arg-X, a fungal protease cleaves only X-Lys.227 A pro-
form ethyleneimine. tease from the submaxillary glands of mice cleaves
only Arg-X,228 one from Staphylococcus specifically at
Glu-X,229,230 and one from kidneys at Pro-X.231
CH2 Several enzymes catalyze stepwise removal of
CH2 SH + CH2 NH2 + a
ch
m
a
i
i
n
n
o
.
a
C
c
a
id
r
s
b o
fr
x
o
y
m
p e
o
p
n
t
e
i d
o
a
r
s
th
es
e
2
o
32
t h
re
e
m
r e
o
n
v
d
e
o
a
f
m
a
i n
p
o
e p
a
t
c
i
i
d
d
e
s
from the carboxyl-terminal end, while aminopeptidases
attack the opposite end. Using chromatographic
+
CH2 S CH2CH2NH3 (3-27) methods, the amino acids released by these enzymes
may be examined at various times and some idea of
the sequence of amino acids at the chain ends may be
Because of its specificity for basic residues, trypsin obtained. A dipeptidyl aminopeptidase from bovine
converts a protein into a relatively small number of spleen cuts dipeptides one at a time from the amino
tryptic peptides which may be separated and charac- terminus of a chain. These can be converted to volatile
terized. Trypsin acts primarily on denaturated proteins, trimethylsilyl derivatives and identified by mass spec-
and to obtain good results the disulfide bridges must trometry.233 If the chain is shortened by one residue
be broken first. Chymotrypsin is less specific than using the Edman degradation (Section 3) and the
trypsin and pepsin is even less specific (Table 3-2). dipeptidyl aminopeptidase is again used, a different
Nevertheless, they can be used to cut a peptide chain set of dipeptides that overlaps the first will be obtained
into smaller fragments whose sequences can be deter- and a sequence can be deduced. Carboxypeptidase Y
mined. To establish the complete amino acid sequence can be used with MALDI mass spectrometry to deduce
the C-terminal amino acid sequence
for a peptide. However, Ile and Leu
cannot be distinquished.
TABLE 3-2
Specificities of Commonly Used Protein-Hydrolyzing Enzymes
Nonenzymatic cleavages. Of
the various nonenzymatic methods
Trypsin Lys-X, Arg-X X not Pro that have been proposed, one has
been outstandingly useful. Cyano-
Chymotrypsin
rapidly: Phe-X, Tyr-X, Trp-X X not Pro gen bromide, N ≡ C – Br, cleaves pep-
slowly: Y-X X not Pro tide chains adjacent to methionine
Y=Leu, Asn, Gln, His, Met, Ser, Thr residues. The sulfur of methionine
displaces the bromide ion (Eq. 3-28)
Staphylococcus aureus
and because of a favorable spatial
protease V-8 Glu-X X not Pro
relationship, the resulting sulfonium
Clostripain Arg-X compound undergoes C – S bond
cleavage through participation of the
Pepsin
adjacent peptide group (Eq. 3-28,
preferentially: X-Phe-X, X-Tyr-X, X-Leu-X
less so: X-Ala-X stepb). The C = N of the product is
then hydrolyzed with cleavage of
Thermolysin the peptide chain in step c.
rapidly: X-Y
The linkage Asp-Gly can often
Y=Ile, Leu, Val, Ala, Phe, Met
be cleaved specifically by treatment
slowly: X-Y
with hydroxylamine at high pH.195
Y=Tyr, Gly, Thr, Ser
Procedures for specific cleavage of
tryptophanyl bonds have been de-

--- Page 122 ---

118 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
CH3
3. Determining Amino Acid Sequence
H
CH2 CH2 S
N C The covalent structure of insulin was established
O
H C Br C N by Frederick Sanger in 1953 after a 10-year effort. This
Cyanogen bromide was the first protein sequence determination.237,238
HN Sanger used partial hydrolysis of peptide chains
Methionine residue a whose amino groups had been labeled by reaction
in protein with 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene239 to form shorter end-
CH3
labeled fragments. These were analyzed for their
Br–
+S C N amino acid composition and labeled and hydrolyzed
again as necessary. Many peptides had to be analyzed
H
CH2 CH2
to deduce the sequence of the 21-residue and 30-
N C
H O residue chains that are joined by disulfide linkages in
C
insulin.237,238
b HN The Sanger method is mainly of historic interest,
although end-labeling may still be used for various
N H
CH2
CH2
CH3 S C N p
u
u
se
r
d
p o
b
s
y
e s
S
.
a n
A
g
m
er
o
i
r
s
e
d
s
a
e
n
n
s
si
y
t
l
iv
c
e
h
l
l
a
o
b
r
e
i
l
d
in
e
g
. I
r
t
e a
re
g
a
e
c
n
t
t
s
t
t
h
o
a
f
n
o r
w
m
a s
a
H C
O sulfonamide linkage that is stable to acid hydrolysis
C
and is brilliantly fluorescent (Eq. 3-29). The related
+ reagent dimethylaminoazobenzene-4'-sulfonyl chlo-
HN
c ride gives highly colored derivatives easily seen on
thin-layer chromatography plates.240
H2N N H
CH2
CH2
H C The Edman degradation. One of the most im-
O portant reagents for sequence analysis is phenyl-
C
isothiocyanate, whose use was developed by P.
O (3-28) Edman.241– 243 This reagent also reacts with the N-
Peptidyl homoserine lactone terminal amino group of peptides (Eq. 3-30, step a).
The resulting adduct undergoes cyclization with
vised.234 The Asp-Pro linkage is susceptible to cleavage
cleavage of the peptide linkage (Eq. 3-30, step b) under
by trifluoroacetic acid, which is used in the automated
acidic conditions. After rearrangement (step c) the
Edman degradation employed in peptide sequencing
resulting phenylthiohydantoin of the N-terminal
(Eq. 3-30). Cleavage by trifluoroacetic acid can be
amino acid can be identified. The procedure can then
used to generate peptides for subsequent sequence
be repeated on the shortened peptide chain to identify
determination.
the amino acid residue in the second position. With
careful work the Edman degradation can be carried
Separating the peptides. A procedure that has
down the chain for several tens of residues.
been very important in the development of protein
Ingeniousprotein sequenators have been de-
chemistry is peptide mapping or “fingerprinting.”
vised to carry out the Edman degradation automati-
The procedure begins with cleavage of the disulfide
cally.242,244– 246 Each released phenylthiohydantoin is
linkages, denaturation, and digestion with trypsin or
then identified by HPLC or other techniques. Com-
some other protease. The sizes and amino acid com-
mercial sequenators have often required 5 – 20 nmol of
positions of the resulting series of peptides are charac-
peptide but new microsequenators can be used with
teristic of the protein under study. The mixture of
amounts as low as 5 – 10 picomoles or less.247,248
peptides is placed on a thin layer plate and subjected
to chromatography in one direction, then to electro-
phoresis in the other direction, with the peptides H3C CH3 H3C CH3
separating into a characteristic pattern or fingerprint. N N
Fingerprinting has been especially useful in searching Protein NH2
for small differences in protein structure, for example,
between genetic variants of the same protein (Fig. 7-27).
Currently, the peptides are usually separated on ion
exchange or gel filtration columns, by reversed-phase
HPLC, or by capillary electrophoresis and are then SO2Cl O S NH Protein
often passed, in subpicomole amounts, into a mass
Dansyl chloride
spectrometer.176,235,236 (5-Dimethylaminoaphthyl- O
sulfonyl chloride) (3-29)

--- Page 123 ---

D. Determining Amino Acid Composition and Sequence 119
Microsequencers permit sequence analysis on minute Protein sequences from the genes. Complete
amounts of protein. Microsequencing can be used in sequences of large numbers of genes have been deter-
conjunction with two-dimensional electrophoretic mined and the corresponding sequences of proteins
separations of proteins such as that shown in Box 3-C. can be read directly from those of the corresponding
The proteins in the polyacrylamide gel are electropho- genes. One method for sequencing a gene is to isolate
retically transferred onto a porous sheet (membrane) a specific messenger RNA, which does not contain
of an inert material such as polyvinyl difluoride.249– 251 intervening sequences. A DNA copy (cDNA) is made
After staining, a selected spot is cut out and placed from the mRNA and is used to ascertain the sequence
into the sequencer. To avoid the problems associated of the encoded protein. The genomic DNA is also
with blocked N termini, the protein may be treated often sequenced. Introns are recognized by the nucle-
with proteases on the membrane and the resulting otide sequences at their ends and the correct amino
peptide fragments may then be separated on a narrow- acid sequence for the encoded protein is deduced.
bore HPLC column and sequenced.240 In many instances, however, a gene can be identi-
Because many proteins are modified at the N ter- fied only after part of the protein, often an N-terminal
minus, blocking application of the Edman degrada- portion has been sequenced. This knowledge permits
tion, it would be useful to have a similar method for synthesis of an oligonucleotide probe that can be
sequencing from the C terminus. It has been difficult used to locate the gene (Chapter 5). Nucleotide se-
to devise a suitable strategy, but there has been some quences can be verified by comparison with sequences
success.252– 254 of tryptic or other fragments of a protein. Similarly,
protein sequences are often checked by sequencing
the corresponding genes as well as by study of X-ray
R1 structures. Substantial numbers of errors are made in
sequencing of both DNA and protein so that checking
N C S + H2N CH C NH
is important.
O
Phenylisothiocyanate Peptide Mass spectrometry in sequencing. Proteins can
a also be sequenced by mass spectrometry or by a com-
Weak base bination of Edman degradation and mass spectrome-
try.213,255,255a Until recently the peptides had to be con-
H H verted to volatile derivatives by extensive methylation
and acetylation or by other procedures. However,
N C R1 H+ newer ionization methods including MALDI (Fig. 3-11)
NH C C NH and ESI (Fig. 3-12) have made it possible to obtain
mass spectra on unmodified peptides. In one proce-
S O
dure a nonspecific protease cleaves a peptide chain
Phenylthiocarbamyl peptide into a mixture of small oligopeptides which are sepa-
Anhydrous rated by HPLC into 20 – 40 fractions, each of which
b
acid may contain 10 – 15 peptides but which can be sent
directly into the ionization chamber of the mass spec-
H trometer.256 Peptides can be generated from a protein
using immobilized enzymes, separated on a chromato-
N C R1
graphic column, and introduced sequentially into the
NH C C O + H3N
mass spectrometer. Examination of peptide mixtures
S by mass spectrometry provides a way of verifying
Anilinothiazolinone sequences deduced from DNA sequencing.257 Mass
spectrometry is also used widely to study covalently
Aqueous or
c modified proteins.173,216,257a,257b As a rule, these cannot
methanolic HCl
be recognized from gene sequences.
S H
N
H 4. Locating Disulfide Bridges
N C
R1 A final step in sequencing is often the location of
S–S bridges. The reduced and alkylated protein can
O
be cleaved enzymatically (e.g., with elastase, pepsin,
Phenylthiohydantoin (PTH)
of N-terminal amino acid (3-30) or thermolysin) to relatively small fragments, each of
which contains no more than one modified cysteine.

--- Page 124 ---

120 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
The same enzymatic cleavage can then be applied to
the unreduced enzyme. Pairs of peptide fragments
remain linked by the S–S bridges. These crosslinked
pairs can be separated, the disulfide bridges cleaved, O
and the resulting peptides identified, each as one of
O
the already sequenced fragments. Mass spectrometry O
provides a rapid method for their identification.258
RNH2
Another elegant way of locating S–S bridges
O
employsdiagonal electrophoresis. Electrophoresis "Fluorescamine"
of the digest containing the crosslinked pairs is con-
ducted in one direction on a sheet of filter paper. Then
R N
the paper is exposed to performic acid vapor to cleave
the bridges according to Eq. 3-22 and electrophoresis O
OH
is conducted in the second direction and the paper is
COOH
sprayed with ninhydrin. The spots falling off the (fluorescent) (3-31)
diagonal are those that participated in S–S bridge
formation. They can be associated in pairs from their
positions on the paper and can be identified with Reaction with naphthalene 2,3-dicarboxaldehyde (Eq.
peptides characterized during standard sequencing 3-32) increases the limit of detection 100-fold or
procedures.259 more.264
Diagonal electrophoresis and its relative diagonal
CHO
chromatography are useful for other purposes as well.
After electrophoresis or chromatography is conducted
in one direction, the paper or thin-layer plate may be CHO
sprayed with a reagent that will react with some com-
RNH2
ponents or may be irradiated with light before the sepa- CN–
ration is repeated in the second direction (Fig. 3-5).102,260
CN
N R
5. Detecting Products
(3-32)
Important to almost all biochemical activity is the
ability to detect, and to measure quantitatively, tiny Detection of proteins on thin-layer plates, gel slabs,
amounts of specific compounds. “Color reagents,” or membranes is often accomplished by staining with
which develop characteristic colors with specific com- a dye,265– 267 the most widely used being Coomassie
pounds, are especially popular. For example, ninhy- brilliant blue.268 Various silver-containing stains may
drin (Box 3-E) can be used as a “spray reagent” to also be used. After separation of a protein mixture by
detect a small fraction of a micromole of an amino acid electrophoresis and transfer to an inert membrane,
or peptide in a spot on a chromatogram. It can also be
used for a quantitative determination, the color being NaO3S SO3 –
developed in a solution. More sensitive than absorp-
tion of light (color) is fluorescence. Fluorescamine
(Eq. 3-31) reacts with any primary amine to form a
highly fluorescent product. As little as 50 pmol of CH2 CH2
amino acid can be determined quantitatively.261 A
yet more sensitive fluorogenic reagent for detection
C2H5 N N C2H5
of amino acids, peptides, and amines of all types is
o-phthaldialdehyde.262,263
CHO
NH
CHO
o-Phthaldialdehyde
O C2H5
Coomassie brilliant blue

--- Page 125 ---

121
BOX 3-E NINHYDRIN
Ninhydrin (1,2,3-indantrione monohydrate) O
forms Schiff bases (ketimines) with amino acids. O
OH
These react in ways similar to those of Schiff bases
of pyridoxal phosphate (Chapter 14). Decarboxyla-
tion of the ketimines followed by hydrolysis of the O
OH
resulting aldimines yields an intermediate amine
that can couple with a second molecule of ninhydrin O
to form a characteristic purple color.a,b First reported Ninydrin O
by Ruhemann in 1910, the intermediate amine can
also be hydrolyzed to free ammonia. Therefore, to
O
ensure maximum color yield ninhydrin solutions for
H
quantitative analysis usually contain reduced
ninhydrin, which can react with free NH 3 and N C COO –
ninhydrin to form Ruhemann’s purple (see scheme).
The reaction has been widely used in chromatogra- R
phy and in quantitative amino acid analysis and O O –
also as a convenient spray reagent for paper and Ketimine
thin-layer chromatography. While α-amino acids H
react most readily, primary amines and peptides N C R
also form Ruhemann’s purple. In these cases a
proton rather than CO is lost from the ketimine.
2
When pyridoxamine (Chapter 14) on chromato- O
H
grams reacts, a bright orange product, presumably Aldimine
the aldimine, appears. Secondary amines, such as
O C R
proline, give a yellow color.
Both the ninhydrin reaction and pyridoxal
phosphate-catalyzed decarboxylation of amino acids
(Chapter 14) are examples of the Strecker degrada-
tion. Strecker reported in 1862 that alloxan causes
the decarboxylation of alanine to acetaldehyde, CO ,
2
and ammonia.c O –
HC NH N
2 3
O
Ruhemann’s purple
Many other carboxyl compounds, e.g., those of the
general structure
andp-nitrosalicylaldehyde also cause the Strecker
degradation.d
O
O
D. Determining Amino Acid Composition and Sequence
H
–
R C COO
NH+
3
CO 2
–
O
NH
2
Ninhydrin
O
Intermediate amine
O
O
HN
O N O O
H
Alloxan H
OH
O
Reduced ninhydrin, hydrindantin
O
(2-hydroxy-1,3-indanedione)
O C (CH CH)4 C
a Wigfield, D. C., and Croteau, S. M. (1980) Biochem. Edu.8,
26–27
b Friedman, M., and Williams, L. D. (1974) Bioorg. Chem.3,
267–280
c Strecker, A. (1862) Annalen123, 363–365
d Schonberg, A., and Moubacher, R. (1952) Chem. Rev.50, 261–
277

--- Page 126 ---

122 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
the resulting protein “blots” can be stained with spe- known 280-nm absorption band of proteins. There
cific antibodies.269,270 Flame ionization detectors can is a much stronger absorption band at about 240 nm.
measure as little as a few picomoles of almost any Sensitive methods for estimating protein concentration
substance leaving a vapor-phase chromatographic depend upon the measurement of this absorption
column. The importance of developing new, more together with that from other side chains at around 280
sensitive analytical methods by which the quantity of or 230 nm.13,271– 274 There is an even stronger absorption
material investigated can be scaled down can hardly band at 192 nm. However, at these wavelengths even
be overemphasized. Increasingly sensitive methods air absorbs light and experimental difficulties are
of detection, including mass spectrometry, now permit extreme. At 280 nm, and even more at 230 nm, it is
measurement of fmol (10–15 mol) quantities in some easy to contaminate samples with traces of light-
cases. With this ability the output of neurotransmitters absorbing material invisible to the eye. Therefore,
from a single neuron in the brain can be measured and most estimations of protein concentration from light
the contents of single cells can be analyzed. absorption depend upon the 280-nm band.
Figure 3-14 shows the spectra of N-acetyl ethyl
esters of all three of the aromatic amino acids and of
6. Absorption of Light cystine. To a first approximation, the absorption spec-
tra of proteins can be regarded as a summation of the
Side chains of the three aromatic amino acids spectra of the component amino acids. However, the
phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan absorb ultra- absorption bands of some residues, particularly of
violet light in the 240- to 300-nm region, while histidine tyrosine and tryptophan, are shifted to longer wave-
and cystine absorb to a lesser extent. Figure 3-13 shows lengths than those of the reference compounds in
the absorption spectrum of a “reference compound” water. This is presumably a result of being located
for tyrosine. There are three major absorption bands, within nonpolar regions of the protein. Notice that the
the first one at 275 nm being a contributor to the well- spectra for tyrosine, phenylalanine, and cystine in Fig.
BOX 3-F BIOSENSORS AND ELECTRONIC NOSES
A new approach to detection of molecules of the analysis of compounds in human breath as an
biological interest is the development of biosensors. aid to medical diagnosis. Over 400 volatile organic
These are small devices that detect the binding of compounds have been identified in breath using gas
specific molecules to a receptor which is in intimate chromatography and mass spectrometry.n
contact with a specially prepared surface that serves
as a transducer. The receptor might be a layer of a Briggs, J. (1987) Nature (London)329, 565 – 566
enzyme, antibody, hormone receptor, lectin, or b Zurer, P. (1997) Chem. Eng. NewsSeptember 15, 7
c Kress-Rogers, E., ed. (1997) Handbook of Biosensors and Electronic
oligonucleotide. Binding of substrate, antigen,
Noses: Medicine, Food, and the Environment, CRC Press, Boca
hormone, sugar, or complementary polynucleotide Raton, Florida
strand, respectively, induces a response consisting d Cunningham, A. J. (1998) Introduction to Bioanalytical Sensors,
of some kind of electrical or optical signal.a– d If the Wiley, New York
e McConnell, H. M., Owicki, J. C., Parce, J. W., Miller, D. L.,
sensor is constructed on a semiconductor chip
Baxter, G. T., Wada, H. G., and Pitchford, S. (1992) Science257,
changes in an imposed potential difference may be 1906– 1912
detected.a,e However, changes in optical properties f Marvin, J. S., Corcoran, E. E., Hattangadi, N. A., Zhang, J. V.,
are more often observed. Fluorescence of dyes Gere, S. A., and Hellinga, H. W. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A.94, 4366 – 4371
incorporated into the tranducing layer may be
g Raether, H. (1988) Surface Plasmons, Springer Tracts in Modern
induced by binding of a molecule to a protein that Physics, Vol. 111, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
undergoes an allosteric modification (see Chapter h Peterlinz, K. A., Georgiadis, R. M., Herne, T. M., and Tarlov, M.
9).f Many biosensors measure surface plasmon J. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 3401– 3402
i Hendrix, M., Priestley, E. S., Joyce, G. F., and Wong, C.-H.
resonance, a change in the evanescent wave that
(1997)J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 3641– 3648
develops in a surface when a light beam at the angle j Salamon, Z., Brown, M. F., and Tollin, G. (1999) Trends Biochem.
of total reflectance strikes the surface. This induces Sci.24, 213 – 219
a change in the dielectric constant which can be k Chao, H., Houston, M. E., Jr., Grothe, S., Kay, C. M., O’Connor-
McCourt, M., Irvin, R. T., and Hodges, R. S. (1996) Biochemistry
measured.f– m Biosensors are used to estimate
35, 12175 – 12185
binding constants and also rate constants. However, l McNally, A. J., Mattsson, L., and Jordan, F. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.
read the article by Schuck and Miltonm for tests of 270, 19744 – 19751
the validity of kinetic data. Biosensors can serve as mSchuck, P., and Minton, A. P. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 458 –
460
“electronic noses.” One possible application is in
o Phillips, M. (1992) Sci. Am.267(July), 74 – 79

--- Page 127 ---

123
12
10
8
6 Figure 3-13 The absorption spectrum of N-acetyltyrosine ethyl ester in an aqueous
phosphate buffer of pH 6.8. Absorbance (as molar extinction coefficient, Eq. 23-5) is
4 plotted against increasing energy of light quanta in units of wave number. The more
commonly used wavelength scale is also given. Spectra are most often presented with
2 the low wavelength side to the left. In the convention adopted here the energy of a
quantum increases to the right. There are three π – π* electronic transitions that give rise
0 to absorption bands of increasing intensity. The third π – π* transition of the aromatic
30 34 38 42 46 50
Wave number (cm-1)× 10-3 ring is at ~ 52,000 cm–1 (192 nm) and reaches a molar extinction coefficient of ~ 40,000.
Then – π* and π – π* transitions of the amide group in this compound also contribute to
300 250 220 200
the high energy end of the spectrum (see Chapter 23 for further discussion).
Wavelength (nm)
3-01
× tneiciffeoc
noitcnitxE
from the numbers of residues of each type per mole-
cule as follows:274
ε (M–1cm–1) =5500 (no. Trp) + 1490 (no. Tyr) + 280
125 (no. cystine) (3-33)
For proteins of unknown composition, a useful ap-
proximation is that a solution containing 1 mg / ml of
protein has an absorbance at 280 nm of about 1.0.
E. Quantitative Determinations and
Modification Reactions of Side Chain
Groups
The functional groups present in the side chains
of proteins include – NH ,– SH, S — S, – OH, – COO –,
2
the imidazole group of histidine, the guanidine group
of arginine, the phenolic group of tyrosine, the indole
ring of tryptophan, and the – S – CH group of methio-
32 34 36 40 42 44 3
Wave number (cm-1)× 10-3 nine. These are able to enter into a great variety of
chemical reactions, most of which make use of the
300 270 250 230 nucleophilic properties of these groups. The reactions
Wavelength (nm) are most often those of nucleophilic addition or nu-
cleophilicdisplacement. The basic chemistry of these
reactions often parallels biochemical reactions that are
Figure 3-14 The spectra of the first electronic transitions of
discussed in Chapters 12 and 13. In many instances,
theN-acetyl derivatives of the ethyl esters of phenylalanine,
the reactions are nonspecific; amino, thiol, and hydroxyl
tyrosine, and tryptophan together with that of the dimethyl
ester of cystine in methanol at 25°C. The spectra for the Tyr, groups may all react with the same reagent. The use-
Phe, and cystine derivatives have been multiplied by the fulness of the reactions depends to a large extent on
factors given on the graph.272 the discovery of conditions under which there is some
selectivity. It is also important that the reactions be
complete. Only a few reactions will be considered here;
these and others have been reviewed by Glazer et al.225,275
3-14 have been multiplied by factors of 2 to 20. It is
evident that if all of the light-absorbing side chains
were present in equal numbers tryptophan would 1. Reactions of Amino Groups
dominate the absorption band and that phenylalanine
would contribute little except some small wiggles. The numerous amino groups of lysine residues
The molar extinction coefficient ε can be estimated and of the N termini of peptide chains usually pro-
3-01
×
tneiciffeoc
noitcnitxE
E. Quantitative Determinations and Modification Reactions of Side Chain Groups
9
Trp
8 Tyr × 2
Phe× 20
7 Cystine× 4
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
38

--- Page 128 ---

124 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
trude into the aqueous surroundings of a protein. Another addition reaction of amino groups is
Chemical modification can be done in such a way as carbamoylation with sodium cyanate (Eq. 3-35). A
to preserve the net positive charge which amino groups displacement reaction by an amino group on an acid
carry at most pH values, to eliminate the positive
charge leaving a neutral side chain, or to alter the charge
–
O O
to a negative value. Alterations of these charges can
greatly affect interactions of the protein molecules R NH2 C R N C NH2
with each other and with other substances. H
+
Amino groups react reversibly with carbonyl N H
compounds to form Schiff bases.275– 277 Reduction of Cyanate (3-35)
the latter by sodium borohydride or sodium cyano-
borohydride causes an irreversible change (Eq. 3-34, anhydride such as acetic anhydride (Eq. 3-36) leads to
stepsa and b). Cyanoborohydride is specific for Schiff acylation, a nonspecific reaction which is also under-
bases and does not reduce the carbonyl compound. gone by thiol, hydroxyl, and other groups. When
However, side products may cause problems.277,278 acetic anhydride is used, the net positive charge of an
Depending upon which carbonyl compound is used,
the net positive charge on the amino group may be
retained or it may be replaced with a different charge O O
by this “reductive alkylation” sequence. Formalde-
R NH2 H3C C O C CH3
hyde will react according to Eq. 3-34 in two steps to
Acetic anhydride
give a dimethyl amino group with no change of net
charge.279 Pyridoxal phosphate (Chapter 14) is con-
O
verted by Eq. 3-34 into a fluorescent label. With a
H
limited amount of pyridoxal phosphate only one or R N C CH3 CH3COOH (3-36)
a few lysine residues may be labeled, often at active
centers of enzymes. Schiff bases formed from glycer-
aldehyde in Eq. 3-34 can undergo the Amadori rear- amino group is lost. However, the product obtained
rangement (Eq. 4-8) to form stable products which, with succinic anhydride or maleic anhydride (Eq. 3-26)
however, can be reconverted to the original amino carries a negative charge. In the latter case, the modifi-
groups upon acid hydrolysis. The borohydride reduc- cation can readily be reversed by altering the pH.
tion product of Eq. 3-34 with glyceraldehyde can be Bothamidination (Eq. 3-37) and guanidination
reconverted to the original amine by periodate oxida- (Eq. 3-38) lead to retention of the positive charge.
tion (Eq. 4-11).277
NH2 +
R' CHO H
H3C C OCH3
R NH2 R N C R' Methyl acetimidate
a Schiff base R NH2
NaBH or NaCNBH
4 4
H b CH3OH
R N CH2 R' NH2 +
R' CHO H
R N C CH3 (3-37)
c H
C R'
+
R N NH2 +
NaBH
CH2 R'
4 H2N C O CH3
d
O-Methylisourea
+
CH2 R' R NH2
R N For formaldehyde
R=H
H
CH2 R'
(3-34) CH3OH
+
NH2
H
R N C NH2 (3-38)

--- Page 129 ---

E. Quantitative Determinations and Modification Reactions of Side Chain Groups 125
Bifunctional imidoesters such as dimethylsuberimidate SCN
may be used to establish whether or not two different
proteins or subunits are close together in a complex or
in a supramolecular structure such as a membrane or
ribosome.
–
COO
H3C O C (CH2)6 C O CH3 NO2
NH2 + NH2 + R SH
Dimethylsuberimidate
R SCN
–
Another useful reaction of amino side chains is that S
with dansyl chloride (Eq. 3-29). Many lysine deriva-
tives can be determined quantitatively by amino acid
analysis.280
–
COO
2. Reactions of SH Groups NO2 (3-40)
In addition to the alkylation with iodoacetate (Eq.
3-24), sulfhydryl groups can react with N-ethylmale- coefficient of 14,150 M–1 cm–1.283 While DTNB has
imide (Eq. 3-39).281 This reaction blocks the SH groups been widely used to determine the content of – SH
irreversibly and has often been used in attempts to groups in proteins, there are some disadvantages.
establish whether or not a thiol group plays a role in
the functioning of a protein. Loss of function in the
O O2N S S NO2
– –
COO COO
N CH2CH3
Ellman's reagent
R SH
O
+
H
R SH
R S S NO2 + – S NO2
O
R S – –
COO COO
N CH2CH3 Thiol anion
(3-41)
O (3-39)
Pyridyldisulfides such as 2-pyridyldisulfide or the
isomeric 4-pyridyldisulfide react more completely and
presence of this “sulfhydryl reagent” may mean that with greater selectivity.281
an SH group has an essential role or it could be a result
of the bulk of the group added. The N-ethylmaleimide N N
group is large and could prevent proper contact between
S S
an enzyme and substrate or between two proteins. To
avoid the possible effect of excessive bulk, it is useful
to convert the SH to the small thiocyanate group – SCN
(Eq. 3-40).282 Thiol groups have a high affinity for mercury
Ellman’s reagent 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid; ions including organic mercury derivatives, which
DTNB) reacts quantitatively with –SH groups (Eq. 3-41) are widely used in the determination of protein struc-
to form mixed disulfides with release of a thiolate anion tures by X-ray crystallography (Section F). Titration
that absorbs light at 412 nm with a molar extinction of SH groups in proteins is often accomplished with

--- Page 130 ---

126 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
p-mercuribenzoate (Eq. 3-42). The reaction may be The following sparingly soluble chloroamide
followed spectrophotometrically at 250 – 255 nm, a region together with I– will also iodinate tyrosine and can
in which the mercaptide product absorbs strongly. be used to incorporate radiolabeled iodine into pro-
teins.285,286
O
+ –
Hg COO Cl Cl
C
N N
R SH
C C
+
H
N N
C
Cl Cl
–
R S Hg COO
O
(3-42) 1,3,4,6-Tetrachloro-3α,6α-diphenylglycouril
3. Reactions of Other Side Chains Tetranitromethane reacts slowly with tyrosyl
groups to form 3-nitrotyrosyl groups (Eq. 3-45). The
There are no highly selective reactions for –OH, by-product nitroform is intensely yellow with ε =
350
–COO–, or imidazole groups. However, some hydroxyl 14,400. The reagent also oxidizes SH groups and
groups in active sites of enzymes are unusually reactive reacts with other anionic groups.
in nucleophilic addition or displacement and can be
modified by acylation, phosphorylation, or in other
ways. Carboxyl groups, which are exceedingly nu-
NO2
merous on protein surfaces, can be modified by treating O2N C NO2 O –
with a water-soluble carbodiimide (Eq. 3-10) in the
presence of a high concentration of an amine such as
NO2
the ethyl ester of glycine. The imidazole groups of
residues of histidine can often be selectively destroyed NO2
by dye-sensitized photooxidation (Ch. 12, Section D,5) NO2
or can be acylated with ethoxyformic anhydride.
–
Compounds with two adjacent carbonyl groups
O2N C NO2 O
such as 1,2-cyclohexanedione (Eq. 3-43) react selectively
H
with guanidinium groups from arginine residues in
Nitroform (3-45)
proteins. Under certain conditions the product indi-
cated in Eq. 3-43 predominates. Related reagents are
derived from camphorquinone.284 Koshland devised the following reagent for the indole
rings of tryptophan residues (Eq. 3-46).
+
Br CH2
NH2
R N C + HO OH
H HO NO2
NH2 O O HN N
NH R indole
R (3-43)
NO2
The phenolic group of tyrosine undergoes iodina- R
tion (Eq. 3-44), acylation, coupling with diazonium
CH2
compounds, and other reactions.
OH
I N (3-46)
I2 I – +H +
Imidazole, lysine amino groups, and tyrosine
OH OH
pH 8–9 hydroxyl groups react with diethylpyrocarbonate
(3-44)

--- Page 131 ---

F. Synthesis of Peptides 127
(Eq. 3-47) at low enough pH (below 6) that the reaction be 98% or better for every step. Even so, it is still
becomes quite selective for histidine.70,287 Reactivity impractical to synthesize very large peptides. Those
with this reagent is often used as an indication of his- that have been made, such as the hormone insulin and
tidine in a protein.288– 290. The reaction may be moni- the enzyme ribonuclease, have been obtained in low
tored by observation of NMR resonances of imidazole yields and have been difficult to purify.298 It is usually
rings.288,290 more practical to obtain large peptides from natural
sources. It is often practical to clone a suitable piece
of DNA in a bacterial plasmid and to set up biological
Protein H
N production of the desired peptide (Chapter 26). On
the other hand, for smaller peptides, laboratory syn-
thesis is feasible. Even for large peptides it is useful
N
because it permits incorporation of unnatural amino
O
+ acids as well as isotopic labels.
H
H5C2 C O O The general procedure for making a peptide in
O C C2H5 the laboratory is to “block” the amino group of what
will become the N-terminal amino acid with a group
O
that can be removed later. The subsequent amino
Diethyl pyrocarbonate
acid units “activated” at their carboxyl end are then
attached one by one. The chemical activation is often
C2H5OH Protein accomplished by conversion of the carboxyl group of
the amino acid to an anhydride. At the end of the
O
+ synthesis, the blocking group must be removed from
NH
H5C2 C O N the N terminus and also from various side chain groups
O C
such as those of cysteine and lysine residues. In many
respects, this procedure is analogous to the biological
O (3-47)
synthesis of proteins whose basic chemistry is dis-
cussed in Chapter 29.
The thioether side chains of methionine units in
proteins can be oxidized with hydrogen peroxide to
the corresponding sulfones (Eq. 3-48). They can also 1. Solid-Phase Peptide Synthesis
be alkylated, e.g., by CH I to form R — S+(CH ) .
3 3 2
Modern methods of peptide synthesis began with
the solid-phasemethod introduced by Merrifield299
O
in 1962 (Fig. 3-15). To begin the synthesis a suitably
R S CH3 + 2H2O2 R S CH3 + 2H2O protected amino acid is covalently linked to a polysty-
rene bead. The blocking t-butoxycarbonyl (Boc) group
O (3-48) is removed as isobutene by an elimination reaction to
give a bound amino acid with a free amino group.
This can then be coupled to a second amino acid with
4. Affinity Labeling a blocked amino group using dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
(Eq. 3-10). The removal of the blocking group and
To identify groups that are part of or very near to addition of a new amino acid residue can then be
the active site of a protein, reagents can be designed repeated as often as desired. The completed peptide
that carry a reactive chemical group into the active is removed from the polystyrene by action of a strong
site.291 The related photoaffinity labeling292,293 is acid such as HF.
also widely used (see also Chapter 23). Advantages of the Merrifield procedure are that
the peptide is held tightly and can be washed thor-
oughly at each step. Problems arise from repeated use
F. Synthesis of Peptides of trifluoroacetic acid and the need to use HF or other
strong acid to cleave the peptide from the matrix and
The synthesis of peptides of known sequence in also to remove blocking benzyl groups that must be
the laboratory is extremely important to biochemical present on many side chain groups. Newer variations
research. For example, we might want to know how of the procedure include a more labile linkage to a
the effects of a peptide hormone are altered by replace- polyamide type of polymer and use of blocked amino
ment of one amino acid in a particular position by acids.297,300–301a These “active esters” will spontaneously
another. The synthetic methods must be precise294– 298 condense with the free amino group of the growing
and because there are so many steps the yield should peptide and with suitable catalysis will eliminate

--- Page 132 ---

128 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
Semisynthetic approaches can also be used to place
unnatural amino acids into biologically synthesized
F F
O proteins through the use of suppressor transfer RNAs
H
H (Chapter 29).306
C O N C
CH2 C C O F
O H R 2. Combinatorial Libraries
F F
Blocked amino acid Many chemists devote all of their efforts to the
synthesis of new compounds, including polypeptides,
pentafluorophenol. The fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl that might be useful as drugs. Traditionally, this has
(Fmoc) blocking group is removed under mildly basic involved the tedious preparation of a large number of
conditions. The whole procedure has been automated compounds of related structure which can be checked
in commercially available equipment. individually using various biochemical or biological
Smaller peptides may be joined to form longer tests. In recent years a new approach using “combina-
ones.298 Also useful is enzymatic synthesis. Protein- torial chemistry” has become very popular and is
hydrolyzing enzymes under appropriate conditions continually being adapted for new purposes.307–310
will form peptide linkages, for example, joining to- There are several approaches to creating a combinato-
gether oligopeptides.302,303 Other new methods have rial library.
been devised to join unprotected peptides.304,305 In“split synthesis” procedures a solid-phase
CH3 O R1
– Cl CH2 polymer
H3C C O C N CH COO
H
CH3 Ethanol
80˚C Polystyrene
t-Butoxycarbonyl (Boc)
amino acid
–
Cl
O
Boc NH CHR1 C O CH2 polystyrene
HCl/acetic acid or
CH3 trifluoroacetic acid,
then trimethylamine
H3C C CH2 + CO2
Isobutene
O
H2N CHR1 C O CH2 polystyrene
R2
Dicyclohexylcarbodimide
Boc NH CH COO– (Eq. 3-10)
O O
Boc NH CHR2 C NH CHR1 C O CH2 polystyrene
HF or HBr/trifluoroacetic acid
Repeat as needed
to add additional
residues Polypeptide
Figure 3-15 Procedure for solid-phase peptide synthesis devised by Merrifield.299

--- Page 133 ---

G. Microscopy 129
synthesis is conducted on beads. For example, a family ration of thin sections of cells is a very important
of peptides, each with the same C terminus, can be technique. Only with very thin sections is the image
started on a large number of beads. After the first sufficiently focused. However, confocal scanning
amino acid residue is attached the beads are divided optical microscopy, invented in the 1950s but not
into up to 20 equal portions and different amino acids used commercially until much later,328,329 provided an
are added to each portion. The beads can then be alternative solution to the focusing problem. A conical
mixed and again subdivided. The third residue will beam of light focused to a point is scanned across the
again contain many different amino acids attached to sample and the transmitted light (or light emitted by
each of the different amino acids in the second posi- fluorescence) passes through a small “pinhole” aper-
tion. By repeating the procedure again, perhaps for ture located in the primary image plane to a photo-
many steps, a “library” of random peptides with each multiplier tube where its intensity is recorded. The
bead carrying a single compound will be formed. illuminating beam is moved to scan the entire field
To test whether a polypeptide or other compound sequentially. A series of pinholes in a spinning disk
carried on a given bead has a derived biological activity, may accomplish the same result. The focal plane can
such as the ability to inhibit a certain enzyme, various
assays that require only one bead can be devised. How-
ever, if a particular bead carries a compound of inter-
est, how can it be identified? The bead carries only a
small amount of compound but it may be possible
using microsequencing procedures to identify it. An
alternative procedure is to use an encoding method to
identify the beads.
An alternative to the “one bead–one peptide”
approach is to incorporate random sequences of a
DNA segment into a gene that can be used to “display”
the corresponding peptide sequence. This is illustrated
in Fig. 3-16. A protein segment (which may be a ran-
dom sequence) can be displayed either on the major
coat proteins along the shaft or on the minor coat
proteins at the end of the bacterial virus fd (see Fig. 7-7).
In the case of random insertions, each virus particle
may display a different sequence (as many as 108).
Peptides may be selected by binding to a desired
receptor or monoclonal antibody and the DNA encap-
sulated in the virus particle can be used to produce
more peptides for identification purposes.311 – 316 Many
other ingenious systems for constructing and testing
libraries of peptides317– 320 and other molecules319,321,322
are being devised. One of these involves a photoli-
thography procedure for immobilizing macromolecules
in a regular addressable array, e.g., in a 0.5-mm check-
erboard pattern, on a flat surface.323,324
G. Microscopy
Figure 3-16 Model of bacteriophage fd engineered to
The light microscope325 was developed around
display peptides as inserts in the coat proteins of the virus.
1600 but serious studies of cell structure (histology)
The native virus structure is shown in gray; proteins not
did not begin until the 1820s. By 1890, microscope present in the native virus are shown black or green. Inserted
lenses had reached a high state of perfection326 but the near the N-termini of some major coat proteins is a 6-residue
attainable resolution was limited by the wavelength of peptide. To one of these peptides a specific Fab antibody
light. For 450 nm blue light the limit is about 300 nm fragment (green) has bound from solution, and a second
and for ultraviolet light, viewed indirectly, about 200 Fab is shown nearby. The N-terminal region of a minor
nm.325,327 By the 1940s the electron microscope with its coat protein at the end of the virion has been engineered to
display a (different) Fab fragment. Steric constraints are less
far superior resolving power had overshadowed the
stringent for inserts in the minor proteins, but fewer copies
light microscope.
per virion are possible. Reprinted with permission from
For both light and electron microscopy, the prepa- Barbas,et al.313a

--- Page 134 ---

130 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
be varied so that an image of a thick object such as a removal of water and embedding in plastic. Fixatives
cell can be optically sectioned into layers of less than 1 such as formaldehyde react with amino groups and
µm thickness. Stereoscopic pairs can also be generated other groups of proteins and nucleic acids. Some
(Fig. 3-17).330 proteins are precipitated in place and digestive en-
A newer development in confocal microscopy is zymes that otherwise would destroy much of the fine
the use of two-photon and three-photon excitation of structure of the cell are inactivated. Glutaraldehyde
the fluorescent molecules that occur naturally within (a five-carbon dialdehyde) is widely used to fix and
cells using short pulses of short-wavelength high- crosslink protein molecules in the tissue. The methods
energy laser light.331 Distribution of such compounds continue to be improved.342
as NADH,332 DNA, and the neurotransmitter seroto- Small particles, including macromolecules, may
nin333 can be observed without damaging cells. Indi- be“shadowed.” Chromium or platinum can be evap-
vidual storage granules, each containing ~ 5 x 108 orated in a vacuum from an angle onto the surface of
molecules of serotonin in a concentration of ~ 50 mM, the specimen, Individual DNA molecules can be
can be seen.334 Another new instrument, the near- “seen” in this way.343 In fact, only the “shadows”
field scanning optical microscope (NSOM),335,336 is are seen and they are 2 – 3 times wider than the DNA
a lensless instrument in which the illuminating beam molecules. In the negative contrast method a thin
passes through a very small (e.g., 100 nm diameter) layer of a solution containing the molecules to be
hole in a probe that is scanned in front of the sample. examined, together with an electron-dense material
It may extend the limit of optical microscopy to ~ 1/50 such as 1% sodium phosphotungstate, is spread on a
the wavelength of the light. thin carbon support film. Upon drying, a uniform
Since it first became commercially available in electron-dense layer is formed. Where the protein
1939, the electron microscope has become one of the molecules lie, the phosphotungstate is excluded, giving
most important tools of cell biology.337,338 The practical an image of the protein molecule.
resolution is about 0.4 nm, but recent developments in Surfaces of cells, slices, or intact bacteria can be
scanning electron microscopy have resulted in resolu- coated with a deposit of platinum or carbon. The
tion of 0.14 nm.339 Of major importance was the devel- coating, when removed, provides a “negative”replica
opment around 1950 of microtomes and knives capable which can be examined in the microscope. Alterna-
of cutting thin (20 – 200 nm) sections of tissues embed- tively, a thin plastic replica can be made and can be
ded in plastic.340 A bacterium such as E. coli can be shadowed to reveal topography. In “freeze fracturing”
sliced into as many as 10 thin longitudinal slices (see and“freeze etching,” fresh tissue, which may contain
Fig. 1-4) and a eukaryotic cell of 10 µm diameter into glycerol to prevent formation of large ice crystals, is
100 slices. Serial sections can be examined to deter- frozen rapidly. Such frozen cells can often be revived;
mine three-dimensional structures. For some results hence, they may be regarded as still alive until the
see Bubel.341 moment that they are sliced! The frozen tissue is
If a slice of fresh (frozen) tissue is examined directly, placed in a vacuum chamber within which it is sliced
little is seen because most of the atoms found in cells or fractured with a cold knife. If desired, the sample
are of low atomic mass and scatter electrons weakly can be kept in the vacuum chamber at about –100°C
and uniformly. Therefore, thin sections must be for a short time, during which some water molecules
“stained’ with atoms of high atomic mass, e.g., by evaporate from the surface. The resultant etching
treatment with potassium permanganate or osmium reveals a fine structure of cell organelles and mem-
tetroxide. Tissues must also be “fixed” to prevent branes in sharp relief. After etching, a suitable replica
disruption of cell structures during the process of is made and examined (Fig. 1-15A and E). Fracturing
tends to take place through lipid
portions of cell membranes.
Small viruses, bacterial flagella,
ribosomes, and even molecules can
be seen by electron microscopy.
However, to obtain a clear image
in three dimensions requires a
computer-based technique of
image reconstruction or electron
microscope tomography, which
was developed initially by Aaron
Klug and associates.344– 349 A sam-
ple is mounted on a goniometer, a
Figure 3-17 Confocal micrograph showing a forty-micrometer stereo slice in device that allows an object to be
a 90-µm thick section of mouse cerebellum.330 Courtesy of A. Boyde. tilted at exact angles. Electron

--- Page 135 ---

G. Microscopy 131
micrographs are prepared with the sample untilted Light
and tilted in several directions at various angles, e.g.,
up to 90° in 10° increments. The micrographs are Hotodiode
digitized and a computer is used to reconstruct a
Lens
three-dimensional image.
Inelectron crystallography350micrographs of
two-dimensional crystalline arrays of molecules or
larger particles are prepared. A Fourier transform of Cantilever
the micrograph gives a diffraction pattern which can
be treated in a manner similar to that usual for X-ray
diffraction to give a three-dimensional image. An
important milestone in use of this technique was the
determination of the structure of bacteriorhodopsin
(Fig. 23-45) at 0.3-nm resolution. Bear in mind that
X-ray crystallography can also be viewed as a form of
microscopy. XYZ translator
Invention of the scanning tunneling microscope
(STM) by Binnig and Roher351– 353 initiated a new revo-
lution in microscopy. The STM and similar scanned
probe microscopes examine surfaces by moving a fine “O” ring Plexiglas
probe mounted in a piezoelectric x,y,z-scanner354 across
the surface to be examined. The tiny tungsten probe
of the STM is so fine that its tip may consist of a single
atom. When a small voltage is applied a minuscule
quantum mechanical tunnelling current flows across
Sample Liquid
the small gap between the probe and the surface and a
high-resolution image, sometimes at atomic resolution,
Figure 3-18 Schematic diagram of the atomic force micro-
is created from the recorded variation in current.354-359
scope.360 Courtesy of Paul Hansma.
The STM theoretically responds only to surfaces that
conduct electrons, but nonconducting samples have
been imaged at high humidity; presumably by con-
ductance of electrons or ions through the surface water
layer. The success of the STM spurred the development
of many other types of scanned probe microscopes.
Among these, the atomic force microscope (AFM;
Fig. 3-18) has been especially useful for biological
materials, including proteins and nucleic acids. The
AFM moves a fine-tipped stylus directly across the
sample surface or, alternatively, vibrates the probe
above the surface. The small up-and-down move-
ments of the stylus are recorded359– 366 and thereby
create a topographic or force-field map of the sample.
AFM images contain three-dimensional information
and can be used to view individual molecules (Fig.
3-19).367,367a Chemical force microscopy is sensitive
to adhesion and friction as a function of the interaction
between defined chemical groups on the tip and sam-
ple.368
An emerging field is force spectroscopy, in which
the AFM measures interaction forces between and
within individual molecules.369– 371a Under development
are NMR microscopes (Section I). There is continual
effort to see small objects more directly and more
clearly!
Figure 3-19 AMF images of cholera toxin364 (see also Box
11-A). Courtesy of Z. Shao.

--- Page 136 ---

132 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
tallography of hemoglobin. The project seemed hope-
H. X-ray and Neutron Diffraction
less at times, but in 1968, 31 years later, Perutz had
determined the structure of hemoglobin.383– 386
One of the most important techniques by which
If X-rays could be focused easily, could one build
we have learned bond lengths and angles and precise
an X-ray microscope that would permit the immediate
structures of small molecules is X-ray diffraction.
viewing of molecular structures? X-ray holograms at
Today, this technique, which involves measurements
the molecular level have been obtained.387,388 However,
of the scattering of X-rays by crystalline arrays of
currently the only practical X-ray microscope for protein
molecules, is being used with spectacular success to
structures involves the measurement of diffraction
study macromolecules of biochemical and medical
patterns created by the scattering of X-rays (or of neu-
importance.372– 378
trons) from the crystalline lattice. The details of this
X-rays were described by Röntgen in 1896 but
procedure can be found in other sources.372–375,378,389–390
there was uncertainty as to their wave nature.274 It
It is sufficient to point out here that a pattern of many
was not until 1912 that the wavelengths of X-rays had
been measured and it was recog-
nized that they were appropriate for
the use of X-rays in structure deter-
mination. Consider the fact that
with a conventional light micro-
scope we cannot distinguish two
small objects that are much closer
together than the distance represent-
ed by the wavelength of the light
with which we observe them. This
is about 460 nm for blue light. By
comparison the wavelength of the
copper Kα radiation, which is used
in protein crystallography, is 0.1542
nm entirely appropriate for seeing
the individual atoms of which mat-
ter is composed. Recognizing this,
W. L. Bragg in Cambridge, England,
in 1913 used X-ray diffraction to
establish the structures of NaCl,
KCl, and KBr in the crystalline state.
The science of X-ray crystallography
had been founded.379
In 1926, James Summer crystal-
lized the enzyme urease (Chapter 16)
and crystallization of other enzymes
soon followed.380 In 1934, J. B.
Bernal brought back to Cambridge
from Uppsala, Sweden, some crys-
Figure 3-20 An X-ray diffraction photograph such as was used to determine
tals of pepsin almost 2 mm long that
the structure of hemoglobin. This precession photograph was obtained from a
had been grown in T. Svedberg’s
crystal of human deoxyhemoglobin by rotating the crystal along two different
laboratory. Bernal and Crowfoot axes in a defined manner before a narrow X-ray beam. The film also was
showed that these delicate crystals, moved synchronously. The periodicity observed in the photograph is a result
which contained almost 50% water, of a diffraction phenomenon arising from the periodic arrangement of atoms
gave a sharp diffraction pattern in the crystal. The distances of the spots from the origin (center) are inversely
when they were protected by enclo- related to the distances between planes of atoms in the crystal. In this photo-
graph (which shows only two dimensions of the three-dimensional diffraction
sure in a narrow capillary tube
pattern) the spots at the periphery represent a spacing of 0.28 nm. If the
containing some of the mother
intensities of the spots are measured, and if the phases of the harmonic func-
liquor from which the crystals had
tions required for the Fourier synthesis can be assigned correctly, the structure
been grown.381,382 After this, diffrac-
can be deduced to a resolution of 0.28 nm from a set of patterns of this type.
tion patterns were obtained for In the case of human deoxyhemoglobin, a complete set of data would consist
many protein crystals, and in 1937 of about 16,000 spots. With modern equipment the resolution limit can be
Max Perutz chose for his thesis extended to better than 0.15 nm (or more than 100,000 unique spots).
work at Cambridge the X-ray crys- Photograph courtesy of Arthur Arnone.

--- Page 137 ---

H. X-ray and Neutron Diffraction 133
spots, such as that in Fig. 3-20, is obtained. In a typical of solvent through controlled evaporation.374,398 Am-
determination of a protein structure from 10,000 to monium sulfate and polyethylene glycol are two
several times that number of spots must be measured. commonly used precipitants. The presence of the
The needed information is contained in the coordinates neutral detergent β-octyl glucoside improves some
of the spots (i.e., in the angles through which the crystals.399 Droplets of protein solution mixed with
scattering occurs) and in the intensities of the spots. the precipitant are often suspended on microscope
The structure is obtained by a Fourier synthesis in cover glasses in small transparent wells or are placed in
which a large number of mathematical functions in depression plates within closed plastic boxes.374,400,401
the form of three-dimensional sinusoidal waves are In either case, a reservoir of a solution with a higher
summed. The wavelengths of these functions are concentration of precipitant is present in the same
determined by the positions of the spots in the diffrac- compartment. Water evaporates from the samples
tion pattern. The amplitudes of the waves are related into the larger reservoir, concentrating the protein
to the intensities of the spots.374 However, the waves and causing its crystallization. Crystals grow slightly
are not all in phase and the phases must be learned in better in a spacecraft than on Earth.402,403 Some pro-
some other way. This presents a difficult problem. teins, notably myosin from muscle, crystallize well
Mathematical methods have been devised that auto- only after reductive methylation of all lysine side
matically determine the phases for small molecules chains to dimethyllysine with formaldehyde and
and usually allow the structures to be established sodium borohydride (Eq. 3-34).278
quickly. For proteins it is more difficult. The next step is for a protein crystallographer to
In 1954, Perutz introduced the isomorphous mount a small perfect crystal in a closed silica capil-
replacement method for determining phases. In this lary tube and to use an X-ray camera to record diffrac-
procedure a heavy metal, such as mercury or platinum, tion patterns such as that in Fig. 3-20. These patterns
is introduced at one or more locations in the protein indicate how perfectly the crystal is formed and how
molecule. A favorite procedure is to use mercury well it diffracts X-rays. The patterns are also used to
derivatives that combine with SH groups. The resulting calculate the dimensions of the unit cell and to assign
heavy metal-containing crystals must be isomorphous the crystal to one of the seven crystal systems and
with the native, i.e., the molecules must be packed the one of the 65 enantiomorphic space groups. This
same and the dimensions of the crystal lattice must be provides important information about the relationship
the same. However, the presence of the heavy metal of one molecule to another within the unit cell of the
alters the intensities of the spots in the diffraction crystal. The unit cell (Fig. 3-21) is a parallelopiped
pattern and from these changes in intensity the phases
can be determined. Besides the solution to the phase
problem, another development that was absolutely
essential was the construction of large and fast com-
puters. It would have been impossible for Perutz to
determine the structure of hemoglobin in 1937, even
if he had already known how to use heavy metals to
determine phases.
The first protein structure to be learned was that of
myoglobin, which was established by Kendrew et al. in
1960.391– 393 That of the enzyme lysozyme was deduced
by Blake et al. in 1965.394 Since then, new structures
have appeared at an accelerating rate so that today we
know the detailed architecture of over 6000 different
proteins395 with about 300 distinctly different folding
patterns.396 New structures are being determined at
the rate of about one per day. X-ray diffraction has
also been very important to the study of naturally or
artifically oriented fibrous proteins397 and provided
the first experimental indications of the β structure of
proteins.
Suppose that you have isolated a new protein. Figure 3-21 Diagram showing an asymmetric unit as it
How can you learn its three-dimensional structure? might appear in a unit cell of space group P2 1 2 1 2 1 . This unit
cell has three pairs of nonintersecting twofold screw axes
The first step is crystallization of the protein, some-
which are marked by the shaded rods. These are designated
thing that a biochemist may be able to do. Crystalliza-
by arrows and the symbol. Two asymmetric units are related
tion is done in many ways, often by the slow diffusion
one to another by rotation around a twofold axis together
of one solution into another or by the slow removal
with translation by one-half the dimension of the unit cell.

--- Page 138 ---

134 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
whose sides are parallel to crystal-
lographic axes and which, by
translation in three dimensions,
gives rise to the entire crystal. The
unit cell must contain at least one
asymmetric unit, the smallest
unit of structure that lacks any
element of crystal symmetry. The
asymmetric unit may consist
of one or a small number of pro-
tein subunits.
In crystals of the triclinic
system all of the asymmetric units
are aligned in the same manner
and there are no axes of symmetry.
Monoclinic crystals have a single
twofold or dyad axis (see Fig. 7-
11). The unit cell might contain
two molecules related one to
another by the dyad or one dimer-
ic molecule with the dyad located
as in Fig. 7-11C. Orthorhombic
crystals have three mutually per-
Figure 3-22 Stereoscopic view of a section of the structure of cutinase from
pendicular twofold axes and the
the fungus Fusarium solani determined to a resolution of 0.10 nm. The three
unit cell is a rectangular solid.
amino acid residues shown are serine 120 (top), histidine 188, and aspartate
Trigonal, tetragonal, and hexago- 175 (lower left). The structure is presented as a contour map with a “wire
nal crystal systems have three, mesh” drawn at a “cutoff” level of density equal to 1 σ above the average,
four and sixfold axes of symmetry, where σ is the root mean square density of the entire map. The side chains
respectively, while the cubic crys- of these three residues constitute the “catalytic triad” in the active site of this
tal contains four threefold axes enzyme (see Chapter 12). At this resolution more than one conformation of a
group may often be seen. For example, the gamma oxygen (OG) of S120 is
along with diagonals of the cube
seen in two positions, the major one being toward His 188. When the map is
as well as two-fold axes passing
drawn with a lower contour level the N-H proton on His 188 that is hydrogen
through the faces (see Fig. 15-14).
bonded to Asp 175 can also be seen.410 Courtesy of Christian Cambillau.
Within each crystal system there
are several space groups. An exam-
ple is the orthorhombic space
group P2 2 2 , which is often met with small organic instrument that collects many reflections simulta-
1 1 1
molecules and proteins. In this space group the unit neously. There are some difficulties. For example,
cell contains three mutually perpendicular but nonin- during the long periods of irradiation needed to mea-
tersecting twofold screw axes (Fig. 3-21). The position sure the weak spots with a diffractometer the protein
of one molecule in the unit cell is related to the next by crystals decompose and must be replaced frequently.
both a 180° degree rotation about the twofold axes and Data collection may last for months. The newest
a translation of one-half the length of the unit cell. methods utilize more powerful X-ray sources and
There is such a screw axis for each of the three direc- oftensynchrotron radiation, which delivers very
tions.372 short and extremely intense pulses of X-rays and
The third step in the structure determination is allows data to be collected on very small well-formed
collection of the X-ray diffraction data. This may be crystals.404
done with a diffractometer in which a narrow colli- The fourth step is the preparation of isomorphous
mated pencil source of X-rays is aimed at the crystal crystals of heavy metal-containing derivatives. The
and the intensities and positions of the diffracted heavy metal may be allowed to react with the protein
beams are measured automatically. The computer- before crystallization or may be diffused into preformed
controlled diffractometer is able to measure the angles crystals. A variety of both cationic and anionic metal
to within less than one-hundredth of a degree. If complexes, even large Ta Br 2+ tantalum clusters,
6 12
sufficient time is allowed, very weak spots can be have been used.405 Two or more different heavy metal
counted. Today, diffractometers are more likely to be derivatives are often required for calculation of the
used for preliminary measurements, while the major phases. The heavy metal atoms must be present at
data collection is done with an area detector, an only a very small number of locations in the unit cell.

--- Page 139 ---

H. X-ray and Neutron Diffraction 135
An entire data set must be collected for each of these bacteria using recombinant DNA procedures. Crystals
derivatives. The evaluation of the phases from these are prepared both with protein enriched in Se and with-
data is a complex mathematical process which usually out enrichment. In some ways it is better to incorporate
involves the calculation first of a “difference Patterson tellurium (127Te) in telluromethionine.409
projection.”406 This is derived by Fourier transforma- In the fifth step of an X-ray structure determination
tion of the differences between the scattering intensities theelectron density map is calculated using the inten-
from the native and heavy atom-containing crystals. sities and phase information. This map can be thought
The Patterson map is used to locate the coordinates of as a true three-dimensional image of the molecule
of the heavy metal atoms which are then refined and revealed by the X-ray microscope. It is usually dis-
used to compute the phases for the native protein. played as a stereoscopic view on a computer graphics
Alternative methods of solving the phase problem system (Fig. 3-22). It is also often prepared in the form
are also used now. When a transition metal such as Fe, of a series of transparencies mounted on plastic sheets.
Co, or Ni is present in the protein, anomolous scatter- Each sheet represents a layer, perhaps 0.1 nm thick,
ing of X-rays at several wavelengths (from synchro- with contour lines representing different levels of
tron radiation) can be used to obtain phases. Many electron density.
protein structures have been obtained using this Using the electron density map a three-dimensional
multiple wavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD model of the protein can be built. For years, the cus-
phasing) method.404,407,408 Selenocysteine is often tomary procedure was to construct a model at a scale
incorporated into a protein that may be produced in of 2 cm = 0.1 nm using an optical comparator, but
A
Figure 3-23 (A) Stereoscopic
α-carbon plot of the cystolic
aspartate aminotransferase
dimer viewed down its dyad
symmetry axis. Bold lines are
used for one subunit (subunit 1)
and dashed lines for subunit 2.
The coenzyme pyridoxal 5'-
phosphate (Fig. 3-24) is seen
most clearly in subunit 2 (center
left). (B) Thirteen sections,
spaced 0.1 nm apart, of the
2-methylaspartate difference B
electron density map superim-
posed on the α-carbon plot
shown in (A). The map is con-
toured in increments of ± 2σ
(the zero level omitted), where
σ = root mean square density of
the entire difference map. Posi-
tive difference density is shown
as solid contours and negative
difference density as dashed
contours. The alternating series
of negative and positive differ-
ence density features in the
small domain of subunit 1
(lower right) show that the
binding of L-2-methylaspartate
between the two domains of this
subunit induces a right-to-left
movement of the small domain.
(Continues)

--- Page 140 ---

136 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
crystallographers now use computer graphics systems. tein is known, further experiments are usually done
The three-dimensional image of the electron density using the X-ray diffraction technique. Since protein
map and a computer-generated atomic model are super- crystals contain channels of solvent between the
imposed on the computer screen. An example is shown packed molecules, it is usually possible to diffuse
in Fig. 3-22. When the superposition has been com- small molecules into the crystal. These may be sub-
pleted, the coordinates of all atoms are present in the strates, inhibitors, or allosteric effectors. Diffraction
memory of the computer. data are collected after diffusion of the small molecules
The final step in the structure determination is into the crystal and a difference electron density
refinement using various mathematical methods. map may be calculated. This may show exactly where
From the coordinates of the atoms in the model the those molecules were bound. An example is shown in
expected diffraction pattern is computed and is com- Fig. 3-23. Sometimes difference maps not only show
pared with that actually observed. The differences the binding to an enzyme of a substrate or other small
between predicted and observed density are squared molecule but also reveal conformational changes in
and summed. The sum of the squares constitutes an proteins. Such is the case for Fig. 3-23, which shows
error function which is then minimized by moving the binding of α-methylaspartate, an inhibitor that
the various atoms in the model short distances while behaves initially like a substrate and goes part way
keeping bond lengths, angles, and van der Waals through the reaction sequence for aspartate amino-
distances within acceptable limits and recalculating transferase until further reaction is blocked by the
the error function. This complex “refinement” pro- methyl group. This difference map also shows that
cedure must be repeated literally hundreds of thou- the part of the protein to the left of the binding site in
sands of times with every part of the structure being the figure has moved.411 Using the X-ray data it was
varied. Structures at very high resolution (0.07– 0.1 possible subsequently to deduce the nature of the
nm) may reveal multiple positions for hydrogen- conformational change.
bonded side chains410a,b as well as hydrogen atoms Examination of the effect of temperature on the
(Fig. 3-22) and even bonding electrons.410b diffraction pattern of a protein can give direct informa-
Once the three-dimensional structure of the pro- tion about the mobility of different parts of the mole-
C
Figure 3-23 (Cont.)
(C) Nine sections, spaced
0.1 nm apart, of a part of
the 2-methylaspartate
difference map superim-
posed on the atomic
model shown in (A) and
(D). The coenzyme is
shown as the internal
aldimine with Lys 258
(see Fig. 14-6, 14-10). The
positive and negative
contours on the two sides
of the coenzyme ring
indicate that the coen-
zyme tilts over to form
the external aldimine
D when substrates react.413
(D) Superimposed
structure of the active site
of the enzyme in its free
form as in (A) (bold lines)
and the refined structure
of the α-methylaspartate
complex, (dashed lines).411
This illustrates the tilting
of the coenzyme ring,
which is also shown in
Eq. 14-39 and Fig. 14-10.
Courtesy of Arthur Arnone
and Sangkee Rhee.

--- Page 141 ---

I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 137
cules.412 This complements information obtainable in higher concentrations. Newer techniques allow use of
solution from NMR spectra. a volume as small as 5 nl and containing < 0.1 nmol of
Because hydrogen atoms contain only one electron, sample.429 For many years progress in biochemical
and therefore scatter X-rays very weakly, they are application of NMR was slow, but a dramatic increase
usually not seen at all in X-ray structures of proteins. in the power of the spectrometers, driven in great
However, neutrons are scattered strongly by hydrogen measure by the revolution in computer technology,
atoms and neutron diffraction is a useful tool in has made NMR spectroscopy a major force in the
protein structure determination.414,415 It has been used determination of structures and functions of proteins
to locate tightly bonded protons that do not exchange and nucleic acids.430,431
with2H O as well as bound water (2H O).
2 2
The development of synchrotron radiation as an
X-ray source404,416– 418 has permitted accumulation of 1. Basic Principles of NMR Spectroscopy
data for electron density difference maps in less than
1 s and it is expected that such data can eventually be The basis of NMR spectroscopy lies in the absorp-
acquired in ~ 1 ps.419– 421 If a suitable photochemical tion of electromagnetic radiation at radiofrequencies
reaction can be initiated by a picosecond laser flash, a by atomic nuclei.426,427,432– 437 All nuclei with odd mass
substrate within a crystalline enzyme can be watched numbers (e.g., 1H,13C,15N,17O,19F, and 31P), as well as
as it goes through its catalytic cycle. An example is those with an even mass number but an odd atomic
the release of inorganic phosphate ions from a “caged number, have magnetic properties. Absorption of a
phosphate” (Eq. 3-49) and study of the reaction of the quantum of energy E = hν occurs only when the nuclei
released phosphate with glycogen phosphorylase are in the strong magnetic field of the NMR spectrom-
(Chapter 12).422,423 eter and when the frequency ν of the applied electro-
magnetic radiation is
appropriate for “resonance”
O
CH3
O P O–
CH3 CH3 with the nucleus being ob-
C H OH H+ C O P O O– HPO4 2– C O s “ e 5 r 0 v 0 e -m d. e g In a h th e e rt w z” i d N e M ly R u s s e p d ec-
+ O– hν + O– OH k = 105s-1 trometers the liquid helium-
N ~315 nm N 20°C, pH 7 NO cooled superconducting
O– electromagnet has a field
O
“Caged phosphate” (3-49) strength of 11.75 tesla (T). In
this field a proton resonates at
~ 500 megahertz (MHz) and
However, caged substrates usually must diffuse nuclei of 31P, 13C, and 15N at ~ 202, 125, and 50 MHz,
some distance before reacting, so very rapid events respectively. At 500 MHz the energy of a quantum is
cannot be studied. An alternative approach is to diffuse onlyE = 3.3 x 10–33 x 108 J = 0.2 J mol–1, more than four
substrates into crystals at a low temperature at which orders of magnitude less than the average energy of
reaction is extremely slow but a substrate may become thermal motion of molecules (3.7 kJ mol–1). Thus, the
seated in an active site ready to react. In favorable spin transitions induced in the NMR spectrometer
cases such “frozen” Michaelis complexes may be heated have no significant effect on the chemical properties of
by a short laser pulse to a temperature at which the molecules.
reaction is faster and the steps in the reaction may be The resonance frequency ν at which absorption
observed by X-ray diffraction.424,425 occurs in the spectrometer is given by Eq. 3-50, where
H is the strength of the external magnetic field, µ is
o
the magnetic moment of the nucleus being investigated,
I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) andh is Planck’s constant. The basis for NMR spectros-
copy lies in the fact that nuclei in different positions in
Organic chemists and biochemists alike have long a molecule resonates at slightly different frequencies.
relied on NMR spectroscopy to assist in identification In a protein each one of the hundreds or thousands
and determination of structures of small compounds. of protons resonate at its own frequency. With older
Most students have some familiarity with this tech- NMR instruments a spectrum at the constant magnetic
nique and practical information is available in many field H can be obtained by varying the frequency and
o
places.426– 428 Measurements can be done on solids, observing the values at which absorption occurs, much
liquids, or gases but are most often done on solutions as is done for ultraviolet, visible, and infrared spectra
held in special narrow NMR tubes. Volumes of samples (Chapter 23). With newer pulsed NMR spectrometers
are typically 0.5 ml (for a 1–5-mM solution containing the measurement is done differently but the spectra
1–5µmol of protein) but less for small molecules and
ν =µH /h (3-50)
o

--- Page 142 ---

138 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
look the same. The higher the magnetic field, the often use 2H O as solvent and the water-soluble sodium
2
greater the variation in resonance frequency and the 3-trimethylsilyl 1-propane sulfonate (DSS or Tier’s salt)
higher the sensitivity. The most powerful commercial as a standard. Its position is insignificantly different
NMR spectrometers currently available operate at from that of TMS. For NMR spectra measured in 2H O,
2
about 750 MHz for 1H and a few higher frequency the“pD” of the medium is sometimes indicated. It
instruments have been built. has often been taken as the pH meter reading plus 0.4.
Theproton NMR spectrum of the coenzyme However, because of uncertainty about the meaning of
pyridoxal phosphate in 2H O is shown in Fig. 3-24 as pD, most workers cite the apparent pH measured with
2
obtained with a 60-MHz spectrometer. Four things can a glass electrode and standardized against aqueous
be measured from such a spectrum: (1) the intensity buffers.438 It is important to describe how the mea-
(area under the band). In a proton NMR spectrum, surement was made when publishing results.
areas are usually proportional to the numbers of
equivalent protons giving rise to absorption bands; Band widths. The narrowness of a band in an
(2) the chemical shift, the difference in frequency NMR spectrum is limited by the Heisenberg uncer-
between the peak observed for a given proton and a tainty principle, which states that ∆E x ∆t = h/2π,
peak of some standard reference compound. In Fig. where h is Planck’s constant, ∆E is the uncertainty in
3-24 the reference peak is at the right edge; (3) the the energy, and ∆t is the lifetime of the magnetically
width at half-height (in hertz), a quantity that can excited state. Since E = hν for electromagnetic radia-
provide information about molecular motion and tion,E is directly proportional to the width of the
about chemical exchange; and (4) coupling constants absorption band (customarily measured at one-half
which measure interactions between nearby magnetic its full height). The magnetic nucleus is well shielded
nuclei. These are extremely important to the determi- from external influences and the lifetime of its excited
nation of structures of both small and large molecules. state tends to be long. Hence, ∆ν is small, often
With a magnetic field of H = 11.75 T and a 500- amounting to less than 0.2 Hz. This fact is very favor-
o
MHz oscillator, the positions of proton resonances in able for the success of high-resolution proton magnetic
organic compounds are spread over a range of ~10,000 resonance. However, bands are often much broader
Hz. This is 20 parts per million (ppm) relative to 500 for large macromolecules.
MHz. Positions of individual resonances are usually
given in ppm and are always measured in terms of a The chemical shift. In a molecule such as TMS,
shift from the resonance position of some standard the electrons surrounding the nuclei “shield” the
substance. For protons this is most often tetramethyl- nucleus so that it does not experience the full external
silane (TMS), an inert substance that can be added magnetic field. For this reason, absorption occurs at a
directly to the sample in its glass tube. Biochemists high frequency (high energy). Protons that are bound
4.75
O H 1H2HO
O – H C
– H 4'
O
P 5’C O –
O O
2.45
6 CH
2' 3
H +N1 CH3
2H
Figure 3-24 The 60-MHz
0
proton magnetic resonance
5.11
7.71 J=6.4 DSS spectrum of pyridoxal 5'-
10.42 6-H
phosphate at neutral pH
—CHO CH
2 (apparent pH = 6.65). The
SSB SSB internal standard is DSS.
Chemical shifts in parts per
million are indicated beside
10.0 8.0 6.0 4.0 2.0 0.0
the peaks. Spectrum courtesy
δ (ppm)
of John Likos.

--- Page 143 ---

I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 139
to an atom deficient in electrons (because of attach- in easily measured differences in the energy of the
ment to electron withdrawing atoms or groups) are NMR transition under consideration. This spin–spin
deshielded. The greater the deshielding, the further interaction (coupling) leads to a splitting of NMR bands
downfield from the TMS position is the NMR peak. of protons into two or more closely spaced bands. The
The magnitude of this chemical shift may be stated ethyl group often appears in NMR spectra as a “quartet”
in hertz, but it is most often expressed in ppm as δ of four evenly spaced peaks that arise from the CH
2
(Eq. 3-51). The value of δ is the shift in frequency group and a triplet of peaks arising from the CH pro-
3
relative to frequency of the oscillator in parts per million tons. Protons attached to the same carbon (geminal
and is independent of the field strength. It still depends protons), and in similar environments, do not ordinarily
upon use of a particular reference standard which split each other’s peaks, while the protons on the
must be stated when a δ value is given. In the spec- neighboring carbon do.
trum shown in Fig. 3-24, the methyl protons appear Thecoupling constantJ is the difference in hertz
2.45 ppm below the DSS peak but still at a relatively between the successive peaks in a multiplet. It is a
high field. Characteristic chemical shift ranges for field-independent quantity and the same no matter
other protons (Table 3-3) extend to ~20 ppm. what the frequency of the spectrometer. In Fig. 3-24
the peak of the methylene protons is split by 1H–31P
coupling, with a value of J ~ 6.4 Hz. While spin–spin
∆ν(Hz) × 106
δ(ppm) = coupling is most pronounced when magnetic nuclei
ν(Hz)of oscillator (3-51)
are close together in a structure, the effect can some-
times be transmitted through up to five covalent
Aromatic rings lead to strong deshielding of at- bonds. The technique of double irradiation or spin
tached protons because of a ring current induced in decoupling can be used to detect spin coupling. The
the circulating π electrons. Thus, in Fig. 3-24 the peaks sample is irradiated at the resonance frequency of one
of the methylene protons which are adjacent to the of the nuclei involved in the coupling, while the spec-
aromatic ring occur at 5.10 and 5.12 ppm. The 6-H, trum is observed in the frequency region of the other
which is bound directly to the ring, is more strongly nucleus of the coupled pair. Under these conditions
deshielded and appears at 7.71 ppm. The hydrogen the multiplet collapses into a singlet and the mutual
of the aldehyde groups is deshielded as a result of a coupling of the two nuclei is established. The cou-
similar“diamagnetic electronic circulation” in the pling can be seen directly in appropriate two-dimen-
carbonyl group. Its peak is even further downfield at sional NMR spectra.
10.4 ppm. Ring current and other effects on chemical The coupling constant between two vicinal protons
shifts are important in NMR spectroscopy of proteins. which are attached to adjacent carbon atoms (or other
Aromatic proton resonances sometimes stand out atoms) depends upon the torsion angle.
because they have been shifted far downfield. Ring
current effects on chemical shifts can be predicted quite
accurately if three-dimensional structures are known.439 H φ' H'
Additionally, computer programs are available for
C C
predicting them.440– 443
Hydrogen bonding has a very large effect on the
chemical shift of protons. The resonance of a strongly
hydrogen-bonded proton is usually shifted downfield
from its position in non-hydrogen-bonding media. TheKarplus equation (Eq. 3-52) relatesJ to the
This is especially true for hydrogen bonds to charged torsion angle φ’ (so labeled to distinguish it from pep-
groups, e.g., the NH of a histidine or tryptophan side tide torsion angle φ; Fig. 2-8).
chain hydrogen bonded to a carboxylate group, a
situation often met in the active sites of proteins.
The chemical shift of 13C in the carboxyl group is also J A cos2φ’ + B cos φ’ + C (3-52)
H,H’
affected.444,445 While ring current shifts can be pre-
dicted quite well, it is much more difficult to predict
the total chemical shift.446,447 This equation was predicted on theoretical grounds,
but the constants, A,B, and C are empirical.450 Other
Scalar coupling (J coupling). The energy of the forms of the equation, some of them simplified, have
spin transition of a hydrogen nucleus is strongly influ- also been proposed.451 The Karplus relationship is
enced by the local presence of other magnetic nuclei, often used to estimate time-averaged torsion angles
e.g., other protons that are covalently attached to the in peptides. For a CαH–NH torsion angle the para-
same or an adjacent atom. These neighboring protons metersA,B and C of Eq. 3-52 are ~ 6.4, 1.4, and 1.9,
can be in either of the two spin states, a fact that results respectively. For a CαH – CβH they are ~ 9.5, 1.6, and

--- Page 144 ---

140 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
1.8, respectively.452 Coupling constants between 1H rise to a single peak. Even so, 13C NMR spectroscopy
and13C or 15N are of importance in determination of was not practical until pulsed Fourier transform (FT)
three-dimensional structure of proteins.453 spectrometers were developed (Section 2).
The nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) is the Chemical shifts in 13C spectra are often 200 ppm
result of transfer of magnetization from one nucleus or more downfield relative to TMS. The effects of
to a nearby nucleus directly through space rather than substituents attached to a carbon atom are often addi-
viaJ-coupling.427,454 This was observed first as a result tive when two or more substituents are attached to the
of irradiation of a resonance in a one-dimensional same atom.457,458 It is often necessary (but costly) to
spectrum resulting in an increased intensity of the prepare compounds enriched in 13C beyond the natural
resonance of the nearby nucleus. Magnetization trans- abundance. For proteins this may be done by growing
fer can occur from a given nucleus to one or more an organism on a medium containing [13C]glucose or a
nearby nuclei. Each such transfer that is detected is single amino acid enriched in 13C.459,460 Using metabo-
usually referred to simply as an NOE. For an NOE lites enriched in 13C, it is also possible to observe
to be observable the two nuclei must be very close metabolism of living tissues directly. For example,
together, < 0.5 nm (5 Å). The strength of the magneti- glycogen synthesis from 13C-containing glucose has
zation transfer falls off approximately as the sixth been observed in a human leg muscle using a wide-
power of the interatomic distance. Consider two bore magnet and surface coils for transmitting and
hydrogen atoms, both tightly hydrogen-bonded to receiving.461 This topic is discussed further in Box 17-C.
an intervening oxygen atom, e.g., of a carboxylate or
phosphate group. The expected H – H distance would Nitrogen - 15. Despite difficulties associated
be ~ 0.3 nm and a strong NOE between them would be with low natural abundance (0.37%) and low sensitivity,
anticipated. Two nonbonded hydrogen atoms (e.g., on 15N NMR is practical and with isotopically enriched
methyl groups of amino acid side chains) can be as samples has become very important. Proteins with a
close together as 0.24 nm at van der Waals contact and high content of 15N can be produced easily and inex-
could show a very strong NOE. However, contact is pensively from cloned genes in bacterial plasmids.
rarely this close in proteins unless in a hydrogen bond. For example, cells of E. coli can be grown on a minimal
medium containing [15N] NH Cl. Since 13C can also be
4
0.28 nm 0.28 nm introduced in a similar way it is possible to incorporate
both isomers simultaneously. Production of uniformly
labeled protein containing 15N and / or 13C provides
–
N H O H N the basis for multidimensional isotope-edited spectra
necessary for protein structure determination (next
section) and for study of tautomerization of histidine
~0.3 nm
rings (Eq. 2-6).460,462– 464 15N chemical shifts of groups
in proteins are spread over a broad range (Table 3-3).465
Phosphorus - 31. NMR spectroscopy using 31P,
2. Nuclei Other than Hydrogen the ordinary isotope of phosphorus, also has many
uses.466 Application of 31P NMR to living tissues has
Deuterium (2H). The natural abundance is very been extraordinarily informative467 and is dealt with in
low so that use of 2H-labeled compounds is practical Chapter 6. The many phosphorus nuclei in nucleotides,
for study of metabolism, e.g., for following an 2H label coenzymes, and phosphorylated metabolites and pro-
in glucose into products of fermentation455 or in mam- teins are all suitable objects of investigation by NMR
malian blood flow.456 Deuterium NMR has been used techniques.
extensively to study lipid bilayers (Chapter 8).
Fluorine - 19. Although not abundant in nature,
Carbon - 13. Use of 13C in NMR developed 19F gives an easily detected NMR signal and can be
slowly because of the low natural abundance of this incorporated in place of hydrogen atoms into many
isotope. Another complication was the occurrence of biochemical compounds including proteins.468,469 In
13C–1H coupling involving the many protons normally one study genetic methods were used to place 3-fluoro-
present in organic compounds. The latter problem was tyrosine separately into eight positions in the lac repres-
solved by the development of wide-band proton sor protein (Chapter 29).470 Measurements of 19F NMR
decoupling (noise decoupling). With a natural abun- spectra were used to study domain movement. Active
dance of only 1.1%, 13C is rarely present in a molecule site groups of enzymes can be modified to incorporate
at adjacent positions. Thus, 13C–13C coupling does 19F.471 Binding of fluorinated substrates can be stud-
not introduce complexities and in a noise-decoupled ied.472 Nontoxic 19F-containing compounds are useful
natural abundance spectrum each carbon atom gives as intracellular pH indicators, the NMR spectrometer

--- Page 145 ---

I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 141
serving as the pH meter (Box 6-A).473,474 An atom of reporter that can replace Zn2+ (no magnetic moment)
fluorine attached to an aromatic ring is highly and in active sites of many enzymes and in nonenzymatic
predictibly sensitive to inductive effects of substituents systems as well;484 Tl, replacing K+ in enzyme binding
in the para position to the fluorine.475 For example, sites;485 17O, study of dynamics of protein hydration;486
fluorine at the 6-position in pyridoxal phosphate (Fig. and77Se, observation of acetylchymotrypsin interme-
14-4) can be observed in enzymes and reports changes diate.487
in coenzyme structure.476,477
Some other nuclei. Here are a few reported uses 3. Fourier Transform Spectrometers and
of NMR on other nuclei. 3He, binding into little cavities Two-Dimensional NMR
in fullerenes;47811B, binding of boronic acids to active
sites;47923Na, measurement of intracellular [Na+];480– 482 Although NMR spectroscopy was widely used by
35Cl and 37Cl, binding to serum albumin;483 113Cd, the 1950s it was revolutionized by two developments,
pioneered by Richard Ernst in the mid 1960s and
1970s.488 The first of these was pulsed Fourier trans-
TABLE 3-3 form (FT) spectroscopy, which permits rapid accumu-
Approximate Chemical Shift Ranges in 1H- and in lation of high-resolution spectra. In an FT NMR
15N- NMR Spectra spectrometer a strong pulse of radiofrequency (RF)
radiation is delivered to the sample over a period of
a few microseconds and its effects are observed at all
Group 1H chemical shift 15N chemical shift
frequencies simultaneously. Although 1– 2 or more
(ppm from TMS) (ppm from liquid NH )
3 seconds must be allowed before the next pulse is
delivered, one complete NMR spectrum is obtained
–CH 0–4.0
3
with each pulse. Often the results of hundreds, thou-
–CH 2 – 1.1–4.4 sands, or even hundreds of thousands of pulses are
added to provide greater sensitivity. With good tem-
–CH 2.4–5
Peptide αH perature control this may be accomplished over periods
random coila 3.9–5.0 of minutes to days.489,490
–OHb ~ 5–6
Free induction decay. The strong exciting RF
H pulse is delivered with an orientation at right angles
C C 5–8 to that of the static field H of the magnet and whose
o
direction defines the z axis. As a result of this pulse,
–NH 31– 37
2 the magnetization of a nucleus is tilted away from the
NH z axis and precesses around the z axis at its resonance
(Larmor) frequency, which is ~500 MHzfor 1H in a
Peptide 7–12 103 – 142
500-MHzspectrometer. The frequency that is measured
Aromatic H 7–9 is actually a difference from the “carrier frequency” of
the RF pulse. The precessing magnetization of the
Imidazole
Cε1–H ~7.7 nuclei has a component in the xy plane which induces
Cδ2–H ~7.0 an electrical signal in the coil of the NMR probe which
N–H ~10 165 – 180 defines the y axis. This signal, which contains the
Larmor frequencies of all of the nuclei of a given ele-
Imidazolium
ment, is recorded as a function of time over a period of
Cε1–H ~8.7
a few seconds. The signal decays away exponentially.
Cδ2–H ~7.4
However, this curve of free induction decay (FID) is
N–H 10–18
not smooth but contains within it all of the Larmor
–CHO 9.4–10.4 frequencies. If enough points (perhaps 500 in a 2-s
Aldehyde acquisition) are recorded and stored in the computer’s
memory, Fourier transformation of the data will pro-
–COOH 11.3–12.2
duce the frequency-dependent NMR spectrum.489,490
Indole NH ~10 130 – 145 Relaxation times T and T . When a very strong
1 2
pulse of electromagnetic radiation is applied in the
Guanidinium
–NηΗ 2 69–77 NMR spectrometer, virtually all of the nuclei are
–Nε H 31–37 placed in the magnetically excited state. If another
pulse were applied immediately, little energy would
a See Wishart et al.448 be absorbed because the system is saturated. In the
b See Linderstrøm-Lang449

--- Page 146 ---

142 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
older“continuous-wave” NMR spectrometers, the dipoles are close enough together to lead to relaxation.
energy is always kept small so that little saturation In the usual solvents at room temperature, τ is of
c
occurs. However, in FT NMR instruments, the strong the order of 10–12 to 10–10 s. Thus, relaxation rates in
pulses lead to a high degree of saturation. Application solutions are considerably faster than the frequencies
of repeated pulses would produce no useful information of radiation absorbed in the NMR spectrometer (~ 108
were it not for the fact that the excited nuclei soon s–1). Relaxation is relatively ineffective and T and T
1 2
relax back to their equilibrium energy distribution. are usually large and equal. Bands remain sharp. As
Relaxation occurs through interactions of the nuclei the correlation time increases (as happens, for example,
with fluctuating magnetic fields in the environment. if the viscosity is increased), T and T decrease with T
1 2 1
For organic molecules in solution the fluctuations that reaching a minimum when τ ~v, the frequency of the
c
are most often effective in bringing about relaxation absorbed radiation. Lines are broadened and hyper-
are the result of moving electrical dipoles in the imme- fine lines (from coupling between nuclei) cannot be
diate vicinity. Even so, relaxation of protons in water resolved. As τ is increased further, T reaches a con-
c 2
requires seconds. stant low value, while T rises again. NMR measure-
1
Relaxation of nuclear magnetic states is character- ments can be made in the region where τ exceeds ν,
c
ized by two relaxation times. The longitudinal or spin- a circumstance that is favored by the use of high-
lattice relaxation timeT measures the rate of relax- frequency spectrometers. On the other hand, in fluids
1
ation of the net magnetic vector of the nuclei in the it is more customary to work in the range of “extreme
direction of H . The transverse or spin–spin relax- motional narrowing” at low values of τ . Both T and
o c 1
ation timeT measures the relaxation in the xyplane T rise as the mobility of the molecules increases.
2 2
perpendicular to the direction of H . The two relax- A limitation of use of NMR measurements of
o
ation times can be measured independently. In general, proteins comes from the increase in tumbling time
T < T . For solids, T is quite short (~ 10–5 s) whereas with increasing size of the molecules. Since 1/τ is
2 1 2 r
relaxation times of seconds are observed in solutions. often the most important term in the relaxation rate
This lengthening of the lifetime of the excited state in constant, only small proteins of mass < 20 kDa give
going from solid to liquid leads to a narrowing of very sharp bands. Nevertheless, usable spectra are
absorption lines and explains why NMR bands in often obtainable on proteins ten times this size.
liquids are often narrow. However, an increase in A practical problem in 13C NMR arises from slow
viscosity or a loss of fluidity in a membrane leads to relaxation (long T ). Partial saturation is attained and
1
broadening. signal intensities are reduced for those carbon atoms
How can T and T be measured? T for fluids can for which relaxation is especially ineffective. Relax-
2 1 2
often be estimated from the width of the band ∆ν at ation times can be measured separately for each carbon
half-height (Eq. 3-53). However, pulsed NMR methods atom in a molecule and can yield a wealth of informa-
are usually employed, the measurement of T being tion about the segmental motion of groups within a
1
especially easy. molecule. Although the relationships between relax-
ation times and molecular motion are complex, they
T 2 ≈ 1π∆ν (3-53) are often relatively simple for 13C. Carbon atoms are
usually surrounded by attached hydrogen atoms, and
An attempt is often made to relate T and T to dipole–dipole interactions with these hydrogen atoms
1 2
the molecular dynamics of a system. For this purpose cause most of the nuclear relaxation. For a carbon
a relationship is sought between T or T and the atom attached to N equivalent protons in a molecule
1 2
correlation time (cid:1) of the nuclei under investigation. undergoing rapid tumbling, Eq. 3-55 holds. Where
c
The correlation time is the time constant for exponen- h = h/2π and γ and γ are the magnetogyric ratios of
C H
tial decay of the fluctuations in the medium that are carbon and hydrogen nuclei.
responsible for relaxation of the magnetism of the
nuclei. In general, 1/τ can be thought of as a rate
c Nh2γ 2γ 2τ
constant made up of the sum of all the rate constants 1T ≈ c H eff
for various independent processes that lead to relax- 1 r6 (3-55)
ation. One of the most important of these (1/τ ) is for
1
molecular tumbling. This equation permits a calculation of an effective
correlation time τ for each carbon atom.491 T and T
eff 1 2
1τ ≈ (3k T) 4πηr3 (3-54) can also be evaluated for individual 15N or 13C nuclei
1 B in labeled proteins.491
This equation is closely related to that of rotational Two-dimensional and multidimensional NMR
diffusion (Eq. 9-35). Another term is the reciprocal of spectra. Proteins have such complex NMR spectra that,
theresidence timeτ , the mean time that a pair of except for small regions at the upfield and downfield
m

--- Page 147 ---

I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 143
ends (see Fig. 3-26A), it is impossible to interpret one-
dimensional spectra. A solution to this problem came
from the development by Jeener, Ernst, and Freeman
of methods of displaying NMR spectra in two dimen-
sions.428,490,492,493 All two-dimensional and multidimen-
sional NMR methods make use of one basic procedure:
After the initial RF pulse, a second or a series of subse-
quent RF pulses are introduced. This is done before
the nuclei have had time to relax completely. The time
t from the initial pulse to the second pulse is called
1
theevolution period and allows accumulation of
information about NOEs or J- coupling, whether homo-
nuclear (e.g. 1H–1H or 13C–13C) or heteronuclear (e.g.,
1H–13C or 1H–15N).
Two-dimensional spectra usually require hours or
days of acquisition because separate FIDs are collected
3
COSY
4
5
7
8
9
NOESY
8 7
ppm
mpp
for a series of many different values of t . This provides
1
a second timescale for the experiment. The second
pulse is often used to rotate the directions of magneti-
zation of the nuclei that are being observed from the
xy plane into the yz plane but with the z component at
180° to the Ho vector. One very important type of two-
dimensional plot is the NOESY(NOE spectroscopy)
spectrum, which detects NOEs between all excited
nuclei that are close enough together (Fig. 3-25B). The
transfer of magnetization occurs during a mixing
time∆, which follows the second pulse. For a protein
∆ may be 25 – 300 ms. A third 90° pulse returns the z
components of the magnetization to be parallel with
they axis and the FID is collected over the period t .
2
The amplitude of the resonances detected is modulat-
ed by the frequencies that existed during the evolution
A 55 58 B
10 5 1
35
50 45
30
40
15
20
25
Figure 3-25 (A) Alpha-carbon plot of the
structure of ribosomal protein L30 from E. coli
as deduced by NMR spectroscopy and model
building. (B) Combined COSY-NOESY dia-
gram for ribosomal protein L30 used for eluci-
dation of d connectivities (see Fig. 3-27). The
NN
upper part of the diagram represents the finger-
print region of a COSY spectrum recorded for
the protein dissolved in H O. The sequential
2
assignments of the crosspeaks is indicated. The
lower part of the diagram is part of a NOESY
spectrum in H O. The d “walks” are indicat-
ed by : (→—) S 2 11-A12; (— NN ) H19 to L26; (- - - -)
I43 to S51; (- - - -) G32 to H33; (——) F52 to 9
V54. From van de Ven and Hilbers.494

--- Page 148 ---

144 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
period. After Fourier analysis436,490 A Solvent Solvent
a two-dimensional plot with two
Amides and aromatics
frequency axes is generated and is
usually displayed as a contour plot.
Along the diagonal of Fig. 3-25B are
N-CH
3
δ-CH
3
peaks representing the one-dimen-
sional spectrum. All of the peaks off
of the diagonal are NOEs which can Trp CHa’s
be related back to the peaks on the Indole
NH’s
diagonal as shown by the horizontal
and vertical lines. ∆3-Pro
A second important two-dimen-
sional method is correlation spec-
troscopy (COSY), in which the
pairs of off-diagonal peaks result
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
from spin–spin coupling. A related δ (ppm)
method called TOCSY provides
correlations that extend through B
more than three bonds. The COSY
0.0
plot in Fig. 3-26B is for the synthetic
Cosy
cyclic decapeptide cyclo-(∆3-Pro –D- Sulfolane
p-Cl-Phe–D-Trp – Ser – Tyr –D-Trp – N-
Me-Leu– Arg – Pro –β-Ala). It was
obtained in six hours on a 500-MHZ 2.0
instrument. The region marked I
reveals couplings of protons on α-
carbons to those on adjacent β car-
bons within the same residue (Jαβ;
4.0
Fig. 3-27) and other couplings with-
I
in the side chain. Each amino acid
has a characteristic pattern. From
PPM
careful study of this region it is IV
possible to correlate each α-H reso- 6.0
nance with a particular amino acid
side chain. However, some residues
are difficult to distinguish, e.g., His,
Trp, Phe, and Tyr have similar Jαβ V
8.0
values. Region II of Fig. 3-26B
II
reveals connectivities of α and β
hydrogens to N-H protons in the
7– 9 ppm region. Each α-H is cou-
pled to the N-H of the same residue III 10.0
(Jα , Fig. 3-27). A section of a COSY
H
plot is also shown in Fig. 3-25B and
10.0 8.0 6.0 4.0 2.0 0.0
indicates how resonances can be
related to those in the NOESY plot PPM
made on the same sample.
Of great importance in the
Figure 3-26 Proton NMR spectra of a cyclic decapeptide analog of the gona-
determination of protein structures
dotropin-releasing hormone in the solvent sulfolane at 500 MHz. (A) One-
is the use of 15N- or 13C-enriched dimensional spectrum. This figure also illustrates upfield methyl group
samples to obtain isotope-edited regions, α-hydrogen, amide, aromatic, and downfield (10 – 20 ppm) regions.
spectra. For example in HSQC or in The indole NH resonances are shifted downfield by the ring current of the
15N-multiple quantum cohenence indole. (B) COSY spectrum plotted as a contour map. The outlined areas
(HMQC)spectra we see only NH represent five unique J-coupled regions; area I, the Cα to Cβ to Cγ etc., side
protons in a plot of 1H chemical chain connectivities; area II, the NH to Cα connectivities; area III, the indole
NH of tryptophan; area IV, the connectivities of the ∆3-Prol residue; and area
shift in one dimension versus the
V, the aromatic resonances. Peaks that appear on the solid vertical line and the
15N chemical shift of the attached
dashed diagonal lines are artifacts. From Baniak et al.495

--- Page 149 ---

I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 145
nitrogen atom in the other (Fig. 3-28). Furthermore, NOEs and distance constraints. NOESY plots
as shown in this figure, particular types of NH bonds also contain the essential information needed to deter-
(peptide,–NH ,imidazole, indole, amide, and guani- mine which side chains distant in the sequence are close
2
dinium) appear in different regions. There is only one together in space. A NOE observed for a pair of nuclei
peptide NH per residue and, for a small protein, each falls off as the inverse sixth power of the distance
may be separately visible. between them. For this reason, NOEs are observed
only for pairs of atoms closer than about 0.4 nm. It is
possible, in principle, to calculate distances between
4. Three-Dimensional Structures and nuclei from the NOE intensity, but this is not accurate.
Dynamics of Proteins Often, the NOE cross-peaks are grouped into three
categories that correspond to maximum possible
The first three-dimensional structure of a small distances of 0.25, 0.30, and 0.40 nm. These can be
protein was determined solely from NMR measure- related for the most part to intraresidue (e.g., d
N
α’ of
ments in 1984. To date hundreds of “NMR structures” Fig. 3-27) sequential (e.g., dα
N’
and d
NN
, Fig. 3-27) and
have been deduced. For small proteins of M < 10,000 long range backbone–backbone distances. These
r
two-dimensional COSY and NOESY spectra can suffice. values constitute a series of distance constraints
For larger proteins use of 15N- and/or 13C-enriched which are applied while making an automated com-
proteins is essential.428,430,496 This permits generation puter search for a folding pattern that will meet these
of a third and even a fourth frequency axis and three- constraints and at the same time have acceptable
and four dimensional NMR. For example, using torsion angles and good side chain packing throughout.
various complex pulse sequences an 15N-correlated This process makes use of distance geometry algorithms
1H–2H NOESY spectrum can be generated. This and other methods.430,506,507 An early success was the
shows directly which NOEs arise from NH protons solution of a 75-residue amylase inhibitor indepen-
with resonances in the amide region of an HSQC or dently by crystallographers508 and NMR spectrosco-
HMQC spectrum (Fig. 3-28). With both 15N and 13C pists.509 The NMR structure was based on 401 NOE
present, many additional coupling patterns and J distance constraints, 168 distance constraints imposed
values can be observed.497– 502 It is also possible to by hydrogen bonds and 50 torsion angles deduced
measure NOEs from atoms in a protein to those of a from J values. Recently, refinement of NMR structures
relatively weakly bound ligand such as a coenzyme or has been done as in X-ray crystallography.507 Some
substrate analog and to determine the conformation of structures have been refined using both NMR and
the bound ligand from this transferred NOE.503– 505 X-ray data.442
The spectra in Figs. 3-25, 3-26 and 3-28 are for
Assignment of resonances. After acquisition relatively small proteins. Spectra of larger proteins are
of the necessary data, which may require 10 – 15 mg of more complex and lines are broader. Many techniques
protein, the observed resonances must be assigned to are used to simplify spectra. The NMR spectrum of a
specific amino acid residues in the peptide chain. The protein is simplified considerably if the protein is dena-
connectivities of the individual CH and NH groups tured by heating, and 1H NMR spectra of “random
that have been identified in the COSY spectrum and coil” proteins can be predicted well from tables of
information about the relationship of one atom to standard chemical shifts for the individual amino
another atom nearby in space are required. The closest acids.510 Many amide NH protons exchange with
neighbors to either αH or peptide NH protons are often solvent rapidly, making it easier to assign the remaining
protons in a neighboring residue (dα , d , Fig. 3-27). peaks. However, nearly all NH peaks will be seen in
N NN
As was pointed out in the preceding section, NOE an HMQC or HSQC (Fig. 3-28) spectrum. Partial, or
correlations obtained from plots such as that in Fig. even complete, substitution of deuterium for hydrogen
3-25B provide much of the information needed to will also simplify spectra.511 – 513 Microorganisms that
establish which resonances belong to each residue in a will grow in a medium rich in D O can be used as
2
known sequence.494 The three-dimensional structure sources of partially deuterated proteins. Because the
of the ribosomal protein L30 of E. coli. (Fig. 3-25A) was remaining protons usually have 2H rather than 1H as
deduced entirely by NMR spectroscopy. A downfield a neighbor, dipolar line broadening is reduced and
part of the NOESY and COSY plots used is shown in sharper resonances are observed.514 Substitution of
Fig. 3-25B. This figure also shows how cross-peaks in 15N for 14N in the backbone amide groups can also
the NOESY spectrum were correlated with identified yield spectra with narrower lines.515 Isotope-edited
COSY peaks. It is helpful initially to hunt for unique NMR spectra allow simplification of complex two-
dipeptides that can be identified in the NOESY spec- dimensional spectra by observation of only those
trum. Ambiguities that arise can be resolved by use of protons attached to an isotopically labeled nucleus,
various additional techniques. e.g.,13C or 15N.516– 518 Measurement of 15NH-Cα J
H
couplings facilitates structure determinations.519

--- Page 150 ---

146 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
H Figure 3-27 Illustration of some distances (d , dα and dβ
NN N N
J
αβ
H d βN o
an
b
d
tai
J
n
α
e d
o b
f
t
r
a
o
i
m
ne
N
d
O
fr
E
om
SY
1
s
H
p e
C
c
O
tra
S Y
a n
s
d
p e
s
c
o
t
m
ra
e
o
c
r
o
J
u
-r
p
e
l
s
in
o
g
lv
c
e
o
d
n
s
s
p
ta
e
n
c
t
t
s
r a
(J
.
αβ
βC d N
H
αN*
H
The coupling constants and proton chemical shifts provide a
“fingerprint” for each residue and J α may also provide an estimated
J Nα d Nα C α value for torsion angle f. The distan N ces establish residue-to-residue
φ N connectivities as well as distance constraints that may permit a
N C C calculation of three-dimensional structure. Additional coupling
d NN* constants can be measured for 15N- or 13C- enriched proteins.
Coupling from β-hydrogens to other side chain hydrogens provides
H O
“fingerprint” information about individual residues.
Figure 3-28 A 15N–1H HSQC spectrum of partially denatured 129-residue hen lysozyme. Boxes enclose the tryptophan
indole region (upper left), the arginine side chain Nε region (upper left), and a portion of the amide NH region (lower center
and enlarged in the insert). Resonances of pairs of hydrogen atoms in side chain (Asn and Gln) amide groups are indicated by
horizontal lines. From Buck et al.524

--- Page 151 ---

I. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 147
Many aspects of the dynamics of the action of enzymes
of this size can be studied by NMR spectroscopy. New
48
approaches allow study of proteins up to ~30 kDa in 81 119 36 pH* 5.1
size.519a Computer programs can analyze data and
make automatic assignments of resonances.520,521 36 81 pH* 7.0
Also useful are techniques for measuring NMR 48 119
spectra on solids, including microcrystalline pro-
48
teins522 (see also Box 9-C). In some cases, e.g., for 36
heme proteins,522,523 the crystals can be oriented in
pH* 9.8
a magnetic field permitting measurements of NMR
81
spectra with more than one orientation of the crystals. 119
This potentially affords more information than the
usual techniques. For example, growth of bacteria in
2H O media containing 1H-containing pyruvate yields 8.70 8.30 7.90 7.50 7.0
pro 2 teins with almost complete deuteration in the C-α 1H chemical shift (ppm)
an C-β positions but with highly protonated methyl
groups. This gives rise to good – CH to – CH NOEs
3 3
and provides other advantages in both NMR spectros-
copy and mass spectrometry.512 Isotopically enriched 8.6
amino acids, e.g., 13C-enriched leucine,525 or isoleucine
containing15N,13C, and 2H as well526 can be fed to
8.4
growing bacteria. The use of paramagnetic shifts by
ions such as Gd3+ may be helpful.527 Very large shifts
are sometimes induced in heme proteins by the Fe3+
8.2
of the heme that is embedded within the protein.528
8.0
5. Other Information from NMR Spectra
NMR titrations. How do pH changes affect NMR 7.8
resonances? Resonances of 1H nuclei close enough to
a proton with a pK in the pH region under study will
a
experience a shift, which may be either upfield or down- 7.6
fieldwhen the proton dissociates. The resonance of
13C in a carboxyl group will shift downfield when the
proton on the carboxyl group dissociates. If the proton 7.4
that dissociates is tightly hydrogen bonded in a protein,
its rate of dissociation may be slow compared to the
NMR frequency used. If so, the original peak will 7.2
decrease in value as the pH is raised and a new peak
will appear at a position characteristic of the dissociated
form. However, protons attached to N or O are usually 7.0
in rapid exchange with the solvent. In this case, the
NMR resonance of the nucleus being observed will 5 6 7 8 9
pH*
move continuously from one chemical shift value at low
pH to a different one at high pH. In an intermediate
case the resonance will shift and broaden.
Both the C
δ2-H
and C
ε1-H
protons of histidine can Figure 3-29 (A) 1H NMR spectra of human myoglobin in
often be seen in proteins (Fig. 3-29A).529– 531 As is shown D O showing the C-Hε1 resonances of the imidazole rings of
2
in Fig. 3-29 A and B, their chemical shifts are strongly histidines 36, 48, 81, and 119 at three values of the apparent
dependent upon the state of protonation of the ring pH (pH*). From Bothelho and Gurd.529 (B) 1H NMR titration
nitrogen atoms. At low pH, the positive charge that is curves for the histidine Cε1 and C-δ2 ring protons of glycyl-L-
histidylglycine. Data obtained at 100 MHz using 0.1 M
shared by the two NH groups attracts electrons away
tripeptide in D O containing 0.3 M NaCl. The pH values
from both CH positions, causing deshielding of the CH 2
protons. The effect is greater for the C
ε1-H
than for
(labeled pH*) are uncorrected glass electrode pH meter
readings of D O solutions using an electrode standardized
C δ2-H protons (Table 3-3). If the groups being titrated 2
with normal H O buffers. Chemical shifts are downfield
2
do not interact strongly with other nearby basic or from TMS. Courtesy of J. L. Markley.438
δ
tfihs
lacimehC
A
B
O
H
H + 3N N α N COO–
H
O β H
γ
δ1 δ2 H H
N C
+
ε1C N
ε2
H H
ε1
C -H
δ2
C -H

--- Page 152 ---

148 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
acidic groups, pK values can be estimated for individ-
a
ual histidines.530,532 With 15N-containing proteins the
tautomeric states (NH
ε2
vs NH
δ1)
of the imidazole
rings can also be deduced.533 Observation of imidazole
rings shows that in proteins pK a values of imidazolium E’ E
groups are sometimes less than five and sometimes D’
B D
greater than ten.463,534 A C
Observing exchangable protons. 1H spectra of + PLP
proteins are often recorded in D O because of inter-
2
ference from the very strong absorption of H O at
2 F
G
approximately 4.8 ppm. However, resonances of some
rapidly exchanging protons are lost. Special pulse + PMP Apo F’’
sequences, as well as improvements in spectrometer
design, allow many of these resonances to be seen in B C D
H O.535– 537 At the far downfield end (δ>10) of 1H NMR
2 Apoenzyme
spectra there are often weak peaks arising from NH
protons of imidazole or indole side chains that can be
observed in H O.463,538– 540 These resonances are often 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
2
shifted 2 – 5 ppm downfield from the positions given Chemical shift
in Table 3-3. The 1H resonance for a carboxyl (– COOH)
proton is shifted to 20 ppm or more in spectra of very
Figure 3-30 Spectra of the pyridoxal phosphate (PLP),
strongly hydrogen-bonded anionic complexes such as
pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP) and apoenzyme forms of
the malonate dianion.541– 544 (see Chapter 9, Section D,4).
pig cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase at pH 8.3, 21°C.
The strongest hydrogen bonds cause the greatest down- Some excess apoenzyme is present in the sample of the PMP
field shifts because the negative charge pulls the 1H form. Spectra were recorded at 500 MH . Chemical shift
2
proton away from the electrons of the atom to which values are in parts per million relative to that of H O taken
2
it is attached, deshielding the proton.545 as 4.80 ppm at 22°C. Peak A is from a proton on the ring
A good example is provided by the imidazole NH nitrogen of PLP or PMP, peaks B and D are from imidazole
NH groups of histidines 143 and 189 (see Fig. 14-6), and peaks
proton of the active site of trypsin and related serine
C and D’ are from amide NH groups hydrogen bonded to
proteases (Chapter 12), which is seen at ~16 ppm.
carboxyl groups.
Another example is provided by aspartate aminotrans-
ferase, whose 1H NMR spectrum in a dilute aqueous
phosphate buffer is shown in Fig. 3-30. The peak
labeled A is the resonance of the NH proton on the the dynamics of protein molecules in solution. Exchange
ring of the pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme (marked in of amide protons in proteins with 2H or 3H has been
Fig. 14-6) and peak B belongs to an adjacent imidazole studied on a relatively slow timescale by such tech-
group of histidine 143. Both of these protons move niques as observation of infrared vibrations of the
with pH changes around a pK of ~ 6.2 which is associ- amide group (see Chapter 23).552,553 However, the
a
ated with the Schiff base proton 6 – 8 nm away.534,546– 551 development of two-dimensional NMR dramatically
Peak A moves upfield 2.0 ppm and peak B downfield improved the ability to study proton exchange.552,554–
1.0 ppm when the pH is raised around this pK These 556 The measurements may involve use of quenching
a.
hydrogen-bonded protons act as sensitive “reporters” by rapid solvent change,556 special pulse sequences,555
of the electronic environment of the active site. Many and study of T relaxation rates (seconds timescale).
1
proteins contain carboxylate or phosphate groups in Recently, electrospray mass spectrometry has also
their active sites and observation of NMR resonances been exploited.557,558 Exchange patterns for large
of protons hydrogen bonded to them or to groups in proteins may be followed,559 and proteolytic fragmen-
substrates or inhibitors may be a useful technique for tation into short peptides may be used after various
study of many enzymes and other proteins. lengths of exchange time to investigate the exchange
in specific regions of a protein.216,560 Unfolding of a
Exchange rates of amide protons. The NH protein under denaturing conditions can be studied,
protons of the peptide backbone can be observed in H O as can refolding of a completely denatured protein.561
2
in the 6 –11 ppm region. If the spectrum is recorded Amide hydrogen exchange is usually discussed
for a sample in D O, many of these resonances disap- in terms of a model proposed by Linderstrφm-Lang
2
pear gradually as the protons of the peptide units in 1955.554,556 He suggested that portions of protein
exchange with the deuterium ions of the medium. A molecules unfold sporadically to allow rapid exchange
study of the observed exchange rates can shed light on which can be catalyzed by H+, HO–, or other acids or

--- Page 153 ---

J. The Protein Data Bank, Three-Dimensional Structures, and Computations 149
bases. The pH dependence of exchange for a given Solid-state NMR and other topics. Little can
amide NH can be described as follows: be said about these topics, but NMR measurement
on solid crystalline materials is now practiced and
is providing a wealth of information. It is being
k = k [H+] + k [OH–] + k applied more often to biochemically related prob-
ex H OH w (3-56)
lems.465,542,565– 567
NMR spectroscopy of nucleic acids is discussed
where k ,k , and k are rate constants for acid-cata- briefly in Chapter 5. An important medical application
H OH w
lyzed, base-catalyzed, and the very slow water-cata- of NMR is in imaging, a topic dealt with in Box 30-A.
lyzed exchange.554,556,562 While many amide protons
exchange rapidly, hydrogen-bonded NH protons in
well-packed hydrophobic core regions exchange slow- J. The Protein Data Bank, Three-Dimensional
ly,554,563 sometimes remaining in the protein for years Structures, and Computation
in a D O solution. Some unusually stable small pro-
2
teins such as the seed protein crambin show little The x,y,z coordinates of all atoms in published,
exchange. The C
ε1
protons of histidine imidazoles refined three-dimensional structures have been depos-
also exchange slowly with D O from the medium. ited in the Protein Data Bank (Table 3-4).568– 571 Many
2
The exchange rates529,564 are rapid at higher tempera- other related databases are available,572 e.g., covering
tures, with an average half-life of about 11 min at 65°C. molecular modeling,573 gene sequences, proteome
Different residues may exchange at different rates. data,574 and much, much more. A good way to keep
Binding of substrates or inhibitors can stabilize the up to date is to read the “computer corner” in Trends
protein, slowing all exchange rates of both amide and in Biochemical Sciences (TIBS). Most databases can be
imidazole groups. reached on the World Wide Web.572 A selected list is
TABLE 3-4
Selected World Wide Web Servers Related to Protein Structures and Sequencesa
Question / area Tool Access / URL
Database search by comparison Dali server http://www.embl-heidelberg.de/dali/dali.html
of 3D structures
Structural classification of proteins SCOP http://www.bio.cam.ac.uk/scop/
Summary and analysis of PDP structures PDBSum http://www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/pdbsum
Retrieve 3D coordinates Protein Data Bank http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/
SWISS-PROT sequence database, ExPASy http://expasy.hcuge,ch/
Swissmodel homology modeling, etc.
Molecular graphics viewer for RasMol http://www.bernstein-plus-sons.com/software/rasmol
PCs and workstations
World Wide Web -Entrez and http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Molecular Modeling Database access
Protein Science Kinemages MAGE and PREKIN http://www.prosci.uci.edu/kinemages/
Kinemagelndex.html
Pedro’s Biomolecular Research Tools http://www.fmi.ch/biology/research_tools.html
Predict secondary structure from sequence Predict Protein server http://www.sander.embl-heidelberg.de
Browse databanks in molecular biology SRS server http://www.embl-heidelberg/srs/srsc
The Human Genome Database http://gdbwww.gdb.org/
Image Library of Biological Macromolecules http://www.imb-jena.de/IMAGE.html
Bacterial Nomenclature http://www.gbf-braunschweig.de/DSMZ/
bactnom/bactnam.htm
a From Holm and Sander,570 Hogue et al.,573 Laskowski et al.,580 and Walsh et al.572

--- Page 154 ---

150 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
given in Table 3-4. The widely used viewer called RasMol comparing sequences we can often guess an approxi-
can be used with your PC or MacIntosh computer575–576a mate structure but accurate predictions are still not
or UNIX workstation569,575. Another way to view possible. Having a structure, we would like to predict
macromolecules is to use the Protein Science Kinemages properties and reactivities and to be able to guess how
(“kinetic images”) using the program MAGE.577,578 two more macromolecules interact to form macromolec-
Although it is mentioned in a few places, this ular complexes. We would like to understand the
book does not begin to describe the rapid growth of complex chain of nonpolar and electrostatic interac-
computation in biochemistry, biophysics, and biology tions that underlie the fundamental properties of
in general. Very fast methods of protein structure catalysis, movement, and responsiveness of organ-
determination are being developed.579,582 One of the isms. Many computers and ingeneous minds are
major goals in current computation is to predict folding working to help us match theory with reality in these
patterns of proteins from their sequences.582,583 By areas. Read the current journals!
References
1. Strang, R. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, VII–VIII 22. Deutscher, M. P., ed. (1990) Guide to Protein 41. Scopes, R. K. (1994) Protein Purification. Principles
2. Michaelis, L. (1922) Die Wasserstoffionenkon- Purification: Methods in Enzymology, Vol. 182, of Protein Structure, Springer-Verlag, New York
zentration, p. 48, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Academic Press, San Diego, California 42. Villafranca, J., ed. (1990) Current Research in
3. Dixon, M., and Webb, E. C., eds. (1979) 23. Celis, J. E., ed. (1994) Cell Biology: A Laboratory Protein Chemistry: Techniques, Structure, and
Enzymes, 3rd ed., pp.138–163, Academic Handbook, Academic Press, New York (3 volumes) Function, Academic Press, New York
Press, New York 24. Fasman, G. D., ed. (1989) CRC Practical 43. Coligan, J., Dunn, B., Ploegh, H., Speicher, D.,
4. Dryer, R. L., and Lata, G. F. (1989) Experimental Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Wingfield, P., eds. (1995) Current Protocols
Biochemistry, Oxford Univ. Press, New York CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida in Protein Science, Wiley, New York
5. Kuramitsu, S., and Hamaguchi, K. (1980) 25. Rosenberg, I. M. (1996) Protein Analysis and 44. Matsudaira, P. T., ed. (1989) A Practical Guide
J. Biochem.87, 1215 – 1219 Purification, Birkhäuser, Cambridge, to Protein and Peptide Purification for Micro-
6. Beynon, R. J., and Easterby, J. S. (1996) Buffer Massachusetts sequencing, Academic Press, San Diego,
Solutions: The Basics, IRL Press, Oxford 26. Walker, J. M., ed. (1996) The Protein Protocols California
7. Bates, R. G. (1964) Determination of pH, Wiley, Handbook, Humana Press, Totowa, New Jersey 45. Doonan, S., ed. (1996) Protein Purification
New York 27. Marshak, D. R., Kadonaga, J. T., Burgess, R. Protocols, Humana Press, Totowa, New Jersey
8. Stoll, V. S., and Blanchard, J. S. (1990) in Guide R., Knuth, M. W., Brennan, W. A., Jr., and Lin, 46. Little, P., and Hughes, S., eds. (1992)
to Protein Purification (Deutscher, M. P., ed), S.-H. (1996) Strategies for Protein Purification Technique, Vol. 4, Academic Press, London
pp. 24–38, Academic Press, San Diego, and Characterization, Cold Spring Harbor Lab. 47. Methods: A Companion to Methods in
California Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York Enzymology, 1990 – present, Academic Press,
9. Ellis, K. J., and Morrison, J. F. (1982) Methods 28. Creighton, T. E., ed. (1989) Protein Structure: A San Diego, California
Enzymol.87, 405–426 Practical Approach, IRL Press, Oxford 48. Wankat, P. C., Van Oss, C. J., and Henry, J. D.,
10. Good, N. E., Winget, G. D., Winter, W., 29. Marshak, D. R., Kadonaga, J. T., Burgess, R. Jr., eds. (1992) Separation and Purification
Connolly, T. N., Izawa, S., and Singh, R. M. M. R., Knuth, M. W., Brennan, W. A., and Lin, S.- Methods, Dekker, New York
(1966)Biochemistry5, 467– 477 H. (1995) Strategies for Protein Purification and 49. protein expression and purification, (1990 – present),
11. Ferguson, W. J., Braunschweiger, K. I., Characterization, Cold Spring Harbor Lab. Academic Press, San Diego, California
Braunschweiger, W. R., Smith, J. R., Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 50. Coligan, J., Dunn, B., Ploegh, H., Speicher, D.,
McCormick, J. J., Wasmann, C. C., Jarvis, N. 30. Crabb, J. W., ed. (1995) Techniques in Protein and Wingfield, P., eds. (1996 – present) Current
P., Bell, D. H., and Good, N. E. (1980) Anal. Chemistry, Vol. VI, Academic Press, San Diego, Protocols in Protein Science, Wiley, New York
Biochem.104, 300–310 California 51. Hirs, C. H. W., and Timasheff, S. N., eds.
12. Dawson, R. M. C., Elliot, D. C., Elliot, W. H., 31. Walker, J. M., ed. (1994) Basic Protein and (1983)Methods in Enzymology, Enzyme
and Jones, K. M. (1986) Data for Biochemical Peptide Protocols, Humana Press, Totowa, New Structure, Vol. 91, Academic Press, New York
Research, 3rd ed., Oxford Science Pub., London Jersey 52. Doolittle, R. F., ed. (1990) Methods in
13. Robyt, J. F., and White, B. J. (1990) Biochemical 32. Bollag, D. M., and Edelstein, S. J. (1990) Enzymology, Molecular Evolution: Computer
Techniques, Theory and Practice, 2nd ed., Protein Methods, Wiley-Liss, New York Analysis of Protein and Nucleic Acid, Vol. 183,
Waveland Press, Inc., Prospect Height, Ill 33. Creighton, T. E., ed. (1989) Protein Structure Academic Press, New York
14. Cooper, T. G. (1977) The Tools of Biochemistry, and Protein Function: A Practical Approach, IRL 53. Bollag, D. E., Rozycki, M. D., and Edelstein, S.
Wiley, New York Press, Oxford J., eds. (1996) Protein Methods, 2nd ed., Wiley,
15. Alexander, R. R., and Griffiths, J. M. (1992) 34. Copeland, R. A. (1994) Methods for Protein New York
Basic Biochemical Methods, 2nd ed., Wiley, New Analysis. A Practical Guide to Laboratory 54. Birnie, G. D., and Fox, S. M., eds. (1969)
York Protocols, Chapman and Hall, New York Subcellular Components, Butterworth, London
16. Wilson, K., and Walker, J., eds. (1994) 35. Matsuidaira, P. T., ed. (1995) A Practical Guide 55. Estabrook, R. W., and Pullman, M. E., eds.
Principles and Techniques of Practical Biochemistry, to Protein and Peptide Purification for Micro- (1967)Methods in Enzymology, Vol. 10,
4th ed., Cambridge Univ. Press, New York sequencing, Academic Press, San Diego, CA Academic Press, New York
17. Boyer, R. F. (1992) Modern Experimental 36. Hugli, T. E., ed. (1989) Techniques in Protein 56. Kaback, H. R. (1971) in Methods in Enzymology,
Biochemistry, 2nd ed., Benjamin-Cummings Chemistry, Academic Press, New York Vol. 22 (Jakoby, W. B., ed), pp. 99–120,
Publ., Redwood City, California 37. Means, G. E., and Feeney, R. E. (1973) Academic Press, New York
18. le Maire, M., Chabaud, R., and Herve, G. Chemical Modification of Proteins, Holden-Day, 57. Dingle, J. T. (1972) Lysosomes. A Laboratory
(1991)Laboratory Guide to Biochemistry, San Francisco Handbook, North-Holland Publ., Amsterdam
Enzymology, and Protein Physical Chemistry, 38. Keleti, G., and Lederer, W. H. (1974) Handbook 58. Rasmussen, N. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21,
Plenum, New York of Micromethods for the Biological Sciences, Van 319–321
19. Fini, C., Floridi, A., and Finelli, V. N., eds. Nostrand-Reinhold, New York 58a. Jenkins, W. T. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 376–382
(1989)Laboratory Methodology in Biochemistry, 39. Switzer, R. L., and Garrity, L. F. (1999) 59. McPhie, P. (1971) in Methods in Enzymology,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida Experimental Biochemistry:Theory and Exercises Vol. 22 (Jakoby, W. B., ed), pp. 23–32,
20. Scopes, R. K. (1993) Protein Purification: in Fundamental Methods, 3rd ed., Freeman, Academic Press, New York
Principles and Practice, 3rd ed., Springer, New New York 60. Blatt, W. F. (1971) in Methods in Enzymology,
York 40. Schulz, G. E., and Schirmer, R. H. (1979) Vol. 22 (Jakoby, W. B., ed), pp. 39–49,
21. Harris, E. L. V., and Angal, S. (1990) Protein Principles of Protein Structure, Springer-Verlag, Academic Press, New York
Purification: A Practical Approach, IRL Press, New York 61. Porath, J., and Flodin, P. (1959) Nature
Oxford, 2 volumes (London)183, 1657–1659

--- Page 155 ---

151
References
62. Porath, J. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, N100 95. Mant, C. T., and Hodges, R. S. (1991) High- 126. Janknecht, R., de Martynoff, G., Lou, J.,
63. Lathe, G. H. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, Performance Liquid Chromatography of Peptides Hipskind, R. A., Nordheim, A., and
N99–N100 and Proteins: Separation, Analysis, and Stunnenberg, H. G. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
64. Flodin, P., and Aspberg, K. (1961) Biol. Struct. Conformation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida U.S.A.88, 8972–8976
Funct. Proc. IUB / IUBS Int. Sym, 1st ed., Vol. 1, 96. Gooding, K. M., and Regnier, F. E., eds. (1990) 127. Hochuli, E., Dobeli, H., and Schacher, A.
pp. 345-349 (p. 346) HPLC of Biological Macromolecules, Dekker, (1987)J. Chromatogr.411, 177–184
65. Weir, M., and Sparks, J. (1987) Biochem. J.245, New York 128. Turner, A. J. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, 171–
85 96a. Beesley, T. E., Buglio, B., and Scott, R. P. W. 173
66. Regnier, F. E. (1991) Nature (London)350, 634– (2000)Quantitative Chromatographic Analysis, 129. Vesterberg, O. (1971) in Methods in Enzymology,
635 Dekker, New York Vol. 22 (Jakoby, W. B., ed), pp. 389–412,
67. Afeyan, N. B., Gordon, N. F., and Mazsaroff, I. 97. Oliver, R. W. A., ed. (1989) HPLC of Academic Press, New York
(1990)J. Chromatogr.519, 1–29 Macromolecules: A Practical Approach, IRL 130. Bauer, J. (1994) Cell Electrophoresis, CRC Press,
67a. Wu, C.-s. (1999) Column Handbook for Size Press, Oxford Boca Raton, Florida
Exclusion Chromatography, Academic Press, 98. Fried, B., and Sherma, J., (1999) Thin-Layer 131. Allison, S. A., and Tran, V. T. (1995) Biophys. J.
San Diego, California Chromatography, 4th ed., Dekker, New York 68, 2261–2270
68. Liapis, A. I., and McCoy, M. A. (1992) J. 99. Zlatkis, A., and Kaiser, R. E. (1977) High 132. Shuster, L. (1971) in Methods in Enzymology,
Chromatogr.599, 87–104 Performance Thin-Layer Chromatography, Vol. 22 (Jakoby, W. B., ed), pp. 412–433,
69. Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R. (1980) Elsevier Scientific-North Holland, Academic Press, New York
Biophysical Chemistry, Part II, Freeman, San Amsterdam 133. Chrambach, A., and Rodbard, D. (1971)
Francisco, California (pp. 549–685) 100. Sherma, J., and Fried, B., eds. (1996) Practical Science172, 440–451
70. Kyte, J. (1995) Structure in Protein Chemistry, Thin-Layer Chromatography: A Multidisciplinary 134. Andrews, A. T. (1986) Electrophoresis: Theory,
Garland Publ., New York Approach, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida Techniques and Biochemical and Clinical
71. Brakke, M. K. (1953) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 101. Liu, M.-K., Li, P., and Giddings, J. C. (1993) Applications, 2nd ed., Clarendon-Oxford Univ.
45, 275–290 Protein Sci.2, 1520–1531 Press, Oxford
72. Britten, R. J., and Roberts, R. B. (1960) Science 102. Treadwell, G. E., Cairns, W. L., and Metzler, 135. Gordon, A. H. (1980) Electrophoresis of Proteins
131, 32–33 D. E. (1968) J. Chromatogr.35, 376–388 in Polyacrylamide and Starch Gels, Revised ed.,
73. Martin, R. G., and Ames, B. N. (1961) J. Biol. 103. Novotny, M. V. (1989) Science264, 51–57 Elsevier-North Holland, Amsterdam
Chem.236, 1372–1379 104. Schomvurg, G. (1990) Gas Chromatography: A 136. Chrambach, A., Dunn, M. J., and Radola, B. J.,
74. Meselson, M., Stahl, F. W., and Vinograd, J. Practical Course, VCH Publ., Cambridge, UK eds. (1987) Advances in Electrophoresis, Vol. I,
(1957)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.43, 581–588 105. Lee, M. L., and Markides, K. E. (1987) Science VCH Publ., Cambridge, UK
75. da Silva, J. R. R. F. (1978) in New Trends in Bio- 235, 1342–1347 137. Serwer, P., Easom, R. A., Hayes, S. J., and
organic Chemistry (Williams, R. J. P., and da 105a.Muraviev, D., Gorshkov, V., and Warshawsky, Olson, M. S. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 4–7
Silva, J. R. R. F., eds), Academic Press, London A. (1999) Ion Exchange, Dekker, New York 138. electrophoresis, (1995 – present), VCH Publ.,
76. Arakawa, T., and Timasheff, S. N. (1982) 106. Moore, S., and Stein, W. H. (1949) Cold Spring New York
Biochemistry21, 6545–6552 Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol.14, 179–190 139. advances in electrophoresis, (1987 – present),
77. Rao, J. K. M., and Argos, P. (1981) Biochemistry 107. Moore, S., and Stein, W. H. (1949) J. Biol. VCH Publ., Cambridge
20, 6536–6543 Chem.178, 53–77 140. Hawcroft, D. M. (1997) Electrophoresis: The
78. Green, A. A., and Hughes, W. L. (1955) in 108. Manning, J. M. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 1188–1191 Basics, IRL Press, Oxford
Methods in Enzymology, Vol. 1 (Colowick, S. P., 109. Svasti, J. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 8–9 141. Hengen, P. N. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20,
and Kaplan, N. O., eds), pp. 67–90, Academic 110. Moore, S., and Stein, W. H. (1951) J. Biol. 202–203
Press, New York Chem.192, 663–681 142. Garfin, D. E. (1990) Methods Enzymol.182,
79. Dawson, R. M. C., Elliott, D. C., Elliott, W. H., 111. Moore, S., and Stein, W. H. (1954) J. Biol. 425–441
and Jones, K. M. (1969) Data for Biochemical Chem.211, 893–906 143. Hames, B. D., and Rickwood, D., eds. (1990)
Research, 2nd ed., Clarendon Press, Oxford 112. Moore, S., and Stein, W. H. (1963) in Methods Gel Electrophoresis of Proteins: A Practical
80. Ito, Y. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 47–50 in Enzymology, Vol. 6 (Colowick, S. P., and Approach, 2nd ed., IRL Press, Oxford
81. Ito, Y. (1987) Nature (London)326, 419–420 Kaplan, N. O., eds), pp. 819–831, Academic 144. Righetti, P. G., ed. (1996) Capillary Electro-
82. Mandava, N. B., and Ito, Y., eds. (1988) Press, New York phoresis in Analytical Biotechnology, CRC Press,
Countercurrent Chromatography, Dekker, New 113. Yamamoto, S., Nakanishi, K., and Matsuno, R. Boca Raton, Florida
York (1988)Ion Exchange Chromatography of Proteins, 145. Camilleri, P., ed. (1993) Capillary Electrophoresis:
82a. Menet, J.-M., and Thiébaut, D., eds. (1999) Dekker, New York Theory and Practice, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton
Countercurrent Chromatography, Dekker, New 114. Peterson, E. A. (1970) Cellulosic Ion Exchangers, 146. Altria, K. D., ed. (1996) Capillary Electrophore-
York Elsevier-North Holland, Amsterdam sis Guidebook, Humana Press, Totowa, New
83. Er-el, Z., Zaidenzaig, Y., and Shaltiel, S. (1972) 115. Nölting, B., Golbik, R., Neira, J. L., Soler- Jersey
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.49, 383–390 Gonzalez, A. S., Schreiber, G., and Fersht, A. 147. Landers, J. P., ed. (1994) Handbook of Capillary
84. Arakawa, T., and Timasheff, S. N. (1982) R. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 826– Electrophoresis, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
Biochemistry21, 6536–6544 830 148. Landers, J. P. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18,
85. Atha, D. H., and Ingham, K. C. (1981) J. Biol. 116. Lundell, N., and Markides, K. (1992) 409–414
Chem.256, 12108–12117 Chromatographia34, 369–375 149. Wehr, T., Rodríguez-Díaz, R., and Zhu, M.
86. Kenney, A., and Fowell, S., eds. (1992) 117. Dean, P. D. G., Johnson, W. S., and Middle, F. (1998)Capillary Electrophoresis of Proteins,
Practical Protein Chromatography, Humana A., eds. (1985) Affinity Chromatography, A Dekker, New York
Press, Totowa, New Jersey Practical Approach, IRL Press, Oxford 149a.Yao, S., Anex, D. S., Caldwell, W. B., Arnold,
87. Tiselius, A., Hjerten, S., and Levin, O. (1956) 118. Parikh, I., and Cuatrecasas, P. (1985) Chem. D. W., Smith, K. B., and Schultz, P. G. (1999)
Arch. Biochem. Biophys.65, 132 Eng. News63 (Aug 26), 17–32 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 5372– 5377
88. Wolf, W. J., and Sly, D. A. (1964) J. Chromatogr. 119. Porath, J. (1968) Nature (London)218, 834–838 150. Valaskovic, G. A., Kelleher, N. L., and
15, 247–250 120. Inman, J. K. (1974) in Methods in Enzymology, McLafferty, F. W. (1996) Science273, 1199–1202
89. Regnier, F. E. (1987) Science238, 319–323 Vol. 34 (Jakoby, W. B., and Wilchek, M., eds), 151. Gao, J., Gomez, F. A., Härter, R., and
90. Hutchens, T. W., and Porath, J. (1987) pp. 30–58, Academic Press, New York Whitesides, G. M. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
Biochemistry26, 7199–7204 121. Bethell, G. S., Ayers, J. S., Hearn, M. T. W., and U.S.A.91, 12027–12030
91. Molnár, I., Horváth, C., and Jatlow, P. (1978) Hancock, W. S. (1981) J. Chromatogr.219, 361– 152. Harrison, D. J., Fluri, K., Seiler, K., Fan, Z.,
Chromatographia11, 260–265 372 Effenhauser, C. S., and Manz, A. (1993) Science
92. Hamilton, R. J., and Sewell, P. A. (1982) 122. Wilchek, M., and Miron, T. (1987) Biochemistry 261, 895–897
Introduction to High Performance Liquid 26, 2155–2161 153. Radola, B. J., and Graesslin, D., eds. (1977)
Chromatography, 2nd ed., Chapman and Hall, 123. Ashley, G. W., and Bartlett, P. A. (1984) J. Biol. Electrofocusing and Isotachophoresis, de Gruyter,
London Chem.259, 13615–13620 Berlin
93. Berridge, J. C. (1985) Techniques for the 124. Hengen, P. N. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 154. Bocek, P., Dem, M., Gebauer, P., and Dolnik,
Automated Optimization of HPLC Separations, 285–286 V. (1987) Analytical Isotachophoresis, VCH
Wiley, New York 125. Loo, T. W., and Clarke, D. M. (1995) J. Biol. Publ., Cambridge, UK
94. Simpson, C. F. (1982) Techniques in Liquid Chem.270, 21449–21452
Chromatography, Wiley, New York

--- Page 156 ---

152 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
References
155. Righetti, P. G. (1983) Isoelectric Focusing: 184. Harding, S. E., Rowe, A. J., and Horton, J. C., 210. Smith, R. D., Loo, J. A., Edmonds, C. G.,
Theory, Methodology and Applications, Elsevier - eds. (1992) Analytical Ultracentrifugation in Barinaga, C. J., and Udseth, H. R. (1990) Anal.
North Holland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam Biochemistry and Polymer Science, CRC Press, Chem.62, 882–899
156. Catsimpoolas, N., and Drysdale, J., eds. (1977) Boca Raton, Florida 211. Fenn, J. B., Mann, M., Meng, C. K., Wong, S.
Biological and Biomedical Applications of 185. Hansen, J. C., Lebowitz, J., and Demeler, B. F., and Whitehouse, C. M. (1990) Mass
Isoelectric Focusing, Plenum, New York (1994)Biochemistry33, 13155–13163 Spectrom. Rev.9, 37
157. Egen, N. B., Bliss, M., Mayersohn, M., Owens, 186. Ralston, G. (1993) Introduction to Analytical 212. Dole, M., Mack, L. L., Hines, R. L., Mobley, R.
S. M., Arnold, L., and Bier, M. (1988) Anal. Ultracentrifugation, Beckman Instruments, C., Ferguson, L. D., and Alice, M. B. (1968) J.
Biochem.172, 488–494 Fullerton, California Chem. Phys.49, 2240
158. Bjellqvist, B., Ek, K., Righetti, P. G., Gianazza, 187. Stafford, W. F., and Schuster, T. M. (1995) in 213. Mann, M., and Wilm, M. (1995) Trends
E., Görg, A., Westermeier, R., and Postel, W. Introduction to Biophysical Methods for Protein Biochem. Sci.20, 219–224
(1982)J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods6, 317–339 and Nucleic Acid Research (Glasel, J. A., and 214. Mann, M., Meng, C. K., and Fenn, J. B. (1989)
159. Righetti, P. G., Gianazza, E., and Gelfi, C. Deutscher, M. P., eds), pp. 111–145, Academic Anal. Chem.61, 1702–1708
(1988)Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 335–338 Press, San Diego 215. Covey, T. R., Bonner, R. F., Shushan, B. I., and
160. Righetti, P. G. (1990) Immobilized pH Gradients: 188. Bowen, T. J. (1970) An Introduction to Ultra- Henion, J. (1988) Rapid Commun. Mass
Theory and Methodology, Elsevier, Amsterdam centrifugation, Wiley (Interscience), New York Spectrom.2, 249–256
161. Whitney, J. B., III, Cobb, R. R., Popp, R. A., 189. Bothwell, M. A., Howlett, G. J., and 216. Miranker, A., Kruppa, G. H., Robinson, C. V.,
and O’Rourke, T. W. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Schachman, H. K. (1978) J. Biol. Chem.253, Aplin, R. T., and Dobson, C. M. (1996) J. Am.
Sci. U.S.A.82, 7646–7650 2073–2076 Chem. Soc.118, 7402–7403
162. Madden, M. S. (1995) Anal. Biochem.229, 203– 190. Pollet, R. J., Haase, B. A., and Standaert, M. L. 217. Marshall, A. G., Senko, M. W., Li, W., Li, M.,
206 (1979)J. Biol. Chem.254, 30–33 Dillon, S., Guan, S., and Logan, T. M. (1997) J.
163. Anderson, N. (1979) Nature (London)278, 122– 190a.CRC Handbook of Biochemistry, (1968) Chem. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 433–434
123 Rubber Publ. Co., Cleveland, Ohio 218. Torchinsky, Y. M. (1981) Sulfur in Proteins,
164. Wade, N. (1981) Science211, 33–35 191. Jacobsen, M. P., Wills, P. R., and Winzor, D. J. Pergamon, Oxford
165. Henslee, J. G., and Srere, P. A. (1979) J. Biol. (1996)Biochemistry35, 13173–13179 219. Friedman, M. (1973) The Chemistry and
Chem.254, 5488–5491 191a.Colowick, S. P., and Kaplan, N. O., eds., (1968) Biochemistry of the Sulfhydryl Group in Amino
166. Hanash, S. M., and Strahler, J. R. (1989) Nature Methods Enzymol.12B, 388–389 Acids, Peptides and Proteins, Pergamon, Oxford
(London)337, 485–486 192. Squire, P. G., and Himmel, M. E. (1979) Arch. 220. Jocelyn, P. C. (1972) Biochemistry of the SH
167. Neukirchen, R. O., Schlosshauer, B., Baars, S., Biochem. Biophys.196, 165–177 Group, Academic Press, New York
Jackle, H., and Schwarz, U. (1982) J. Biol. 193. Andrews, P. (1965) Biochem. J.96, 595–606 221. Simpson, R. J., Neuberger, M. R., and Liu, T.-Y.
Chem.257, 15229–15234 194. Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R. (1980) (1976)J. Biol. Chem.251, 1936–1940
168. Racine, R. R., and Langley, C. H. (1980) Nature Biophysical Chemistry, Freeman, San Fransico, 222. Hugli, T. E., and Moore, S. (1972) J. Biol. Chem.
(London)283, 855–857 California (pp. 670–684) 247, 2828–2834
169. Celis, J. E., and Bravo, R., eds. (1984) Two- 195. Nakos, G., and Mortenson, L. (1971) 223. Chin, C. C. Q., and Wold, F. (1974) Anal.
Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis of Proteins: Biochemistry10, 455–458 Biochem.61, 379–391
Methods and Applications, Academic Press, 196. Mann, K. G., and Fish, W. W. (1972) Methods 224. Royer, G. P., Schwartz, W. E., and Liberatore,
New York Enzymol.26C, 28–42 F. A. (1977) Methods Enzymol.47E, 40–45
170. Celis, J. E., and Bravo, R. (1981) Trends 197. Igou, D. K., Lo, J. T., Clark, D. S., Mattice, W. 225. Glazer, A. N. (1976) in The Proteins, 3rd ed.,
Biochem. Sci.6, 197–201 L., and Younathan, E. S. (1974) Biochem. Vol. II (Neurath, H., and Hill, R. L., eds),
171. Garrels, J. I. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 5269–5282 Biophys. Res. Commun.60, 140–145 pp. 1–103, Academic Press, New York
172. Krauss, M. R., Collins, P. J., and Blose, S. H. 198. Weber, K., Pringle, J. R., and Osborn, M. 226. Plapp, B. V., Raftery, M. A., and Cole, R. D.
(1989)Nature (London)337, 669–670 (1972)Methods Enzymol.26C, 3–29 (1967)J. Biol. Chem.242, 265–270
173. Wood, T. D., Chen, L. H., Kelleher, N. L., 199. Wood, H. G., Werkman, C. H., Hemingway, 227. Doonan, S., and Fahmy, H. M. A. (1975) Eur. J.
Little, D. P., Kenyon, G. L., and McLafferty, F. A., and Nier, A. O. (1941) J. Biol. Chem.139, Biochem.56, 421–426
W. (1995) Biochemistry34, 16251–16254 377–381 228. Mitchell, W. M. (1977) Methods Enzymol.47E,
173a.McLafferty, F. W., Fridriksson, E. K., Horn, D. 200. Biemann, K. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 1920–1927 165–169
M., Lewis, M. A., and Zubarev, R. A. (1999) 200a.Niessen, W. M. A. (1998) Liquid Chromatogra- 229. Gadasi, H., Maruta, H., Collins, J. H., and
Science284, 1289 – 1290 phy - Mass Spectrometry, 2nd ed., Dekker, New Korn, E. D. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 3631–3636
174. Shevchenko, A., Jensen, O. N., Podtelejnikov, York 230. Drapeau, G. R. (1977) Methods Enzymol.47E,
A. V., Sagliocco, F., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., 200b.Chapman, J. R., ed. (2000) Mass Spectrometry of 189–191
Mortensen, P., Shevchenko.A, Boucherie, H., Proteins and Peptides, Hamana Press, Totowa, 231. Koida, M., and Walter, R. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.
and Mann, M. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. New Jersey 251, 7593–7599
U.S.A.93, 14440–14445 200c.Burlingame, A. L., Carr, S. A., and Baldwin, 232. Hayashi, R. (1977) Methods Enzymol.47E, 84–93
175. Wilm, M., Shevchenko, A., Houthaeve, T., M. A., eds. (2000) Mass Spectrometry in Biology 233. Krutzsch, H. C., and Pisano, J. J. (1977)
Breit, S., Schweigerer, L., Fotsis, T., and Mann, and Medicine, Hamana Press, Totowa, New Methods Enzymol.47E, 391–404
M. (1996) Nature (London)379, 466–469 Jersey 234. Mahoney, W. C., and Hermodson, M. A.
176. Hess, D., Covey, T. C., Winz, R., Brownsey, R. 201. Senko, M. W., and McLafferty, F. W. (1994) (1979)Biochemistry18, 3810–3814
W., and Aebersold, R. (1993) Protein Sci.2, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23, 763–785 235. Hancock, W. S., ed. (1996) New Methods in
1342–1351 202. Li, Y., Hunter, R. L., and McIver, R. T., Jr. Peptide Mapping for the Characterization of
177. Van Holde, K. E. (1985) Physical Biochemistry, (1994)Nature (London)370, 393–395 Proteins, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Engelwood Cliffs, 203. Siuzdak, G. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 236. Lundblad, R. L. (1995) Techniques in Protein
New Jersey 91, 11290–11297 Modification, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
178. Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R. (1980) 204. Caprioli, R. M., and Suter, M. J.-F. (1995) in 237. Sanger, F. (1949) Biochem. J.45, 563–574
Biophysical Chemistry, Freeman, San Francisco, Introduction to Biophysical Methods for Protein 238. Sanger, F. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biochem.57, 1–28
California and Nucleic Acid Research (Glasel, J. A., and 239. Ruthen, R. (1993) Sci. Am.269(Oct), 30–31
179. Svedburg, T., and Pederson, K. O. (1940) The Deutscher, M. P., eds), pp. 147-204, Academic 240. Aebersold, R. H., Leavitt, J., Saavedra, R. A.,
Ultracentrifuge, Oxford Univ. Press, London Press, San Diego Hood, L. E., and Kent, S. B. H. (1987) Proc.
180. Schachman, H. K. (1989) Nature (London)341, 205. Burlingame, A. L., and Carr, S. A., eds. (1996) Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 6970–6974
259–260 Mass Spectrometry in the Biological Sciences, 241. Edman, P. (1956) Acta Chem. Scand.10, 761–768
181. Schachman, H. K. (1992) in Analytical Humana Press, Totowa, New Jersey 242. Edman, P., and Begg, C. (1967) Eur. J. Biochem.
Ultracentrifugation in Biochemistry and Polymer 206. Karas, M., and Hillenkamp, F. (1988) Anal. 1, 80–91
Science (Harding, S. E., Rowe, A. J., and Chem.60, 2299–2303 243. Niall, H. D. (1977) Nature (London)268, 279–280
Horton, J. C., eds), pp. 3–15, Royal Society for 207. Tanaka, K., Waki, H., Ido, Y., Akita, S., 244. Schlesinger, D. H., ed. (1988) Macromolecular
Chemistry, Cambridge, UK Yoshida, Y., and Yoshida, T. (1988) Rapid Sequencing and Synthesis, Liss, New York
182. Schachman, H. K. (1959) Ultracentrifugation in Commun. Mass Spectrom.2, 151–156 245. Shively, J. E., ed. (1986) Methods of Protein
Biochemistry, Academic Press, New York 208. Beavis, R. C., and Chait, B. T. (1989) Rapid Microcharacterization, Humana Press, Clifton,
183. Rivas, G., and Minton, A. P. (1993) Trends Commun. Mass Spectrom.3, 233–237 New Jersey
Biochem. Sci.18, 284–287 209. Hillenkamp, F., Karas, M., Beavis, R. C., and
Chait, B. T. (1991) Anal. Chem.63, 1193A–1198A

--- Page 157 ---

153
References
246. Bhown, A. S. (1988) Protein/Peptide Sequence 276. Feeney, R. E., Blankenhorn, G., and Dixon, H. 309. Cortese, R., ed. (1996) Combinatorial Libraries:
Analysis: Current Methodoligies, CRC Press, B. F. (1975) Advances in Protein Chemistry, Vol. Synthesis, Screening and Application Potential,
Boca Raton, Florida 29, Academic Press, New York (pp. 135–203) Walter de Gruyter & Co., New York
247. Hunkapiller, M. W., and Hood, L. E. (1983) 277. Acharya, A. S., and Manjula, B. N. (1987) 310. Ellman, J., Stoddard, B., and Wells, J. (1997)
Science219, 650–659 Biochemistry26, 3524–3530 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 2779–2782
248. Totty, N. F., Waterfield, M. D., and Hsuan, J. J. 278. Rypniewski, W. R., Holden, H. M., and 311. Kishchenko, G., Batliwala, H., and Makowski,
(1992)Protein Sci.1, 1215–1224 Rayment, I. (1993) Biochemistry32, 9851–9858 L. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.241, 208–213
249. Gershoni, J. M. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 279. Jentoft, N., and Dearborn, D. G. (1979) J. Biol. 312. Scott, J. K. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 241–
103–106 Chem.254, 4359–4365 245
250. Moos, M., Jr., Nguyen, N. Y., and Liu, T.-Y. 280. Hennecke, M., and Plapp, B. N. (1984) Anal. 312a.Barbas, C. F., Burton, D. B., Scott, J. K., and
(1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 6005–6008 Biochem.136, 110–118 Silverman, G. J. (2000) Phage Display: A
251. Baldo, B. A., and Tovey, E. R., eds. (1989) 281. Brocklehurst, K. (1979) Int. J. Biochem10, 259– Laboratory Manual Cold Spring Harbor Press,
Protein Blotting, S. Karger, Farmington, CT 274 Cold Spring Harbor, New York
252. Wellner, D., Panneerselvam, C., and Horecker, 282. Degani, Y., and Patchornik, A. (1974) 313. Marvin, D. A., (1998) Current Opinions in
B. L. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.87, Biochemistry13, 1–11 Structural Biology8, 150–158
1947–1949 283. Riddles, P. W., Blakeley, R. L., and Zerner, B. 313a.Barbas, C. F., Burton, D. B., Scott, J. K., and
253. Bailey, J. M., Nikfarjam, F., Shenoy, N. R., and (1983)Methods Enzymol.91, 49–60 Silverman, G. J. (2000) Phage Display: A
Shively, J. E. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 1622–1633 284. Pande, C. S., Pelzig, M., and Glass, J. D. (1980) Laboratory Manual Cold Spring Harbor Lab.
254. Bailey, J. M., Shenoy, N. R., Ronk, M., and Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 895–899 Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
Shively, J. E. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 68–80 285. Fraker, P. J., and Speck, J. C., Jr. (1978) 314. McConnell, S. J., and Hoess, R. H. (1995) J. Mol.
255. Johnson, R. S., and Walsh, K. A. (1992) Protein Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.80, 849–857 Biol.250, 460–470
Sci.1, 1083–1091 286. Tolan, D. R., Lambert, J. M., Boileau, G., 315. Katz, B. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 15421–15429
255a.Keough, T., Youngquist, R. S., and Lacey, M. P. Fanning, T. G., Kenny, J. W., Vassos, A., and 316. Allen, J. B., Walberg, M. W., Edwards, M. C.,
(1999)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 7131– Traut, R. R. (1980) Anal. Biochem.103, 101–109 and Elledge, S. J. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20,
7136 287. Miles, E. W. (1977) Methods Enzymol.47, 431– 511–516
256. Hunt, D. F., Shabanowitz, J., Yates, J. R., III, 442 317. Gates, C. M., Stemmer, W. P. C., Kaptein, R.,
Zhu, N.-Z., Russell, D. H., and Castro, M. E. 288. Kawata, Y., Sakiyama, F., Hayashi, F., and and Schatz, P. J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 373–386
(1987)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 620–623 Kyogoku, Y. (1990) Eur. J. Biochem.187, 255–262 318. Bastos, M., Maeji, N. J., and Abeles, R. H. (1995)
257. Takao, T., Hitouji, T., Shimonishi, Y., Tanabe, 289. Secundo, F., Carrea, G., D’Arrigo, P., and Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 6738–6742
T., Inouye, S., and Inouye, M. (1984) J. Biol. Servi, S. (1996) Biochemistry35, 9631–9636 319. Han, H., Wolfe, M. M., Brenner, S., and Janda,
Chem.259, 6105–6109 290. Miura, S., Tomita, S., and Ichikawa, Y. (1991) K. D. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92,
257a.Jaffe, H., Veeranna, and Pant, H. C. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.266, 19212–19216 6419–6423
Biochemistry37, 16211–16224 291. Colman, R. F. (1983) Ann. Rev. Biochem.52, 320. Chu, Y.-H., Dunayevskiy, Y. M., Kirby, D. P.,
257b.Whitelegge, J. P., Gundersen, C. B., and Faull, 67–91 Vouros, P., and Karger, B. L. (1996) J. Am.
K. F. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 1423 –1430 292. Chowdhry, V., and Westheimer, F. H. (1979) Chem. Soc.118, 7827–7835
258. Yazdanparast, R., Andrews, P. C., Smith, D. Ann. Rev. Biochem.48, 293 – 325 321. Déprez, B., Williard, X., Bourel, L., Coste, H.,
L., and Dixon, J. E. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 293. Jelenc, P. C., Cantor, C. R., and Simon, S. R. Hyafil, F., and Tartar, A. (1995) J. Am. Chem.
2507–2513 (1978)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.75, 3564– Soc.117, 5405–5406
259. Brown, J. R., and Hartley, B. S. (1966) Biochem. 3568 322. Kim, R. M., Manna, M., Hutchins, S. M.,
J.101, 214–228 294. Simmonds, R. J. (1992) Chemistry of Griffin, P. R., Yates, N. A., Bernick, A. M., and
260. Svobodova, S., Hais, I. M., and Kostir, J. V. Biomolecules, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida Chapman, K. T. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(1953)Chem. Listy47, 205 295. Bodanszky, M., Bodanszky, A., and Trost, B. U.S.A.93, 10012–10017
261. Chen, R. F., Smith, P. D., and Maly, M. (1978) M., eds. (1994) The Practice of Peptide Synthesis, 323. Sundberg, S. A., Barrett, R. W., Pirrung, M.,
Arch. Biochem. Biophys.189, 241–250 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, New York Lu, A. L., Kiangsoontra, B., and Holmes, C. P.
262. Lee, K. S., and Drescher, D. G. (1979) J. Biol. 296. Lloyd-Williams, P., Albericio, F., and Giralt, E. (1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 12050–12057
Chem.254, 6248–6251 (1997)Chemical Approaches to the Synthesis of 324. Baum, R. M. (1991) Chem. Eng. News69, 21–22
263. Chen, R. F., Scott, C., and Trepman, E. (1979) Peptides and Proteins, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 325. Slayter, E. M., and Slayter, H. S. (1992) Light
Biochim. Biophys. Acta.576, 440–455 Florida and Electron Microscopy, Cambridge Univ.
264. Lunte, S. M. et al. (1989) Anal. Biochem.178, 297. Kent, S. B. H. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biochem.57, Press, New York
202–207 957–989 326. Bracegirdle, B. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14,
265. Sharma, Y., Rao, C. M., Rao, S. C., Krishna, A. 298. Kaiser, E. T., Mihara, H., Laforet, G. A., Kelly, 464–468
G., Somasundaram, T., and Balasubramanian, J. W., Walters, L., Findeis, M. A., and Sasaki, T. 327. Matthews, C. K., and van Holde, K. E. (1996)
D. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 20923–20927 (1989)Science243, 187–192 Biochemistry, 2nd ed., Benjamin, Menlo Park,
266. Wilson, C. M. (1983) Methods Enzymol.91, 299. Merrifield, B. (1986) Science232, 341–347 California
236–247 300. Atherton, E., Logan, C. J., and Sheppard, R. C. 328. Lichtman, J. W. (1994) Sci. Am.271(Aug), 40–45
267. Merril, C. R. (1990) Methods Enzymol.182, (1981)J. Chem. Soc., Perkin, I., 538–546 329. Shotton, D., and White, N. (1989) Trends
477–488 301. Atherton, E., and Sheppard, R. C. (1985) J. Biochem. Sci.14, 435–439
268. Finn, F. M., and Hofmann, K. (1976) in The Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun., 165–166 330. Boyde, A. (1985) Science230, 1270–1276
Proteins, 3rd ed., Vol. II (Neurath, H., and Hill, 301a.Miller, S. C., and Scanlan, T. S. (1998) J. Am. 331. Gura, T. (1997) Science276, 1988–1990
R. L., eds), pp. 105–253, Academic Press, Chem. Soc.120, 2690–2691 332. Bennett, B. D., Jetton, T. L., Ying, G.,
New York 302. You-shang, Z. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8, Magnuson, M. A., and Piston, D. W. (1996)
269. Burnette, W. N. (1981) Anal. Biochem.112, 16–17 J. Biol. Chem.271, 3647–3651
195–203 303. Kullman, W. (1987) Enzymatic Peptide 333. Pennisi, E. (1997) Science275, 480–481
270. Karey, K. P., and Sirbasku, D. A. (1989) Anal. Synthesis, CRC Press, Boca Raon, Florida 334. Maiti, S., Shear, J. B., Williams, R. M., Zipfel,
Biochem.178, 255–259 304. Liu, C.-F., and Tam, J. P. (1994) J. Am. Chem. W. R., and Webb, W. W. (1997) Science275,
271. Strickland, E. H., Billups, C., and Kay, E. Soc.116, 4149–4153 530–532
(1972)Biochemistry11, 3657–3662 305. Tam, J. P., Lu, Y.-A., Liu, C.-F., and Shao, J. 335. Pool, R. (1988) Science241, 25–26
272. Metzler, D. E., Harris, C., Yang, I.-Y., Siano, D., (1995)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 12485– 336. Betzig, E., and Chichester, R. J. (1993) Science
and Thomson, J. A. (1972)Biochem. Biophys. 12489 262, 1422–1425
Res. Commun.46, 1588–1597 306. Noren, C. J., Anthony-Cahill, S. J., Griffith, M. 337. Dykstra, M. J. (1992) Biological Electron
273. Morton, R. A. (1975) Biochemical Spectroscopy, C., and Schultz, P. G. (1989) Science244, Microscopy, Plenum, New York
Wiley, New York 182–188 338. Hand, A. R. (1995) in Introduction to
274. Pace, C. N., Vajdos, F., Fee, L., Grimsley, G., 307. Borman, S. (1996) Chem. Eng. News74(Feb 12), Biophysical Methods for Protein and Nucleic Acid
and Gray, T. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 2411–2423 29–35 Research (Glasel, J. A., and Deutscher, M. P.,
275. Glazer, A. N., Delange, R. J., and Sigman, D. 308. Youngquist, R. S., Fuentes, G. R., Lacey, M. P., eds), pp. 205-260, Academic Press, San Diego
S. (1976) Chemical Modification of Proteins: and Keough, T. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 339. Nellist, P. D., McCallum, B. C., and
Selected Methods and Analytical Procedures, 3900–3906 Rodenburg, J. M. (1995) Nature (London)374,
Elsevier, New York 630–632

--- Page 158 ---

154 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
References
340. Schliwa, M. (1997) Nature (London)387, 764 374. McPherson, A. (1982) Preparation and Analysis 402. Day, J., and McPherson, A. (1992) Protein Sci.
341. Bubel, A., ed. (1989) Microstructure and of Protein Crystals, Wiley, New York 1, 1254–1268
Function of Cells, 1st ed., Ellis Harwood, New 375. Wyckoff, H. W., Hirs, C. H. W., and Timasheff, 403. Koszelak, S., Day, J., Leja, C., Cudney, R., and
York S. N., eds. (1985) Methods in Enzymology, Vol. McPherson, A. (1995) Biophys. J.69, 13–19
342. Penman, S. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114,115, Academic Press, Orlando, Florida 404. Service, R. F. (1999) Science285, 1342–1346
92, 5251–5257 376. Allewell, N. M., and Trikha, J. (1995) in 405. Knäblein, J., Neuefeind, T., Schneider, F.,
343. Morel, G., ed. (1995) Visualization of Nucleic Introduction to Biophysical Methods for Protein Bergner, A., Messerschmidt, A., Löwe, J.,
Acids, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida and Nucleic Acid Research (Glasel, J. A., and Steipe, B., and Huber, R. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.
344. Caspar, D. L. D., and DeRosier, D. J. (1982) Deutscher, M. P., eds), pp. 381–431, Academic 270, 1–7
Science218, 653–655 Press, San Diego 406. Glusker, J. P. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9,
345. Frank, J., ed. (1992) Electron Tomography: 377. Verlinde, C. L. M. J., Merritt, E. A., Van Den 328–330
Three-Dimensional Imaging with the Transmis- Akker, F., Kim, H., Feil, I., Delboni, L. F., 407. Guss, J. M., Merritt, E. A., Phizackerley, R. P.,
sion Electron Microscope, Plenum, New York Mande, S. C., Sarfaty, S., Petra, P. H., and Hol, Hedman, B., Murata, M., Hodgson, K. O., and
346. Skoglund, U., and Daneholt, B. (1986) Trends W. G. J. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 1670–1686 Freeman, H. C. (1988) Science241, 806–811
Biochem. Sci.11, 499–503 378. Woolfson, N. M. (1997) An Introduction to X-ray 408. Walter, R. L., Ealick, S. E., Friedman, A. M.,
347. Lambert, O., Boisset, N., Taveau, J.-C., and Crystallography, 2nd ed., Cambridge Univ. Blake, R. C., II, Proctor, P., and Shoham, M.
Lamy, J. N. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.244, 640–647 Press, New York (1996)J. Mol. Biol.263, 730–751
348. Taveau, J.-C., Boisset, N., Lamy, J., Lambert, 379. Thomas, J. M. (1993) Nature (London)364, 409. Budisa, N., Karnbrock, W., Steinbacher, S.,
O., and Lamy, J. N. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.266, 478–482 Humm, A., Prade, L., Neuefeind, T., Moroder,
1002–1015 380. Dounce, A. L., and Allen, P. Z. (1988) Trends L., and Huber, R. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.270, 616–
349. De Rosier, D. J. (1997) Nature (London)386, Biochem. Sci.13, 317–320 623
26–27 381. Bernal, J. D., and Crowfoot, D. (1934) Nature 410. Longhi, S., Czjzek, M., Lamzin, V., Nicolas, A.,
350. Dorset, D. L. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (London)133, 794–795 and Cambillau, C. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.268,
U.S.A.94, 1791–1794 382. Glusker, J. P. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 2465-2469 779–799
351. Binnig, G., and Rohrer, H. (1987) Rev. Mod. 383. Perutz, M. F., Muirhead, H., Cox, J. M., 410a.Yamano, A., Heo, N.-H., and Teeter, M. M.
Phys.59, 615–625 Goaman, L. G. G., Mathews, F. S., McGandy, (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 9597–9600
352. Binnig, G., and Rohrer, H. (1985) Sci. Am.253, E. L., and Webb, L. E. (1968) Nature (London) 410b.Lamzin, V. S., Morris, R. J., Dauter, Z., Wilson,
50–56 219, 29–32 K. S., and Teeter, M. M. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.
353. Wiesendanger, R. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 384. Perutz, M. (1992) Protein Structure: New 274, 20753–20755
U.S.A.94, 12749–12750 Approaches to Disease and Therapy, W.H. 411. Rhee, S., Silva, M. M., Hyde, C. C., Rogers, P.
354. Wickramasinghe, H. K. (1989) Sci. Am. Freeman, San Fransico and New York H., Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., and Arnone,
261(Oct), 98–105 385. Eisenberg, D. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 1625–1628 A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 17293–17302
355. Hansma, P. K., Elings, V. B., Marti, O., and 386. Perutz, M. F. (1978) Sci. Am.239(Dec), 92–125 412. Frauenfelder, H., Petsko, G. A., and Tsernoglou,
Bracker, C. E. (1988) Science242, 209–216 387. Tegze, M., and Faigel, G. (1996) Nature (London) D. (1979) Nature (London)280, 558–563
356. Pool, R. (1990) Science247, 634–636 380, 49–51 413. Arnone, A., Rogers, P. H., Hyde, C. C., Briley,
357. Edstrom, R. D., Yang, X., Lee, G., and Evans, D. 388. Fadley, C. S., and Len, P. M. (1996) Nature P. D., Metzler, C. M., and Metzler, D. E. (1985)
F. (1990) FASEB J.4, 3144–3151 (London)380, 27–28 inTransaminases (Christen, P., and Metzler, D.
358. Engel, A. (1991) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. 389. Rhodes, G. (1993) Crystallography Made Crystal E., eds), pp. 138–155, Wiley, New York
Chem.20, 79–108 Clear, Academic Press, New York 414. Wlodawer, A. (1982) Prog. Biophys. and Mol.
359. Amato, I. (1997) Science276, 1982–1985 389a.Glusker, J. P., and Trueblood, K. N. (1985) Biol.40, 115–159
360. Prater, C. B., Butt, H. J., and Hansma, P. K. Crystal Structure Analysis A Primer, 2nd ed., 415. Kossiakoff, A. A. (1985) Ann. Rev. Biochem.54,
(1990)Nature (London)345, 839–840 Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 1195–1227
361. Hansma, H. G., and Hoh, J. H. (1994) Annu. 389b.Drenth, J. (1994) Principles of Protein X-ray 416. Butler, D. (1994) Nature (London)371, 469
Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23, 115–139 Crystallography, Springler-Verlag, New York 417. Hellemans, A. (1997) Science277, 1214–1215
362. Radmacher, M., Tillmann, R. W., Fritz, M., 389c.McRee, D. E. (1999) Practical Protein 418. Glanz, J. (1995) Science267, 1904–1906
and Gaub, H. E. (1992) Science257, 1900–1905 Crystallography, Academic Press, San Diego, 419. Pool, R. (1988) Science241, 295
363. Karrasch, S., Hegerl, R., Hoh, J. H., Baumeister, California 420. Eisenberger, P., and Suckewer, S. (1996)
W., and Engel, A. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 390. Sweet, R. M. (1985) Methods Enzymol.114, 19–46 Science274, 201–202
U.S.A.91, 836–838 391. Kendrew, J. C. (1963) Science139, 1259–1266 421. Neutze, R., and Hajdu, J. (1997) Proc. Natl.
364. Mou, J., Yang, J., and Shao, Z. (1995) J. Mol. 392. Kendrew, J. C., Dickerson, R. E., Strandberg, Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 5651–5655
Biol.248, 507–512 B. E., Hart, R. G., Davies, D. R., Phillips, D. C., 422. Hajdu, J., and Johnson, L. N. (1990)
365. Yip, C. M., and Ward, M. D. (1996) Biophys. J. and Shore, V. C. (1960) Nature (London)185, Biochemistry29, 1669–1678
71, 1071–1078 422–427 423. Duke, E. M. H., Wakatsuki, S., Hadfield, A.,
366. Mou, J., Sheng, S., Ho, R., and Shao, Z. (1996) 393. Rossman, M. G. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 1731–1733 and Johnson, L. N. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 1178–
Biophys. J.71, 2213–2221 394. Blake, C. C. F., Koenig, D. F., Mair, G. A., 1196
367. Kuznetsov, YuG., Malkin, A. J., Land, T. A., North, A. C. T., Phillips, D. C., and Sarma, V. 424. Jacoby, M. (1997) Chem. Eng. NewsDec 8, 5
DeYoreo, J. J., Barba, A. P., Konnert, J., and R. (1965) Nature (London)206, 757–761 425. Rischel, C., Rousse, A., Uschmann, I., Albouy, P.-
McPherson, A. (1997) Biophys. J.72, 2357–2364 395. Laskowski, R. A., Hutchinson, E. G., Michie, A., Geindre, J.-P., Audebert, P., Gauthier, J.-C.,
367a.Czajkowsky, D. M., and Shao, Z. (1998) FEBS A. D., Wallace, A. C., Jones, M. L., and Förster, E., Martin, J.-L., and Antonetti, A.
Letters430, 51– 54 Thornton, J. M. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22, (1997)Nature (London)390, 490–492
368. Noy, A., Frisbie, C. D., Rozsnyai, L. F., 488–490 426. Rattle, H. (1995) An NMR Primer for Life
Wrighton, M. S., and Lieber, C. M. (1995) J. 396. Gerstein, M., and Levitt, M. (1997) Proc. Natl. Scientists, Partnership Press, Tuckerton, NJ
Am. Chem. Soc.117, 7943–7951 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 11911–11916 427. Roberts, G. C. K., ed. (1993) NMR of
369. Boland, T., and Ratner, B. D. (1995) Proc. Natl. 397. Marvin, D. A., and Nave, C. (1982) in Macromolecules. A Practical Approach, IRL
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 5297–5301 Structural Molecular Biology (Davies, D. B., Press, Oxford
370. Miles, M. (1997) Science277, 1845–1847 Saenger, W., and Danyluk, S. S., eds), 428. Evans, J. N. S. (1995) Biomolecular NMR
371. Hansma, H. G., Laney, D. E., Bezanilla, M., pp. 3–44, Plenum, New York Spectroscopy, Oxford University Press, New York
Sinsheimer, R. L., and Hansma, P. K. (1995) 398. Ducruix, A., and Giegé, R., eds. (1999) 429. Olson, D. L., Peck, T. L., Webb, A. G., Magin,
Biophys. J.68, 1672–1677 Crystallization of Nucleic Acids and Proteins, R. L., and Sweedler, J. V. (1995) Science270,
371a.Fisher, T. E., Oberhauser, A. F., Carrion- 2nd ed., IRL Press, Oxford 1967–1969
Vazquez, M., Marszalek, P. E., and Fernandez, 399. McPherson, A., Koszelak, S., Axelrod, H., Day, 430. Wuthrich, K. (1986) NMR of Proteins and
J. M. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24, 379 –384 J., Williams, R., Robinson, L., McGrath, M., Nucleic Acids, Wiley, New York
372. Blundell, T. L., and Johnson, L. N. (1976) and Cascio, D. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 1969– 431. Nageswara Rao, B. D., and Kemple, M. D.,
Protein Crystallography, Academic Press, New 1975 eds. (1996) NMR as a structural tool for
York 400. McPherson, A., Jr. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.251, macromolecules: Current status and future
373. Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R. (1980) 6300–6303 directions, Plenum, New York
Biophysical Chemistry, Freeman, San Francisco, 401. Ray, W. J., Jr., and Puvathingal, J. M. (1986) 432. Bovey, F. A. (1969) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
California (pp. 687–811) J. Biol. Chem.261, 11544–11549 Spectroscopy, Academic Press, New York

--- Page 159 ---

155
References
433. Sanders, J. K. M., and Hunter, B. K. (1993) 465. Solum, M. S., Altmann, K. L., Strohmeier, M., 497. Bax, A., and Grzesiek, S. (1993) in NMR of
Modern NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd ed., Oxford Berges, D. A., Zhang, Y., Facelli, J. C., Proteins (Clore, G. M., and Gronenborn, A. M.,
Univ. Press, London Pugmire, R. J., and Grant, D. M. (1997) eds), pp. 33–52, CRC Press, Boca Raton,
434. Dybowski, C., and Lichter, R. L., eds. (1987) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 9804–9809 Florida
NMR Spectroscopy Techniques, Vol. 5, Dekker, 466. Verkade, J. G., and Quin, L. D., eds. (1987) 498. Clore, G. M., and Gronenborn, A. M. (1994)
New York Phosphorus-31 NMR Spectroscopy in Protein Sci.3, 372–390
435. Bangerter, B. W. (1995) in Introduction to Stereochemical Analysis, VCH Publishers, 499. Hoitnik, C. W. G., Driscoll, P. C., Hill, H. A. O.,
Biophysical Methods for Protein and Nucleic Acid Deerfield Beach, Florida and Canters, G. W. (1994)Biochemistry33,
Research (Glasel, J. A., and Deutscher, M. P., 467. Ugurbil, K., Kingsley-Hickman, P. B., Sako, E. 3560–3571
eds), pp. 317-379, Academic Press, San Diego Y., Zimmer, S., Mohanakrishnan, P., Robitaille, 500. Yamazaki, T., Tochio, H., Furui, J., Aimoto, S.,
436. Freeman, R. (1997) A Handbook of Nuclear P. M. L., Thoma, W. J., Johnson, A., Foker, J. E., and Kyogoku, Y. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119,
Magnetic Resonance, 2nd ed., Addison Wesley From, A. H. L. (1987) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.508, 872–880
Longman Limited, Essex, England 265–286 501. Yamazaki, T., Lee, W., Arrowsmith, C. H.,
437. Emsley, J. W., ed. (1996) Encyclopedia of NMR, 468. Feeney, J., McCormick, J. E., Bauer, C. J., Muhandiram, D. R., and Kay, L. E. (1994)
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Sussex, England Birdsall, B., Moody, C. M., Starkmann, B. A., J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 11655–11666
438. Markley, J. L. (1975) Acc. Chem. Res.8, 70–80 Young, D. W., Francis, P., Havlin, R. H., 502. Hu, J.-S., and Bax, A. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
439. Perkins, S. J. (1982) in Biological Magnetic Arnold, W. D., and Oldfield, E. (1996) J. Am. 119, 6360–6368
Resonance, Vol. 4 (Berliner, L. J., and Reuben, Chem. Soc.118, 8700–8706 503. Song, S., Velde, D. V., Gunn, C. W., and
J., eds), pp. 193-334, Plenum Press, New York 469. Lau, E. Y., and Gerig, J. T. (1997) Biophys. J.73, Himes, R. H. (1994) Biochemistry33, 693–698
and London 1579–1592 504. Barsukov, I. L., Lian, L.-Y., Ellis, J., Sze, K.-H.,
440. Osapay, K., and Case, D. A. (1991) J. Am. 470. Jarema, M. A. C., Lu, P., and Miller, J. H. (1981) Shaw, W. V., and Roberts, G. C. K. (1996) J.
Chem. Soc.113, 9436–9444 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.78, 2707–2711 Mol. Biol.262, 543–558
441. Szilágyi, L. (1995) Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. 471. Slebe, J. C., and Martinez-Carrion, M. (1990) 505. Wu, W.-J., Anderson, V. E., Raleigh, D. P., and
Spectrosc. 27, Part 4, 326–443 J. Biol. Chem.253, 2093–2097 Tonge, P. J. (1997) Biochemistry36, 2211–2220
442. Williamson, M. P., Kikuchi, J., and Asakura, T. 472. Briley, P. A., Eisenthal, R., Harrison, R., and 506. Metzler, W. J., Hare, D. R., and Pardi, A.
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.247, 541–546 Smith, G. D. (1990) Biochem. J.163, 325–331 (1989)Biochemistry28, 7045–7052
443. Sitkoff, D., and Case, D. A. (1997) J. Am. Chem. 473. Roberts, J. K. M., Wade-Jardetzky, N., and 507. McDowell, L. M., Lee, M., McKay, R. A.,
Soc.119, 12262–12273 Jardetzky, O. (1981) Biochemistry20, 5389– Anderson, K. S., and Schaefer, J. (1996)
444. Gu, Z., Zambrano, R., and McDermott, A. 5394 Biochemistry35, 3328–3334
(1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 6368–6372 474. Deutsch, C. J., and Taylor, J. S. (1987) Ann. 508. Pflugrath, J. W., Wiegand, G., Huber, R., and
445. Gu, Z., Ridenour, C. F., Bronnimann, C. E., N.Y. Acad. Sci.508, 33 Vértesy, L. (1986) J. Mol. Biol.189, 383–386
Iwashita, T., and McDermott, A. (1996) J. Am. 475. Gutowsky, H. S., McCall, D. W., McGarvey, B. 509. Kline, A. D., Braun, W., and Wüthrich, K.
Chem. Soc.118, 822–829 R., and Meyer, L. H. (1952)J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1986)J. Mol. Biol.189, 377–382
446. de Dios, A. C., Pearson, J. G., and Oldfield, E. 74, 4809–4817 510. McDonald, C. C., and Phillips, W. D. (1969)
(1993)Science260, 1491–1496 476. Chang, Y. C., and Graves, D. J. (1985) J. Biol. J. Am. Chem. Soc.91, 1513–1521
447. Sulzbach, H. M., Schleyer, P. V. R., and Chem.260, 2709–2714 511. Nietlispach, D., Clowes, R. T., Broadhurst, R.
Schaefer, H. F., III (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 477. Scott, R. D., Chang, Y.-C., Graves, D. J., and W., Ito, Y., Keeler, J., Kelly, M., Ashurst, J.,
3967–3972 Metzler, D. E. (1985) Biochemistry24, 7668–7681 Oschkinat, H., Domaille, P. J., and Laue, E. D.
448. Wishart, D. S., Sykes, B. D., and Richards, F. 478. Saunders, M., Jiménez-Vázquez, H. A., Cross, (1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 407–415
M. (1992) Biochemistry31, 1647–1651 R. J., Mroczkowski, S., Freedberg, D. I., and 512. Rosen, M. K., Gardner, K. H., Willis, R. C.,
449. Linderstrøm-Lang, K. (1955) Chemical Society Anet, F. A. L. (1994) Nature (London)367, 256– Parris, W. E., Pawson, T., and Kay, L. E. (1996)
Special Publication, No. 2, 1–20 257 J. Mol. Biol.263, 627–636
450. Barfield, M., and Karplus, M. (1969) J. Am. 479. Adebodun, F., and Jordan, F. (1988) J. Am. 513. Venters, R. A., Farmer, B. T., II, Fierke, C. A.,
Chem. Soc.91, 1–16 Chem. Soc.110, 309–310 and Spicer, L. D. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.264, 1101–
451. Karplus, M. (1963) J. Am. Chem. Soc.85, 2870– 480. Springer, C. S., Jr. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biophys. 1116
2871 Biophys. Chem.16, 375–399 514. LeMaster, D. M., and Richards, F. M. (1988)
452. Bax, A. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biochem.58, 223–256 481. Wittenberg, B. A., and Gupta, R. K. (1985) Biochemistry27, 142–150
453. Wang, A. C., and Bax, A. (1996) J. Am. Chem. J. Biol. Chem.260, 2031–2034 515. Bax, A., Kay, L. E., Sparks, S. W., and Torchia,
Soc.118, 2483–2494 482. Jelicks, L. A., and Gupta, R. K. (1989) J. Biol. D. A. (1989) J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 408–409
454. Stonehouse, J., Adell, P., Keeler, J., and Shaka, Chem.264, 15230–15235 516. Torchia, D. A., Sparks, S. W., and Bax, A.
A. J. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 6037–6038 483. Price, W. S., Ge, N.-H., Hong, L.-Z., and (1989)Biochemistry28, 5509–5524
455. Aguayo, J. B., Gamcsik, M. P., and Dick, J. D. Hwang, L.-P. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 517. Lowry, D. F., Redfield, A. G., McIntosh, L. P.,
(1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 19552–19557 1095–1105 and Dahlquist, F. W. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
456. Ackerman, J. J. H., Ewy, C. S., Kim, S.-G., and 484. Wang, S. M., and Gilpin, R. K. (1983) Anal. 110, 6885–6886
Shalwitz, R. A. (1987) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.508, Chem.55, 493–497 518. Stockman, B. J., Reily, M. D., Westler, W. M.,
89–98 485. Markham, G. D. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, Ulrich, E. L., and Markley, J. L. (1989)
457. Breitmaier, E., and Voelter, W. (1987) Carbon-13 1507–1509 Biochemistry28, 230–236
NMR Spectroscopy, 3rd ed., VCH Publishers, 486. Denisov, V. P., and Halle, B. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 519. Qian, H., Mayo, S. L., and Morton, A. (1994)
New York 245, 682–687 Biochemistry33, 8167–8171
458. Beckmann, N. (1995) Carbon-13 NMR 487. Mullen, G. P., Dunlap, R. B., and Odom, J. D. 519a.Riek, R., Pervushin, K., and Wüthrich, K.
Spectroscopy of Biological Systems, Academic (1986)Biochemistry25, 5625–5632 (2000)Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 462–468
Press, New York 488. Aldhous, P. (1991) Nature (London)353, 689 520. Günter, P., Braun, W., Billeter, M., and Wüthrich,
459. Gronenborn, A. M., Clore, G. M., Schmeissner, 489. Becker, E. D., and Farrar, T. C. (1972) Science K. (1989) J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 3997–4004
U., and Wingfield, P. T. (1986) Eur. J. Biochem. 178, 361–368 521. Oh, B.-H., Westler, W. M., and Markley, J. L.
161, 37–43 490. Bax, A., and Lerner, L. (1986) Science232, (1989)J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 3083–3085
460. Clore, G. M., Bax, A., Driscoll, P. C., 960–967 522. Cross, T. A., and Opella, S. J. (1983) J. Am. Chem.
Wingfield, P. T., and Gronenborn, A. M. (1990) 491. Yamazaki, T., Muhandiram, R., and Kay, L. E. Soc.105, 306–308
Biochemistry29, 8172–8184 (1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 8266–8278 523. Rothgeb, T. M., and Oldfield, E. (1981) J. Biol.
461. Jue, T., Rothman, D. L., Shulman, G. I., 492. Farrar, T. C., and Becker, E. D. (1971) Pulse and Chem.256, 1432–1446
Tavitian, B. A., DeFronzo, R. A., and Shulman, Fourier Transform NMR, Academic Press, New 524. Buck, M., Schwalbe, H., and Dobson, C. M.
R. G. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.86, York (1995)Biochemistry34, 13219–13232
4489–4491 493. Wüthrich, K. (1989) Science243, 45–50 525. Nicholson, L. K., Kay, L. E., Baldisseri, D. M.,
462. Markley, J. L. (1989) Methods Enzymol.176, 494. van de Ven, F. J. M., and Hilbers, C. W. (1986) Arango, J., Young, P. E., Bax, A., and Torchia, D.
12–64 J. Mol. Biol.192, p. 419-441 A. (1992) Biochemistry31, 5253–5263
463. Pelton, J. G., Torchia, D. A., Meadow, N. D., 495. Baniak, E. L., Rivier, J. E., Struthers, R. S., 526. Gardner, K. H., and Kay, L. E. (1997) J. Am.
and Roseman, S. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 543–558 Hagler, A. T., and Gierasch, L. M. (1987) Chem. Soc.119, 7599–7600
464. Rajagopal, P., Waygood, E. B., and Klevit, R. Biochemistry26, 2642–2656 527. Lenkinski, R. E., Dallas, J. L., and Glickson, J.
E. (1994) Biochemistry33, 15271–15282 496. Wüthrich, K. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 22059– D. (1979) J. Am. Chem. Soc.101, 3071–3077
22062

--- Page 160 ---

156 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
References
528. Carver, J. A., and Bradbury, J. H. (1984) 558. Wagner, D. S., Melton, L. G., Yan, Y., Erickson,
Biochemistry23, 4890–4905 B. W., and Anderegg, R. J. (1994) Protein Sci.3,
529. Bothelho, L. H., and Gurd, F. R. N. (1978) 1305–1314
Biochemistry17, 5188–5196 559. Zhang, Z., Post, C. B., and Smith, D. L. (1996)
530. Bothelho, L. H., Friend, S. H., Matthew, J. B., Biochemistry35, 779–791
Lehman, L. D., Hanania, G. I. H., and Gurd, F. 560. Zappacosta, F., Pessi, A., Bianchi, E.,
R. N. (1978) Biochemistry17, 5197–5205 Venturini, S., Sollazzo, M., Tramontano, A.,
531. Morino, Y., Yamasaki, M., Tanase, S., Marino, G., and Pucci, P. (1996) Protein Sci.5,
Nagashima, F., Akasaka, K., Imoto, T., and 802–813
Miyazawa, T. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 3877– 561. Kim, K.-S., Fuchs, J. A., and Woodward, C. K.
3882 (1993)Biochemistry32, 9600–9608
532. Cocco, M. J., Kao, Y.-H., Phillips, A. T., and 562. Eriksson, M. A. L., Härd, T., and Nilsson, L.
Lecomte, J. T. J. (1992) Biochemistry31, 6481– (1995)Biophys. J.69, 329–339
6491 563. Spyracopoulos, L., and O’Neil, J. D. J. (1994) J.
533. Bachovin, W. W., Wong, W. Y. L., Farr-Jones, Am. Chem. Soc.116, 1395–1402
S., Shenvi, A. B., and Kettner, C. A. (1988) 564. Markley, J. L. (1975) Biochemistry14, 3546–3554
Biochemistry27, 7689–7697 565. Schmidt-Rohr, K., and Spiess, H. W. (1994)
534. Mollova, E. T., Metzler, D. E., Kintanar, A., Multidimensional Solid-State NMR and
Kagamiyama, H., Hayashi, H., Hirotsu, K., and Polymers, Academic Press, San Diego,
Miyahara, I. (1997) Biochemistry36, 615–625 California
535. Guéron, M., Plateau, P., and Decorps, M. 566. Schmidt-Rohr, K. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118,
(1991)Progr. in NMR Spectr.23, 135–209 7601–7603
536. Plateau, P., and Guéron, M. (1982) J. Am. 567. Wu, C. H., Ramamoorthy, A., Gierasch, L. M.,
Chem. Soc.104, 7310–7311 and Opella, S. J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117,
537. Sklenar, V., and Bax, A. (1987) J. of Magnetic 6148–6149
Resonance74, 469–479 568. Meyer, E. F. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 1591–1597
538. Bullitt, E., and Makowski, L. (1995) Nature 569. Stampf, D. R., Felder, C. E., and Sussman, J. L.
(London)373, 164–167 (1995)Nature (London)374, 572–573
539. Griffin, J. H., Cohen, J. S., and Schechter, A. N. 570. Holm, L., and Sander, C. (1995) Trends
(1973)Biochemistry12, 2096–2099 Biochem. Sci.20, 478–480
540. Tong, H., and Davis, L. (1995) Biochemistry34, 571. Murzin, A. G., Brenner, S. E., Hubbard, T., and
3362–3367 Chothia, C. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.247, 536–540
541. Gunnarsson, G., Wennerström, H., Egan, W., 572. Walsh, L., Newell, M., Ruczaj, H., Reid, T.,
and Forsén, S. (1976) Chem. Phys. Lett.38, and Desmond, P., eds. (1997) Trends Guide to
96–99 the Internet, Elsevier, Cambridge, UK
542. McDermott, A., and Ridenour, C. F. (1996) in 573. Hogue, C. W. V., Ohkawa, H., and Bryant, S.
Encyclopedia of NMR (Emsley, J. W., ed), pp. H. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 226–229
3820–3824, J. Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Sussex, UK 574. Wilkins, M. R., Hochstrasser, D. F., Sanchez,
543. Zhao, Q., Abeygunawardana, C., Gittis, A. G., J.-C., Bairoch, A., and Appel, R. D. (1996)
and Mildvan, A. S. (1997) Biochemistry36, Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 496–497
14616–14626 575. Peitsch, M. C., Wells, T. N. C., Stampf, D. R.,
544. Perrin, C. L., and Nielson, J. B. (1997) J. Am. and Sussman, J. L. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.
Chem. Soc.119, 12734–12741 20, 82–84
545. Tjandra, N., and Bax, A. (1997) J. Am. Chem. 576. Sayle, R. A., and Milner-White, E. J. (1995)
Soc.119, 8076–8082 Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 374–376
546. Kintanar, A., Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., 576a.Bernstein, H. J. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25,
and Scott, R. D. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 453–454
17222–17229 577. Sokolik, C. W. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20,
547. Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., Kintanar, A., 122–124
Scott, R. D., and Marceau, M. (1991) Biochem. 578. Hunt, T. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 74
Biophys. Res. Commun.178, 385–392 579. Service, R. F. (2000) Science287, 1954 – 1956
548. Firsov, L. M., Neustroev, K. N., Aleshin, A. E., 580. Laskowski, R. A., Hutchinson E. G., Michie,
Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., Scott, R. D., A. D., Wallace, A. C., Jones, M. L., and
Stoffer, B., Christensen, T., and Svensson, B. Thornton, J. M. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci22,
(1994)Eur. J. Biochem.223, 293–302 488–490
549. Metzler, D. E., Metzler, C. M., Mollova, E. T., 581. Cohn, E. J., and Edsall, J. T. (1943) Proteins,
Scott, R. D., Tanase, S., Kogo, K., Higaki, T., Amino Acids and Peptides as Ions and Dipolar
and Morino, Y. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, Ions, Van Nostrand-Reinhold, Princeton, New
28017–28026 Jersey (pp. 90–93)
550. Metzler, D. E., Metzler, C. M., Scott, R. D., 582. Abbott, A. (2000) Nature (London)408, 130–132
Mollova, E. T., Kagamiyama, H., Yano, T., 583. Simmerling, C., Lee, M. R., Ortiz, A. R.,
Kuramitsu, S., Hayashi, H., Hirotsu, K., and Kolinski, A., Skolnick, J., and Kollman, P. A.
Miyahara, I. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 28027– (2000)J. Am. Chem. Soc.122, 8392–8402
28033
551. Metzler, D. E. (1997) Methods Enzymol.280,
30–40
552. Englander, S. W., Mayne, L., Bai, Y., and
Sosnick, T. R. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 1101–1109
553. Kossiakoff, A. A. (1982) Nature (London)296,
713–721
554. Rohl, C. A., and Baldwin, R. L. (1994)
Biochemistry33, 7760–7767
555. Gemmecker, G., Jahnke, W., and Kessler, H.
(1993)J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 11620–11621
556. Zhang, Y.-Z., Paterson, Y., and Roder, H.
(1995)Protein Sci.4, 804–814
557. Zhang, Z., and Smith, D. L. (1993) Protein Sci.
2, 522–531

--- Page 161 ---

157
Study Questions
1. a. From the expression for the dissociation constant Flask No. Mol HCl Mol NaOH pH
of an acid, HA (Eq. 3-1), derive the logarithmic
form pH – pK = log[A–] / [HA] = log α/(1–α) 1 0.010 1.71
(Eq. 3-11), whe a re α is the fraction of th 10 e acid 2 0.009 1.85
3 0.006 2.25
in the ionized form.
4 0.002 2.94
5 0.002 9.00
b.The apparent dissociation constant K for the
H PO – ion at 25°C and 0.5 M total ph a osphate 6 0.004 9.37
2 4 7 0.005 9.60
concentration is 1.380 x 10–7 M. What will be the
pH of a solution 0.025 M in KH PO and 0.25 M
2 4 4. Using the pK values from problem 3, construct the
in Na HPO ? This is a National Bureau of a
2 4 theoretical titration curve showing the equivalents
Standards buffer (see Bates7).
of H+ or OH– reacting with 1 mol of glycine as a
function of pH. Note that the shape of this curve is
c. Suppose that you wanted to prepare a buffer
ofpH = 7.00 at 25°C from anhydrous KH PO independent of the pK a . Sketch similar curves for
2 4 glutamic acid (pK ’s equal 2.19, 4.25, and 9.67),
(M = 136.09) and Na HPO (M = 141.98). If you a
r 2 4 r histidine (pK ’s equal 1.82, 6.00, and 9.17) and
placed 3.40 g of KH PO in a 1 liter volumetric a
2 4 lysine (pK ’s equal 2.18, 8.95, and 10.53).
flask, how much anhydrous Na HPO would a
2 4
you have to weigh and add before making to
Compare your plot for glycine with a plot of 1 M
volume to obtain the desired pH? If you wanted
to have the correct pH to ± 0.01 unit, how acid or base added to 0.01 mol of glycine in 100 ml
of water. You may also compare your curves with
accurately would you have to weigh your salts?
those for glycine published in other textbooks.
NOTE: It is quicker to prepare a buffer of precise
pH this way than it is to titrate a portion of
5. Make a table of characteristic pK values for acidic
buffer acid to the desired pH with sodium a
and basic groups in proteins. Which of these groups
hydroxide.
contribute most significantly to the titration curves
of proteins?
2. The apparent pK for 0.1 M formic acid is 3.70 at
a
25°C.
6. If placed in water and adjusted to a pH of 7, will
the following migrate toward the anode or the
a. Concentrated HCl was added to a liter of 0.1 M
cathode if placed in an electrical field? (a) Aspartic
sodium formate until a pH of 1.9 was attained.
acid, (b) alanine, (c) tyrosine, (d) lysine, (e) argin-
Calculate the concentration of formate ion and
ine, and (f) glutamine
that of unionized formic acid.
b.Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration.
7. The tripeptide L-Ala–L-His–L-Gln had the follow-
ing pK values: 3.0 (α-COOH), 9.1 (α-NH –), and
a 3
6.7 (imidazolium).
c. How many equivalents of HCl had to be added
in part a to bring the pH to 1.9?
a. What is the isoelectric pH (pI) of the peptide,
i.e., the pH at which it will carry no net charge?
3. Exactly 0.01-mol portions of glycine were placed in
Hint, the pI for amino acids is usually given
several 100-ml volumetric flasks. The following
approximately as the arithmetic mean of two pK
exact amounts of HCl or NaOH were added to the a
values.581
flasks, the solutions were made to volume with
water, mixed, and the pH measured. Calculate the
b.Draw the structures of the ionic forms of the
pK values for the carboxyl and amino groups from
a peptide that occur at pH 5 and at pH 9. At each
the following, making as many independent calcu-
pH compute the fraction of the peptide in each
lations of each pKa as the data permit. At low pH
ionic form.
valuesyou must correct for the free hydrogen ion con-
centration(see question 2c).581

--- Page 162 ---

158 Chapter 3. Determining Structures and Analyzing Cells
Study Questions
10.(a) Explain two advantages of the isotope dilution
8. a. Write the structure for glycyl-L-tryptophanyl-L- method of analysis. (b) From the following data,
prolyl-L-seryl-L-lysine. calculate the amount of cyclic AMP (cAMP) present
per ml of human gluteus maximus muscle cells.
b.What amino acids could be isolated from it Cells were treated with 32P-enriched cAMP, S.A. =
following acid hydrolysis? 50µCi / µmol for 0.2 h (all cAMP was taken up by
cells), cells were homogenized, and the soluble
c. Following alkaline hydrolysis? cAMP was isolated and purified. The specific
activity of the isolated cAMP = 10 µCi / µmol. The
d.After nitrous acid treatment followed by acid total amount of cAMP added was 1.0 x 10–7 mol per
hydrolysis ml of cells.
e. In an electrolytic cell at pH 7.0 would the peptide 11.The figure in Box 3-C shows a high-resolution
migrate toward the cathode or toward the anode? separation of the soluble proteins of E. coli. The
What is the approximate isoelectric point of the investigator labeled the proteins with 14C-contain-
peptide? ing amino acids.
f. If a solution of this peptide were adjusted to pH a. How would you carry out the labeling
7, and then titrated with sodium hydroxide in experiment?
the presence of 10% formaldehyde, how many
equivalents of base would be required per mole b.What other isotope(s) could be used to label
of peptide to raise the pH to 10? proteins? What chemical form(s) would you
use? What limitations might there be?
9. A peptide was shown to contain only L-lysine and
L-methionine. Titration of the peptide showed 3 c. What soluble components of an E. coli cell soni-
free amino groups for each free carboxyl group cate might interfere with the two-dimensional
present, and each amino group liberated 1 mole of separation, and how could they be removed?
N when the peptide was treated with HNO in the
2 2
Van Slyke apparatus. When the deaminated pep- d.What technique(s) other than radioactive
tide was hydrolyzed completely in acid and the labeling could be used for locating proteins?
hydrolyzate again treated with HNO , the same
2
amount of N is liberated as that derived from the e. If all the soluble proteins of E. coli were detected,
2
intact peptide. A sample of the original peptide about how many separate proteins would you
was treated with excess dinitrofluorobenzene to expect to see?
give a dinitrophenyl (DNP) peptide, which was
shown spectrophotometrically to contain three f. Indicate two or more properties of the resolution
DNP groups per free carboxyl group. When this technique which are most significant in making
DNP-peptide was completely hydrolyzed, the it applicable to a system containing a very large
following products were found: a colorless com- number of proteins.
pound containing S (A ) and a yellow compound
1
containing S (A ). Partial hydrolysis of the DNP- 12.35S is a beta emitter, with no gamma or other type
3
peptide yields A , A , A , plus 4 additional yellow of radiation. It has the following properties:
1 2 3
compounds, B , B , B , and B . On complete hydro- t = 86.7 days, ε = 0.168 MeV.
1 2 3 4 1/2 max
lysis, B yields A , A , and A ; B yields A and A ;
1 1 2 3 2 1 2
B yields A and A ; and B yields A only. a. Write the equation for the radiochemical decom-
3 1 3 4 3
position of 35S.
What is the most probable structure of the original
peptide? b.Discuss the advantages and limitation of the use
of35S as an isotopic tracer.

--- Page 163 ---

160 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
Each cotton fiber is a single cell seed hair, ~ 30 mm in length. The dry fiber is
~ 95% cellulose, which constitutes the secondary cell wall (See Fig. 20-4,D) and
is also present in the primary cell wall. The fibers, which are ~ 30 nm in length,
consist of many parallel chains (Fig. 4-5) ~ 5 µm in length, each containing ~ 10,000
glucose residues. Van der Waals forces, together with one hydrogen bond per
glucose, contribute to the stability of the tightly packed fiber. Cotton is one of
the major agricultural crops, ~ 87 million bales, each ~220 kg, being produced
annually world-wide. Photo and information from A. D. French and M. A.
Godshall, Southern Regional Research Center, USDA, New Orleans, LA.
Contents
161 A. Structures and Properties of Simple Sugars Boxes
162 1. The Variety of Monosaccharides 171 Box 4-A Cyclodextrins
163 Ways of indicating configuration 178 Box 4-B Silicon: An Essential Trace Element
164 Natural derivatives of sugars 184 Box 4-C The Blood Group Determinants
166 2. Conformations of Five- and Six-Membered Ring Forms 191 Box 4-D Antifreeze and Ice-Nucleation Proteins
167 3. Characteristic Reactions of Monosaccharides
167 B. Glycosides, Oligosaccharides, Glycosylamines, and Tables
Glycation 170 Table 4-1 Some of the Many Polysaccharides
169 C. Polysaccharides (Glycans) Found in Nature
170 1. Conformations of Polysaccharide Chains
172 2. The Glucans
175 3. Other Homopolysaccharides
175 4. Heteropolysaccharides of the Animal Body
177 5. Plant Heteropolysaccharides
179 6. Polysaccharides of Bacterial Surfaces
180 D. Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans
181 1. O-Linked Glycosyl Groups
182 2. Asparagine-Linked Oligosaccharides
186 3. Glycoproteins in Biological Recognition
186 Lectins and other carbohydrate-binding proteins
186 Carbohydrate-binding sites
186 Binding of viruses and bacteria to cells
187 Aggregation and adherence of cells
187 Growth and differentiation
188 Recognition and adhesion by leukocytes
188 E. Some Special Methods
188 1. Release of Oligosaccharides from Glycoproteins
189 2. Hydrolysis
189 3. Methylation
190 4. Periodate Oxidation (Smith Degradation)
190 5. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
192 References
196 Study Questions

--- Page 164 ---

161
4
Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
We are all familiar with sugars, important compo-
A. Structures and Properties of Simple Sugars
nents of our diet which are present in fruits, honey,
table sugar, and syrups. Within our bodies the simple
The simple sugars, or monosaccharides, are poly-
sugarD-glucose is an essential source of energy. It is
hydroxyaldehydes (aldoses) or polyhydroxyketones
present in blood at a relatively constant concentration
(ketoses).1–5 All have the composition (CH O) , hence
2 n
of 5.5 mM and is carried to all tissues. A polysaccha-
the family name carbohydrate. A typical sugar, and
ride called glycogen, a polymeric form of glucose,
the one with the widest distribution in nature, is glucose.
provides a reserve of readily available energy within
our cells. Starches and other polysaccharides store
energy within plants. Polysaccharides also have major
structural functions in nature. Cellulose, another H O H O
1
polymer of glucose, forms the fibers of cotton, plant C C
D-Mannose (Man)
cell walls, and wood. Both the tough exoskeletons of 2
H C OH has the opposite HO C H
anthropods and the cell walls of fungi depend for their configuration at C-2
3
strength on the nitrogen-containing polysaccharide HO C H H C OH
chitin. Polysaccharides that carry many negative D-Galactose (Gal)
4
H C OH has the opposite HO C H
charges, such as hyaluronan, form a protective layer
configuration at C-4
between animal cells, while pectins play a similar role H 5 C OH HO C H
in plants.
6
A third function of sugar residues (glycosyl groups) CH2OH Sugars are named as D or L CH2OH
according to the configuration
is in biological recognition and communication. The D-Glucose (Glc) L-Glucose
about this carbon atom, one
outer surfaces of cells are nearly covered by covalently showing
removed from the terminal
numbering
attachedoligosaccharides, small polymeric arrays of position
of atoms
sugar rings. Some are attached to side chain groups of
proteins and others to lipids to form glycoproteins
andglycolipids, respectively. Because of the variety
The carbonyl group of this and other sugars is highly
of different sugars, the various ways in which they can
reactive and a characteristic reaction is addition of
be linked, and their ability to form oriented hydrogen
electron-rich groups such as –OH. If a sugar chain is
bonds, these oligosaccharides provide much of the
long enough (4–6 carbon atoms) one of the hydroxyl
chemical code for identifying cells. This coding enables
groups of the same molecule can add to the carbonyl
cells to attach to each other in correct ways during
group to form a cyclic hemiacetal or ring form, which
development of a multicelled organism. It helps to
reaches an equilibrium with the free aldehyde or ketone
activate our immune system to attack parasites and
form (Eq. 4-1). The six-membered rings formed in this
also helps bacteria to attack us! We are only beginning
way (pyranose rings) are especially stable, but five-
to understand the numerous critical functions of the
membered furanose rings also exist in many carbo-
glycosyl groups of cell surfaces.
hydrates.

--- Page 165 ---

162 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
H O
C
CH2OH
O
HO
HCOH HO H
OH α
OH
HOCH Pyranose
ring forms
HCOH (hemiacetal
forms)
HCOH
CH2OH
O
HO 105 100 95 90 85 ppm 75 70 65 60
α-D-Glucopyranose
CH2OH HO
OH
O
β
H
1
1
532
325
4
4
6
6
β-D-Glucopyranose
D–Glucose H α-D-Fructofuranose
(free aldehyde form) (4-1) 2 35 4 1 6
β-D-Fructofuranose
2 5 3 4 16
β-D-Fructopyranose
2 453 16
The ring forms of the sugars are the monomers
used by cells to form polysaccharides. Indeed, it is the
natural tendency of 5- and 6-carbon sugars (pentoses
Figure 4-1 Natural abundance 13C-NMR spectrum of honey
andhexoses) to cyclize that permits formations of showing content of α and β pyranose ring forms of glucose
stable sugar polymers from the reactive and unstable and both pyranose and furanose ring forms of fructose. Open
monomers. When a sugar cyclizes a new chiral center chain fructose, with a peak at 214 ppm, was present in a trace
is formed at the anomeric carbon atom, the atom amount. From Prince et al.6
that was present in the original carbonyl group. The
two configurations about this carbon atom are desig-
natedα and β as indicated in Eq. 4-1. In an equilibrium
mixture, ring forms of most sugars predominate over open Because of their many polar hydroxyl groups,
chains.6–13 Thus, at 25°C in water glucose reaches an most sugars are very soluble in water. However,
hydrogen bonds between molecules stabilize sugar
crystals making them insoluble in nonpolar solvents.
OH Intermolecular hydrogen bonds between chains of
H OH
sugar rings in cellulose account for much of the
C
strength and insolubility of these polysaccharides.
R
Covalent hydrate
of R—CHO 1. The Variety of Monosaccharides
Sugars contain several chiral centers and the
equilibriumwith ~0.001% free aldehyde, 0.004% cova-
various diastereomers are given different names. The
lent hydrate of the aldehyde (see also Eq. 13-1), 39%
α-pyranose form, 61% β-pyranose form, and 0.15% commonly occurring sugars D-glucose,D-mannose,
each of the much less stable α and β furanose forms.9,12 andD-galactose are just three of the 16 diastereomeric
aldohexoses. The Fischer projection formulas for the
The ketose sugar fructose in solution exists as ~73%
β-pyranose, 22% β-furanose, 5% α-furanose, and 0.5% entire family of eightD-aldoses with 3–6 carbon atoms
are given in Fig. 4-2. Several of these occur only rarely
open chain form (Fig. 4-1).6,10,13 Although polysaccha-
in nature.
rides are composed almost exclusively of sugar residues
Monosaccharides are classified as D or L according
in ring forms, the open chain forms are sometimes
to the configuration at the chiral center farthest from
metabolic intermediates.
the carbonyl group. If the –OH group attached to this
carbon atom lies to the right when the sugar is oriented
according to the Fischer convention, the sugar belongs
CH2OH
C O
D-Fructose (Fru), a ketose that is a close to the D family. The simplest of all the chiral sugars is
structural and metabolic relative of D-glucose. glyceraldehyde. The family of aldoses in Fig. 4-2 can
H O C H It occurs in honey and fruit juices in free form, be thought of as derived from D-glyceraldehyde by
H C O H
in the disaccharide sucrose (table sugar) as a upward extension of the chain. Besides D-glucose,
5-membered furanose ring, and in other
D-mannose, and D-galactose, the most abundant natu-
H C O H oligosaccharides and polysaccharides.
rally occurring sugar shown in Fig. 4-2 is D-ribose, a
CH2OH major component of RNA. Another abundant aldose
isD-xylose, a constituent of the polysaccharides of
wood.

--- Page 166 ---

A. Structures and Properties of Simple Sugars 163
CHO
H C OH
CH2OH
Glyceraldehyde
CHO CHO
H C OH HO C H
H C OH H C OH
CH2OH CH2OH
Erythrose Threose
CHO CHO CHO CHO
H C OH HO C H H C OH HO C H
H C OH H C OH HO C H HO C H
H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH
CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH
Ribose (Rib) Arabinose (Ara) Xylose (Xyl) Lyxose (Lyx)
CHO CHO CHO CHO CHO CHO CHO CHO
H C OH HO C H H C OH HO C H H C OH HO C H H C OH HO C H
H C OH H C OH HO C H HO C H H C OH H C OH HO C H HO C H
H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH HO C H HO C H HO C H HO C H
H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH
CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH
Altrose (Alt) Allose (All) Glucose (Glc) Mannose (Man) Gulose (Gul) Idose (Ido) Galactose (Gal) Talose (Tal)
Figure 4-2 Formulas for the D-aldoses. Prefixes derived from the names of these aldoses are used in describing various other
sugars including ketoses. The prefixes include erythro,threo,arabino,ribo,galacto,manno, etc., D-Fructose can be described in this
manner as D-arabino-hexulose. The prefixes refer to the configurations of a series of consecutive but not necessarily contiguous
chiral centers.2 Thus, 3-arabino-hexulose is an isomer of fructose with the carbonyl group at the 3 position. The prefix deoxy,
which means “lacking oxygen,” is often used to designate a modified sugar in which an –OH has been replaced by –H, e.g.,
2-deoxyribose.
For each D sugar there is an L sugar which is the the atom viewed. In fact, the molecule cannot assume
complete mirror image or enantiomer of the D form. such a conformation because the chain folds back on
AlthoughL-arabinose occurs widely in plants, and itself, bringing many atoms into collision.
some derivatives of L sugars are present in glycopro- Ring forms of sugars are also often drawn according
teins, most naturally occurring sugars have the D con- to the Fischer convention; making use of elongated
figuration. A pair of sugars, such as glucose and galac- bent lines to represent ordinary simple bonds:
tose, differing in configuration at only one of the chiral
centers are known as epimers. The D-ketose sugars
α α β
with the carbonyl group in the 2 position (Fig. 4-3) are
H C OH H C OH HO C CHOH
also abundant in nature, often occurring in the form of 2
H C OH H C OH HO C H
phosphate esters as intermediates in metabolism.
H C OH O HO C OH O H C OH O
Ways of indicating configuration. The Fischer H C OH H C OH H C
projection formulas used in Figs. 4-2 and 4-3 are con- CH H C CHOH
2 2
venient in relating the sugar structures by their indi-
CHOH
2
vidual carbon configurations to each other, but they
α-D-Ribopyranose α-D-Glucopyranose β-D-Fructofuranose
give an unrealistic three-dimensional picture. Accord-
ing to the Fischer convention each carbon atom must
be viewed with both vertical bonds projecting behind In this representation the hydroxyl at the anomeric

--- Page 167 ---

164 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
CH2OH CH
2
OH CH
2
OH
O O
C O ≡
OH OH
CH2OH HO OH HO OH
Dihydroxyacetone (not chiral) OH OH
CH2OH α-D-Glucopyranose
(Haworth structural
C O formula)
H C OH
Haworth structures are easy to draw and unambiguous
CH2OH in depicting configurations,14 but they also do not show
Erythrulose the spatial relationships of groups attached to other
CH2OH CH2OH rings correctly. For this reason conformational formulas
of the type described in Section 2 and shown in Fig. 4-4
C O C O
are used most often in this book.
H C OH HO C H
H C OH C OH Natural derivatives of sugars. The aldehyde
group of an aldose can be oxidized readily to a carboxyl
CH2OH CH2OH
group to form an aldonic acid. Among the several
Ribulose Xylulose
aldonic acids that occur naturally is 6-phosphogluconic
CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH
acid, which is pictured here as the 6-phosphogluconate
C O C O C O C O ion:
H C OH HO C H H C OH HO C H
COO– CHO
H C OH H C OH HO C H HO C H
H C OH H C OH
H C OH H C OH H C OH H C OH
HO C H HO C H
CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH CH2OH
Psicose Fructose Sorbose Tagatose
H C OH H C OH
CH2OH
H C OH H C OH
C O
HO C H
CH2OPO3 2– COOH
6-Phosphogluconate ion Glucuronic acid (GlcA)
H C OH
H C OH
The enzymatically formed uronic acids have –COOH
H C OH
in the terminal position. This is position 6 in glucuronic
CH2OH acid, whose structure is given here and as a ring in
Sedoheptulose Fig. 4-4. Sugar chains with –COOH at both ends are
called aldaric acids, e.g., glucaric acid. The –OH
Figure 4-3 Formulas for the open forms of the D-ketoses. group in the 2 position of glucose may be replaced by
–NH to form 2-amino-2- deoxyglucose, commonly
2
calledglucosamine (GlcN), or by –NH–CO–CH
3
to form N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). Similar
carbon atom is always on the right side of the molecules derivatives of other sugars exist in nature. In many
forα forms in the D series of sugars and at the left side poly-saccharides, sulfate groups are attached in ester
for the β forms. For the L sugars the opposite is true. linkage to the sugar units. The sulfo (–SO 3 –) sugar
For example, since α-D-glucopyranose and α-L-gluco- 6-sulfo-(cid:1)-D-quinovose (Fig. 4-4) is found in lipids
pyranose are enantiomers, their Fischer formulas must of photosynthetic membranes.15,16
be mirror images. The sugar alcohols, in which the carbonyl group
Simplified sugar rings are often drawn with has been reduced to –OH, also occur in nature. For
Haworth structural formulas. The lower edge of example,D-glucitol(D-sorbitol), the sugar alcohol
the ring, which may be shown as a heavy line, is thought obtained by reducing either D-glucose or L-sorbose
of as projecting out toward the reader and the other (Eq. 4-2), is a major product of photosynthesis and
edge as projecting behind the plane of the paper. widely distributed in bacteria and throughout the
eukaryotic kingdom. It is present in large amounts in
berries of the mountain ash and in many other fruits.
It exists in a high concentration in human semen and

--- Page 168 ---

A. Structures and Properties of Simple Sugars 165
B (a r m an y c l h op ed ec s t t i a n r c a h n e d s glycogen) HOH 2 C O 2 OH H
HO have branches added at HO 1 CH 2 OH HO O
6 this position H
4 CH 2 HO OH
O
HO HO OH
HO 1 H
β–D–Fructofuranose (Fru) H
β-D-Xylose of plant xylans
OH
OH Amylose (linear starch)
α-D-Glucose (Glc) contains only α-1,4-glycosidic
of starch, glycogen
linkages involving the groups CHOH
2
indicated by the arrows HO O
O OH
– OOC C NH
Circled group is replaced by —COO– in H
CH 2 OH the anion of β-d-glucuronic acid (GlcA), a H CH 3 O C
HO O component of many mucopolysaccharides CH
3
HO OH Anion of muramic acid,O-Lactyl-GlcNAc (Mur),
OH found in bacterial cell wall polysaccharides.
H
β-D-Glucose This—OH is O
of cellulose H
replaced by N C
OH
9
in 2-acetamido- CH 3 HOH 2 C H
2-deoxy-d-glucose (N-acetylglucosamine
C
H
1COO –
or GlcNAc), the monomer unit of chitin H C 2
–
SO 3 HO O OH
HN 3 H
HO O HO CH 2 OH O HC C OH
3
HO H
HO H O
OH
OH Anion of N-Acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc),
OH
6-Sulfo-α-D-quinovose H one of the Sialic acids (Sia), nine carbon
Quinovose = 6-deoxy-D-glucose 1,5-Anhydro-D-glucitol sugars found in many glycoproteins.
Figure 4-4 Some simple sugars and sugar derivatives in ring forms. Most of these are present in polysaccharides.
H H O H O
H O H OH C C
C + BH4 – + 3H2O C + H2BO3 –
H C OH HO C H
R R
Glucose or other aldose Glucitol or other alditol H C OH H C OH
(4-2)
HO C H H C OH
accumulates in lenses of diabetics. D-Glucitol and HO C H HO C H
other sugar alcohols arise in some fungi during meta-
bolism of the corresponding sugars.17 Mannitol, another
CH3 CH3
product of photosynthesis, is also present in many L-Rhamnose (Rha) L-Fucose (Fuc)
organisms.18 Another polyol that is found in human
blood in significant concentrations (0.06–0.25 mM) is
1,5-anhydro-D-glucitol (Fig. 4-4). It is largely of dietary Vitamin C (ascorbic acid, Box 18-D) is another impor-
origin.19 tant sugar derivative. Neuraminic acid is a 9-carbon
Two common 6-deoxy sugars which lack the sugar made by transferring a 3-carbon piece onto a
hydroxyl group at C-6 are rhamnose and fucose. hexosamine. Its N-acetyl and N-glycolyl derivatives
Both are of the “unnatural”L configuration but are are called sialic acids. Their names may be abbreviated
derived metabolically from D-glucose and D-mannose, NeuAc and NeuGl, respectively, or simply as Sia (see
respectively. also Fig. 4-4).

--- Page 169 ---

166 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
COO–
OH
H
O C CH O
2
Substitution here H OH All bulky substituents,
of H2
O
N—by CH2 HO
HO
H
OH
—
are
O
in
H
e
a
q
n
u
d
a t
—
or
C
ia
H
l p 2
O
os
H
it
,
ions
CH3 C N H C OH H projecting out from the ring.
H
H All of the hydrogens
o
O
r H2N C H β-D-Glucose, a a
p
t
r
t
o
a
j
c
e
h
c
e
t
d
d o
to
w
r
n
in
w
g
a r
c
d
a r
o
b
r
ons
HO C H pyranose ring upward in axial positions.
HOCH2 C N form in a chair
H H C OH conformation.
gives sialic acids
H C OH
CH2OH F to o r th L i - s a r ld u o le s . e s F i o t r i s e x th am e 1 p C le 4 , f o α r - m D- . i d T o h p e y r r e a n ar o e s e e x a c s e w pt e io ll n a s s
Neuraminic acid anion (Neu) iduronate rings assume the 1C conformation because
4
this conformation places the maximum number of bulky
groups in equatorial positions.27,28 It is noteworthy
The sialic acids are prominent constituents of the that electronegative substituents on the anomeric
glycoproteins of cell surfaces. More than 30 modified carbon atom of a sugar ring often prefer an axial
forms, for example, with added methyl or acetyl groups, orientation. This anomeric effect is also reflected
are known.20–24 in a shortening by about 0.01 nm of hydrogen bonds
involving the hydrogen atom of the anomeric axial
OH group. These effects can be explained partially as
2. Conformations of Five- and Six-Membered a result of coulombic repulsion of the two C–O dipoles
Ring Forms and of resonance of the following type:29–31
Single-bonded six-membered molecular rings, δ–
O O
such as those in cyclohexane and in sugars, most often
assume a chair (C) conformation. For sugars in pyra-
nose ring forms, there are two possible chair confor-
O O
mations,4,25,26 which are designated 4C (or C1) and 1C H δ+ H
1 4 x
(or 1C). The superscript and subscript numbers on the shortened
designations indicate which atoms are above and H-bond
~0.18 nm
4 1
In addition to the chair conformations of six-mem-
5 O 5 O bered rings the less stable boat(B) conformations are
also possible. The six boat forms are smoothly inter-
3 2 3 2 convertible through intermediate twist(T) forms,
1 4
which are also called skew (S) forms.3,5 Since the
4 1
C (or C1) C (or 1C)
1 4
O
O
below the plane of the other four ring atoms. These
conformers are not easily interconvertible unless the ring is Boat Skew or twist
opened by a chemical reaction, e.g., that of Eq. 4-1. How-
ever, manipulation with an atomic force microscope internal angle in a pentagon is 108° (close to the tetra-
has shown that stretching of single polysaccharide hedral angle) we might anticipate a nearly planar five-
chains can cause interconversion of the two chair con- membered ring. However, eclipsing of hydrogen
formations of pyranose rings, which are separated by atoms on adjacent carbons prevents formation of such
an energy barrier of ~ 46 kJ/ mol.26a a flat structure. One of the atoms may be buckled out
Most sugars occur in the chair conformation that of the plane of the other four about 0.05 nm, into an
places the largest number of substituents in equatorial envelope conformation (e.g., 1E), or only three atoms
positions and is therefore most stable thermodynami- may be in a plane, as in a twist conformation.
cally. For D-aldoses this is usually the 4C
1
conformation:
1
O The1E envelope
conformation

--- Page 170 ---

B. Glycosides, Oligosaccharides, Glycosylamines, and Glycation 167
Any one of the five atoms of the ring can be either The aldehydes produced in these reactions can be
above or below the plane defined by the other four in condensed with various phenols or quinones to give
the envelope conformation. The energy barriers sepa- colored products useful in quantitative estimation of
rating them are very low, and in cyclopentane or in sugar content or in visualizing sugars on thin-layer
proline all of the envelope conformations are freely chromatographic plates. Phenol and sulfuric acid
interconvertible through intermediate skew forms.32 yield a product whose absorbance at 470 nm can be
Furanose sugar rings are very flexible but the presence used as a measure of the total carbohydrate content of
of the bulky substituents reduces the number of possi- most samples. Resorcinol (1,3-dihydroxybenzene) in
ble conformations.33–36a See Chapter 5 for further 3 M HCl (Seliwanoff’s reagent) gives a red precipitate
discussion. with ketoses. Orcinol (5-methylresorcinol) reacts
rapidly with pentoses and with ribonucleosides and
ribonucleotides. Since 2-deoxy sugars react slowly
3. Characteristic Reactions of this can be used as a test for RNA. Diphenylamine
Monosaccharides with H SO gives a blue-green color specifically with
2 4
2-deoxy sugars and can be used to test for DNA if the
The aldehyde group of aldoses can either be oxi- sample is first hydrolyzed.37
dized or reduced and ketoses can be reduced. The
best laboratory reagent for reduction is sodium boro-
hydride which acts rapidly in neutral aqueous solu- B. Glycosides, Oligosaccharides,
tions (see Eq. 4-2). Since both NaB3H and NaB2H are Glycosylamines, and Glycation
4 4
available, radioactive or heavy isotope labels can be
introduced in this way. The aldehyde groups can be The hydroxyl group on the anomeric carbon atom
oxidized by a variety of agents to the corresponding of the ring forms of sugars is reactive and can be replaced
aldonic acids, a fact that accounts for the reducing by another nucleophilic group such as –O–R from an
properties of these sugars. In alkaline solution aldoses alcohol. The product is a glycoside (Eq. 4-5). The reac-
reduce Cu2+ ions to cuprous oxide (Eq. 4-3), silver ions tion with methanol occurs readily with acid catalysis
under dehydrating conditions, e.g., in 100% methanol.
H O O O–
C + 2Cu2+ + 2OH– C + Cu2O + H2O
The carbon atom that is
R R (4-3) attached directly to two
CH OH
2 O oxygen atoms in the
HO
hemiacetal group is the
anomericcarbon atom.
to the free metal, or hexacyanoferrate (III) to hexacyano- HO H
The attached OH group
ferrate (II). These reactions provide the basis for sensi- OH can be replaced to form
OH H
tive analytical procedures. Even though the aldoses a glycoside.
tend to exist largely as hemiacetals (Eq. 4-1) the reduc-
O R
ing property is strongly evident. Oxidation by metal-
containing reagents is usually via the free aldehyde, O A glycoside (an α-d-
HO
but oxidation by hypobromite BrO–(Br in alkaline glucopyranoside
2 in this instance).
solution) yields the lactone, as does enzymatic oxida- HO H
The molecule HO–R
tion (Eq. 15-10). OH is called the aglycone
O R
Sugars are unstable in acid. Boiling with concen- of the glycoside.
trated HCl or H SO converts pentoses to furfural (Eq.
2 4 (4-5)
4-4a) and hexoses to hydroxymethylfurfural (Eq. 4-4b).
The alcohol in this equation can be a simple one such
CHO O CHO as methanol or it can be any of the –OH groups of
another sugar molecule. For example, two molecules
(H C OH)3 3H2O +
ofα-D-glucopyranose can be joined, in an indirect
CH2OH Furfural (4-4a) synthesis, to form maltose (Eq. 4-6). Maltose is
formed by the hydrolysis of starch and is otherwise
not found in nature. There are only three abundant
HOH2C O CHO naturally occurring disaccharides important to the
metabolism of plants and animals.38 They are lactose
Hexose Hydroxymethylfurfural
(4-4b) (milk),sucrose (green plants), and trehalose (fungi
and insects).

--- Page 171 ---

168 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
O a fixed ring structure for the glucose half. Thus, the
HOH2C
O HOH2C
H name lactose can be abbreviated as βGal-(1→4)-Glc or,
H
O more succinctly, as Galβ1→4Glc. However, in crystal-
HO
HO OH OH H HO OH OH line form the sugar exists either as α-lactose or β-lactose.
The latter is more soluble and sweeter than α-lactose,
α-D-Glucopyranose (2 molecules) which sometimes crystallizes in ice cream upon pro-
longed storage and produces a “sandy” texture. An
H2O isomer of lactose, Galβ1→6Glc or allolactose, is an
important inducer of transcription in cells of E. coli
O O (Chapter 28).
HOH2C H HOH2C H
1 α 4 Notice that in the drawing of the lactose structure
HO OH O OH OH t t h o e t h g e lu o c r o ie s n e t r a i t n io g n h o as f t b h e e e n g a “ l f a l c ip to p s e e d r i o n v g e , r a ” c w o i n th se r q e u sp en e c c e t
HO HO
α-1,4 Glycosidic linkage of the presence of the β-1,4 linkage. For maltose,
Maltose, a disaccharide (4-6) where the linkage is α-1,4, the two rings are usually
drawn with the same orientation (Eq. 4-6). Maltose
can be described as α-D-Glcp-(1→4)-D-Glcpor more
Disaccharides are linked by glycosidic (acetal) simply as Glcα1→4Glc.
linkages. The symbol α-1,4, used in Eq. 4-6, refers to In sucrose and in α,α-trehalose the reducing groups
the fact that in maltose the glycosidic linkage connects of two rings are joined. Each of these sugars exists in
carbon atom 1 (the anomeric carbon atom) of one ring a single form. Sucrose serves as the major transport
with C-4 of the other and that the configuration about sugar in green plants, while trehalose plays a similar
the anomeric carbon atom is α. While the α and β ring role in insects, as does D-glucose in our blood.
forms of free sugars can usually undergo ready inter-
conversion, the configuration at the anomeric carbon
atom is “frozen” when a glycosidic linkage is formed. HOCH2 O HOH2C 1 O
To describe such a linkage, we must state this configu-
HO
ration together with the positions joined in the two HO OH O 2 CH2OH
rings (see Eq. 4-6). Lactose, whose structure follows, HO OH
can be described as a disaccharide containing one Sucrose: Glcpα1→β2Fruf
galactose unit in a β-pyranose ring form and whose
anomeric carbon atom (C-1) is joined to the 4 position
of glucose, giving a β-1,4 linkage:
HOCH2
O HO OH
OH OH HO O OH
CH2OH OH HO OH O CH2OH
O
HO
α,α-Trehalose: Glcpα1→α1Glcp
β
HO O
OH 1 4 CH2OH O
config
N
ur
o
a
t
t
e
io
α
n
D-Galactose D-Glucose at this "reducing Trehalose, or “mushroom sugar,” is found not only in
end" of the
fungi but also in many other organisms.39–41. It serves
molecule of
α-Lactose α-lactose as the primary transport sugar in the hemolymph of
insects and also acts as an “antifreeze” in many species.
The systematic name for α-lactose,O-β-D-galacto- It accounts for up to 20% of the dry weight of anhy-
pyranosyl-(1→4)-α-D-glucopyranose, provides a com- drobiotic organisms, which can survive complete
plete description of the stereochemistry, ring sizes, and dehydration. These include spores of some fungi,
mode of linkages. This name may be abbreviated β-D- yeast cells, macrocysts of Dictyostelium, brine shrimp
Galp-(1→4)-α-D-Glcp. Since pyranose rings are so cysts (dried gastrulas of Artemia salina), some nema-
common and since most natural sugars belong to the todes, and the resurrection plant. These organisms
D family, the designations D and p are often omitted. can remain for years in a dehydrated state. Hydrogen
It may be assumed that in this book sugars are always bonding between the trehalose and phosphatidylcholine
D unless they are specifically designated as L. When may stabilize the dry cell membranes.18,40,41 Although
linkages remain uncertain abbreviated formulas are they can be desiccated, fungal spores remain dormant
given. Because the glucose ring in lactose is free to even when considerable water is present. One of the
open to an aldehyde and to equilibrate (in solution) first detectable changes when the spores germinate is a
with other ring forms, the name lactose does not imply rapid increase in the activity of the enzyme trehalase

--- Page 172 ---

C. Polysaccharides (Glycans) 169
which hydrolyzes trehalose to glucose.42,43 HOCH2
Disaccharides, as well as higher oligosaccharides OH
H
and polysaccharides, are thermodynamically unstable
OH
1C O+ H2N–R
with respect to hydrolysis, for example, for lactose in HO 2
aqueous solution: a
OH
Lactose + H 2 O→ D-glucose + D-galactose
HOCH2
OH H+ HO
HOCH2
O
∆G°≈–8.7± 0.2 kJ mol–1 at 25°C (4-7) H b H
C N R HO N R
OH
HO HO
The corresponding equilibrium constant K = [D-glucose] β Glycosylamine H
[D-galactose]/[lactose]≈ 34 M. For other oligosaccha- OH c
ridesK varies from 17 to 500 M.44,45 However, sucrose
is far less stable with K = 4.4 × 104M and ∆G° = –26.5± HOCH2 Amadori HOCH2
0.3 kJ mol–1 for its hydrolysis.46 Sucrose is also less OH rearrangement OH
stable kinetically and undergoes rapid acid-catalyzed H d H
hydrolysis. This fact is exploited when vinegar is used OH
N R
OH
CH2 N R
HO HO
to convert sucrose to the less crystallizable mixture of
glucose and fructose during candy-making. In marked OH e O
Ketoamine
contrast, trehalose is extremely resistant to acid-cata-
lyzed hydrolysis. HOCH2 O CH2 N H R
The joining of additional sugar rings through
HO
glycosidic linkages to a disaccharide leads to the for- OH
mation of oligosaccharides, which contain a few (4-8)
HO
residues, and to polysaccharides, which contain
many residues. Among the well-known oligosaccha-
rides are the substituted sucroses raffinose, Galp(1→6) amounts of glycosylated hemoglobin and other proteins
Glcp(1→2) Fruf, and stachyose, Galp(1→6) Galp(1→6) modified by glycation of the protein amino groups are
Glcp(1→2) Fruf. Both sugars are found in many legumes normally present in the blood.49–51 People with diabe-
and other green plants in which they are formed by tes, who have a high concentration of blood glucose,
attachment of the galactose rings to sucrose. Oligo- have increased amounts of glycated protein. High
saccharides have many functions. For example, gram- concentration of either glucose or fructose41,52 may
negative bacteria often synthesize oligosaccharides cause serious problems. For example, modification of
of 6–12 glucose units in β-1,2 linkage joined to sn-1- the protein crystallins of the lens of the eye may lead
phosphoglyceryl groups. They are found in the peri- to cataracts. Similar problems with galactose may
plasmic space between the inner and outer cell mem- accompany galactosemia (Chapter 20).53 Ketoamines
branes and may serve to control osmotic pressure.47 formed by glycation of proteins may undergo crosslink-
Oligosaccharides of 10–14α-1,4-linkedD-galacturonic ing reactions with side chains of other protein molecules
acid residues serve as signals of cell wall damage to and this may be one cause of aging.42,43 Other reactions
plants and trigger defensive reactions against bacteria of the ketoamines lead to formation of fluorescent and
in plants.48 colored products.41,43,50,54–56 Oxidation products of sugars
Just as alcohols can be linked to sugars by glyco- also participate in these reactions,57 and nucleic acid
side formation (Eq. 4-5), amines can react similarly to bases also react.56
giveglycosylamines(N-glycosides). In this instance
it is usually the free aldehyde that reacts via formation
of a Schiff base (Eq. 4-8a). The latter can cyclize (Eq. 4-8b) C. Polysaccharides (Glycans)
to the glycosylamine with either the α or β configuration.
Another important reaction of Schiff bases of sugars Polymers of sugars are present in all cells and
is the Amadori rearrangement (Eq. 4-8c,d), which serve a variety of functions.58–60 The simple sugars
produces a secondary ketoamine with a 1-oxo-2-deoxy commonly used in the assembly of polysaccharides
structure. includeD-glucose,D-mannose,D-galactose,D-fructose,
This can cyclize as in step e of Eq. 4-8. In addition, D-xylose,L-arabinose, related uronic acids, and amino
epimerization at position 2 occurs through the reversal sugars (Fig. 4-4). These monomer units can be put
of step d. The overall reaction of Eq. 4-8 is often called together in many ways, either as homopolysaccha-
glycation to distinguish it from glycosylation, the rides containing a single kind of monomer or as hetero-
transfer of a glycosyl group. The Amadori rearrange- polysaccharides containing two or more different
ment is important in nitrogen metabolism and in non- monomers. Because there are many sugars and many
enzymatic reactions of sugars. For example, small ways in which they can be linked, there is a bewildering

--- Page 173 ---

170 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
TABLE 4-1
Some of the Many Polysaccharides Found in Nature
Name Source Monomer Main linkage Branch linkages
Starch Green plants
Amylose D-Glucose α1,4
Amylopectin D-Glucose α1,4 α1,6
Glycogen Animals, bacteria D-Glucose α1,4 α1,6
Cellulose Green plants, some bacteria D-Glucose β1,4
Dextrans Some bacteria D-Glucose α1,6 α1,3
Pullulan Yeast D-Glucose α1,6 + α1,4
Callose Green plants D-Glucose β1,3
Yeast glucan Yeast D-Glucose β1,3
Schizophyllan, curdlan, paramylon D-Glucose β1,3 β1,6 on every third residue
Mannans Algae D-Mannose 1,4
Yeast D-Mannose α1,6
Xylans Green plants D-Xylose β1,3
Brown seaweed
Inulin Some plant tubers D-Fructose β2,6
Chitin Fungi, anthropods N-acetyl-D-Glucosamine β1,4
Alternating polysaccharides
Hyaluronan Animal connective tissue Glucuronic acid +
N-acetylglucosamine β1,4
Chondroitin sulfate D-Glucosamine
N-acetyl-D-Galactosamine β1,3 + β1,4
Dermatan sulfate α-L-Iduronate +
N-acetyl-D-Galactosamine β1,3 + β1,4
Pectin Higher plants D-Galactunonate + others β1,4 + others
Alginate Seaweed D-Mannuronate +
L-Guluronate β1,4 + α1,4
Agar-agar Red seaweed Galactose β1,4 and α1,3
Carageenan Red seaweed Galactose-4-sulfate + β1,4 + α1,3
3,6-anhydro-
D-Galactose-2-sulfate
Murein Bacterial cell wall N-acetyl-D- β1,4
Glucosamine + N-
acetyl-D-Muramic acid
variety of different polysaccharides. Their chains can and kinds of linkage present, the conformational
be linear or helical. The most numerous functional possibilities for carbohydrate chains are limited.
groups present are the free hydroxyl groups, some The sugar ring is a rigid unit and the connection of
of which may form additional glycosidic linkages to one unit to the next can be specified by means of two
produce branched chains. Polysaccharides may also torsion angles φ and ψ just as with peptides.61–63 To
contain–COOH,–NH ,–NHCOCH , and other groups. specify a torsion angle four atoms must be selected–
2 3
After polymerization, hydroxyl groups are sometimes the two at the ends of the bond about which rotation
methylated or converted to sulfate esters or to ketals is being considered and two others. There is more
formed with pyruvic acid. Structural characteristics of than one way to define the zero angle for φ and ψ. As
some of the major polysaccharides are listed in Table 4-1. illustrated in the drawing on p. 172, φ may be taken
as the H1–C1–O–C4' dihedral angle and ψ as the H4'
–C4'–O–C1 angle. The zero angle is when H1 and
1. Conformations of Polysaccharide Chains H4' are eclipsed. A related alternative is to take φ and
ψ as 0° when the two midplanes of the sugar rings are
Despite the variety of different monomer units coplanar.

--- Page 174 ---

C. Polysaccharides (Glycans) 171
A
H
HO
H
CH2 O H O CH2 O
O H O O H O
O β O
β
HO O O
H O H O O
O H O CH2 O H O CH2
H H
B
Carbon
Oxygen
Hydrogen
Figure 4-5 (A) Linkages of the D-glucose
residues in cellulose. (B) Hydrogen-bonding
pattern in cellulose I. From Ross et al.66
BOX 4-A CYCLODEXTRINS
An enzyme produced by some bacteria of the separation of enantiomers of drugs.f,g They can be
genusBacillus cuts chains of amylose and converts chemically modified by adding catalytic groups to
them into tiny rings consisting of six (α-cyclodextrin), serve as enzyme modelsh,i or as color-change
seven (β-cyclodextrin), eight (γ-cyclodextrin), or indicators sensitive to binding of organic molecules.j
more glucose units. The cyclodextrins, which were They can be linked together to form molecular
first isolated by F. Schardinger in 1903, have in- nanotubes. Polymer chains can even be threaded
trigued carbohydrate chemists for many years by through the tubes.k What practical applications
their unusual properties.a They are surprisingly may yet come from this?
resistant to acid hydrolysis and to attack by amy-
lases and cannot be fermented by yeast. a French, D. (1957) Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem.12, 189–260
The torus-like cyclodextrin molecules have an b Korpela, T., Mattsson, P., Hellman, J., Paavilainen, S., and
outer polar surface and an inner nonpolar surface. Mäkelä, M. (1988–89)Food Biotechnology2, 199–210
c Noltemeyer, M., and Saenger, W. (1980) J. Am. Chem. Soc.102,
The small hydrophobic
2710–2722
1.5 nm cavities within the d Menger, F. M., and Sherrod, M. J. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.110,
0.62 nm
cyclodextrins have 8606–8611
diameters of 0.50, 0.62, e Hamilton, J. A., and Chen, L. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.110,
4379–4391
and 0.79 nm, respec-
f Armstrong, D. W., Ward, T. J., Armstrong, R. D., and Beesley, T.
0.79 nm tively, for the α,β, and E. (1986) Science232, 1132–1135
γ dextrins.b Cavities g Lipkowitz, K. B., Raghothama, S., and Yang, J. (1992) J. Am.
are potential binding Chem. Soc.114, 1154–1162
h Anslyn, E., and Breslow, R. (1989) J. Am. Chem. Soc.111,
sites for a great variety
8931–8932
of both inorganic and organic molecules.a–g Com- i Granados, A., and de Rossi, R. H. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117,
plexes of simple alcohols, polyiodides,c ferrocene,d 3690–3696
and many other compounds have been observed. j Ueno, A., Kuwabara, T., Nakamura, A., and Toda, F. (1992)
Nature356, 136–137
Cyclodextrins can be used to “encapsulate” food
k Harada, A., Kamachi, J. L., and Kamachi, M. (1993) Nature364,
additivesb and their complexes may be useful in 516–518

--- Page 175 ---

172 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
Potato Rice
H H
15 µm 10 µm
1 4’
α-1,4-Linked
l = 0.42
nm
D-Glucose units
Shoti Immature sweet corn
The IUB has proposed another convention.64
10 µm 10 µm
2. The Glucans
From glucose alone various organisms synthesize
a whole series of polymeric glucans with quite different
properties. Of these, cellulose, an unbranched β-1,4-
linked polyglucose (Fig. 4-5A), is probably the most
abundant. It is the primary structural polysaccharide
Wheat Maize
of the cell walls of most green plants.65 For the whole
10 µm 10 µm
Earth, plants produce ~1014 kg of cellulose per year.
A systematic examination of the possible values
forφ and ψ shows that for cellulose these angles are
constrained to an extremely narrow range which
places the monomer units in an almost completely
extended conformation.62 Each glucose unit is flipped
over 180° from the previous one. The polymer has a
twofold screw axis and there is a slight zigzag in the
plane of the rings.66–68 Remember that in the chair
form of glucose all of the –OH groups lie in equatorial
positions and are able to form hydrogen bonds with
Figure 4-6 Scanning electron micrographs of starch granules.
neighboring chains. This feature, together with the
rigidity of conformation imposed by the β configura- Magnification 2500× and 3000×. From Jane et al.73
tion of the monomer units, doubtless accounts for the
ability of cellulose to form strong fibers.
It has been impossible to obtain large single crys- fiber may be 2–3 cm in length.
tals of cellulose. However, from 60 to 90% of native Cotton thread treated with concentrated NaOH
cellulose is thought to be clustered to form the needle- shrinks and has an increased luster. The resulting
like crystalline microfibrils. These microcrystals of “Mercerized” cellulose has changed into other crystal-
cellulose I can be separated from other plant materials line forms. The major one is cellulose II, in which
by prolonged boiling with dilute NaOH and HCl. the chains in the sheets are antiparallel.69a Cellulose II
Their structure has been established by electron dif- may also occur to some extent in nature. Many other
fraction67 and by comparison with high-resolution modified celluloses, e.g., methylcellulose, in which
X-ray diffraction structure of the tetrasaccharide β-D- some–OH groups have been converted to methyl
cellotetraose.66,69 Two closely similar parallel-chained, ethers70 are important commercial products.
hydrogen-bonded structures appear to be present. Starch, another of the most abundant polymers
One is shown in Fig. 4-5B. The hydrogen bonds and of glucose, is stored by most green plants in a semi-
van der Waals forces bind the chains into sheets which crystalline form in numerous small granules. These
are stacked to form fibers. A typical fiber of plant granules, which are usually formed within colorless
cellulose has a diameter of 3.5–4 nm and contains 30– membrane-bounded plastids, have characteristic shapes
40 parallel chains, each made up of 2000–10,000 glucose and appearances (Fig. 4-6) that vary from plant to plant.
units. The chain ends probably overlap to form essen- One component of starch, amylose, is a linear poly-
tially endless fibers that can extend for great distances mer of many α-D-glucopyranose units in 1,4 linkage
through the cell wall. They interact with other polysac- (Fig. 4-7) as in maltose. Starch granules always contain
charides as is illustrated in Fig. 4-14. A single cotton a second kind of molecule known as amylopectin.58
O
H O
O H
O
O H
φ
O
ψ
H O
O H
O
O
H
O

--- Page 176 ---

173
from
reducing
7 nm end
mn
21-01
C. Polysaccharides (Glycans)
A OH end of a starch molecule where one might expect to
find a hemiacetal ring in equilibrium with the free
CH
2 O aldehyde. However, this end may be attached to a
O
protein.
HO α Starch granules show a characteristic pattern of
O OH Branches in growth rings of 0.3- to 0.4-µm thickness with thinner
α O amylopectin or
HO glycogen are dense layers about 7 nm apart. Study of this layered
H 2 C OH O H 2 C a α t – t 1 a , c 6 h l e i d n k b a y ges. structure suggests that the individual amylopectin
molecules have branches close together in broomlike
O
HO clusters (Fig. 4-7C).61,71,72 The amylopectin chains are
O HO 120–400 nm long and their relative molecular masses
~60 ° OH may reach 15–30 million. In addition, starch granules
usually contain molecules of the straight-chain amylose,
O
The linear chains of amylase grow each containing several hundred glucose units and
from the “reducing end” toward
the“non-reducing end” using only OH having molecular masses of ~100 kDa. Most starches
α–1,4 linkages as in maltose. CH OH contain 20–21% amylose but there are special varieties
2
F b o en r d ea s c b h y r e ~ s 6 id 0° u l e e t a h d e i n ch g a t i o n ~60° of plants that produce starch with 50–70% amylose.
a helical structure with 6 On the other hand, the“waxy” varieties of maize form
residues per turn.
only amylopectin and lack amylose.
O
HO
In both starch and glycogen the glucose units of
the main chains are linked with α-1,4 linkages. An
O
extended conformation is not possible and the chains
tend to undergo helical coiling. One of the first helical
structures of a biopolymer to be discovered (in 1943)76,77
was the left-handed helix of amylose wound around
B molecules of pentaiodide (I –) in the well-known blue
5
starch–iodine complex78 (Fig. 4-8). The helix contains
six residues per turn, with a pitch of 0.8 nm and a
diameter of nearly 14 nm. Amylose forms complexes
of similar structure with many other small molecules.79
~3 units ~6-7 units Another more tightly coiled double-helical form
of amylose has been proposed.80 Each chain would
C contain six glucose units per turn and the two chains
could be arranged in either parallel or antiparallel
directions. The average amylose molecule contains
2000 glucose units and could be stretched to a slender
chain over 1 µm long, longer than the crystalline regions
observed in starch granules. Thus, the chains within
the granules would have to fold back on themselves,
Figure 4-7 (A) Linkages of the glucose residues in starches possibly in hairpin fashion:
and in glycogen. (B) Schematic diagram of the glycogen
molecule as proposed originally by K. H. Meyer.74 The
circles represent glucose residues which are connected by α-
1,4 linkages and, at the branch points, by α-1,6 linkages. The
symbolφ designates the reducing group. From D. French.75
(C) Proposed broomlike clusters in amylopectin. After D.
French.71 Crystalline array of hairpin folds
proposed for linear starch molecules
X-ray diffraction studies support the double-helical
Both amylopectin and glycogen (animal starch) con- structure but suggest a parallel orientation of the amy-
sist of highly branched bushlike molecules. Branches lose chains.81 Since amylose has not been obtained as
are attached to α-1,4-linked chains through α-1,6 single crystals the diffraction data do not give a definitive
linkages (Fig. 4-7). When glucose is being stored as answer. However, if double helices are formed by
amylopectin or glycogen the many “nonreducing” adjacent branches in amylopectin and glycogen the
ends appear to grow like branches on a bush, but two strands would be parallel. Starch granules also
when energy is needed the tips are eaten back by contain amorphous starch which appears to contain
enzymatic action (Fig. 11-2). There is only one reducing single helices, possibly wrapped around lipid materials.82

--- Page 177 ---

174 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
Glycogen is stored in the cytoplasm of animal cells
and to some extent in the lysosomes as enormous 100-
to 200-MDa particles. These appear in the electron
microscope as aggregates of smaller particles of mole-
cular masses up to 20–40 MDa. A laminated internal
structure with surface bumps is suggested by STM
microscopy (Fig. 4-9). Biosynthesis of glycogen may
be initiated by a 37-kDa protein called glycogenin,
which remains covalently attached to the reducing
end of the glycogen (Chapter 20).83 Despite the huge
molecular masses of glycogen particles, both 1H and
13C NMR resonances are sharp, indicating a high
degree of mobility of the glycosyl units.84
Beta-1,3-linked glucans occur widely in nature.
When a new green plant cell is formed the first poly-
Figure 4-9 A scanning tunneling microscopic (STM) image
A
of three glycogen molecules. The corrugated surface
suggests a laminated structure. These molecules have been
purified from tissues by treatment with strong alkali, which
breaks the larger aggregates into particles of M = 1–10× 106
r
and diameter 25–30 nm. Courtesy of Fennell Evans.93
saccharide to be synthesized is not cellu-
lose but the β-1,3-linked glucose polymer
callose. Cellulose appears later. Callose
is also produced in some specialized
plant tissues, such as pollen tubes,85 and
is formed in massive amounts at the site
of wounds or of attack by pathogens.
The major structural component of the
yeast cell wall is a β-1,3-linked glucan
with some β-1,6 branches.86 Schizophyl-
B lan is a β-1,3-linked glucan with a β-1,6-
linked glucosyl group attached to every
third residue. A glucan from the coleop-
tiles of oats contains 30% β-1,3 linkages
in a linear chain that otherwise has the
structure of cellulose.87 Other β-1,3-
linked glucans serve as energy storage
molecules in lower plants and in fungi.
Among these are β-1,3-linked glucans
such as paramylon,88,89 which is stored
by the euglena. A similar polysaccharide,
curdlan, is formed by certain bacteria. 90
Some other bacteria, e.g., Leuconostoc
mesenteroides, make 1,6-linked poly-D-
glucose or dextrans.91,92 These always
contain some α-1,3-linked branches and
may also have α-1,4 and α-1,2 linkages,
the structures varying from species to
Figure 4-8 (A) Structure of the helical complex of amylose with I– or I–.
The iodide complex is located in the interior of the helix having six g 3 lucos 5 e species. Dextrans formed by bacteria
residues per turn. (B) Model of a parallel-stranded double helix. There such as Streptococcus mutans growing on
are six glucose units per turn of each strand. The repeat period measured the surfaces of teeth are an important
from the model is 0.35 nm per glucose unit. Courtesy of Alfred French. component of dental plaque. Bacterial

--- Page 178 ---

C. Polysaccharides (Glycans) 175
acetylglucosamine whose structure resembles that of
cellulose. In β chitin the individual parallel chains
are linked by hydrogen bonds to form sheets in which
parallel chains are held together by NH- - -O=C
hydrogen bonds between the carboxamide groups.
In the more abundant α chitin the chains in alternate
sheets have opposite orientations,101,102 possibly a
result of hairpin folds in the strands. Native chitin
exists as microfibrils of 7.25 nm diameter. These
contain a 2.8-nm core consisting of 15–30 chitin chains
surrounded by a sheath of 27-kDa protein subunits.
The microfibrils pack in a hexagonal array, but the
structure is not completely regular. Several proteins
Figure 4-10 A schematic representation of the gel networks are present; some of the glucosamine units of the
of Sephadex (left) and agarose (right). Note that the aggre- polysaccharide are not acetylated and the chitin core
gates in agarose gels may actually contain 10–104 helices is often calcified.103 The commercial product chitosan
rather than the smaller numbers shown here. From Arnott
is a product of alkaline deacetylation of chitin but it
et al.95
also occurs naturally in some fungi.102 Chitin is also
present in cell walls of yeasts and other fungi. It is
covalently bonded to a β-1,3-linked glycan which may,
in turn, be linked to a mannoprotein (see Section D,2).97
dextrans are also produced commercially and are
chemically crosslinked to form gels (Sephadex) which
are widely used in biochemical separation procedures 4. Heteropolysaccharides of the Animal Body
(Figs. 3-1 and 4-10). A yeast polysaccharide pullulan
is a regular polymer of maltotriose units with α-1,4 Many polysaccharides contain repeating units
linkages joined in a single chain by α-1,6 linkages.94 consisting of more than one different kind of mono-
One glucan, called alternan is a linear polymer with mer.104,105 Some of these are composed of two sugars
alternateα-1,6 and 1,3 linkages. in a simple alternating sequence. Examples are
hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid) and the chondroitin,
dermatan,keratan, and heparan sulfates. They
3. Other Homopolysaccharides are important components of the “ground substance”
or intracellular cement of connective tissue in animals.
Cell walls of yeasts contain mannans in which Hyaluronan,106,107 which is abundant in synovial fluid
the main α-1,6-linked chain carries short branches of and the vitreous humor of the eye, is a repeating poly-
one to three mannose units joined in α-1,2,α-1,3, and mer of glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine with
sometimesα-1,6 linkages.96 These are covalently linked the structure shown in Fig. 4-11 and M of several
r
to proteins.97 A β-1,4-linked mannan forms micro- million. The chondroitin sulfates and dermatan sulfate
fibrils in the cell wall of some algae such as Acetabu- are similar polymers but with substitution by N-acetyl-
laria (Fig. 1-11) which do not make cellulose.98,99 galactosamine and α-L-iduronic acid, respectively, and
The cell walls of some seaweeds contain a β-1,3-linked with sulfate ester groups in the positions indicated in
xylan instead of cellulose. This polysaccharide forms Fig. 4-11.
a three-stranded right-handed triple helix.99,100 Even Hyaluronan solutions are remarkably viscous and
though xylose is a five-carbon sugar, the polymer at a concentration of only 0.1% can have over 80% of
contains the thermodynamically more stable six- the typical viscosity of biological fluids. This property
membered pyranose rings. On the other hand, fructose, may result from the presence of hydrogen bonds
a 6-carbon sugar, is present as five-membered furanose between the carboxylate, carboxamide, and hydroxyl
rings in inulin, the storage polysaccharide of the Jeru- groups of adjacent sugar residues as in Fig. 4-12. The
salem artichoke and other Compositae, and also in hydrogen bonds stiffen the chain to give a slender rod.
sweet potatoes. The difference has to do with biosyn- The tetrasaccharide shown in the figure is the repeating
thetic pathways. Furanose rings arise both in inulin unit in a threefold helix.109 However, the charged
and in sucrose because the biosynthesis occurs via the molecules do not associate to form strong fibrils like
6-phosphate ester of fructose, making it impossible for those of cellulose. The chain can be bent easily with
the phosphate derivative to form a 6-membered ring. breakage of the H-bonds at various positions to give
The major structural polysaccharide in the exo- a random coil structure.
skeletons of arthropods and of other lower animal While hyaluronan is not covalently attached to
forms is chitin, a linear β-1,4-linked polymer of N- proteins, it is usually anchored to cell surfaces and to

--- Page 179 ---

176 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
Type I Chain. Alternating 1→3 and 1→4 linkages; all(cid:2), (equatorial).
Repeating unit
OH
–O3SO
–OOC CH2 OH β
O O
O HO O
HO O O
OH β NH β 4 –OOC O
O C
CH3
GlcA GalNAc-4-Sulfate GlcA
Name Repeating unit Variations
Hyaluronan [–4GlcAβ1→3GlcNAcβ1→] None. Homogeneous.
n
Chondroitin sulfate [–4GlcAβ1→3GalNAc(SO–]β1→) Some GlcA-2-SO–,
3 n 3
GalNAc-4- or 6-SO–or both.
3
Dermatan sulfate [–4IdoAα1→3GalNAc(4-SO
3
–]β1→)
n
SomeL-IdoA-2-SO
3
–.
Keratan sulfate [–3Galβ1→4GlcNAc(6-SO–]β1→) Some Gal-6-SO, some Sia, Man, Fuc.
3 n 3
Type II Chain. All 1→4linkages, alternating(cid:2) and (cid:1) (axial).
CH2
O C O
O
NH
COO–
O HO O
O COO– HO α OSO3 –
HO O
O
β
O CH2
SO3 – OH
IdoA GlcNAc
Name Repeating unit Variations
Heparan sulfate [–4-GlcAβ1→4GlcNAc] Some IdoA, sulfation.
n
Heparin [–4-L-IdoA(SO
3
–)α1→4GlcN(SO
3
–)α1→]
n
Some IdoA-2-SO
3
–, GlcNAc.
24 different disaccharides possible.
Figure 4-11 The repeating disaccharide units of hyaluronan and other glycosaminoglycans. See Fransson108 and Hardingham
and Fosang.107
CH3
– O O H O C H
C
O H
CH2OH
O
H O O N
O O O O
O O O H
H O H O O
O
H O
N
–
C CH2OH
C H O
O
CH3
Figure 4-12 Proposed hydrogen-bonding scheme for the “native” conformation of hyaluronan. See Morris et al.109

--- Page 180 ---

C. Polysaccharides (Glycans) 177
OSO3 –
O CH2 O SO3 – β C
O
H
S
2
O3 –
HO O O O
NH
α –OOC HO
O C O COO– –O3S HO O NH α
H3C HO O – O3S NH
O
SO3 –O
O O α
OH β O
Figure 4-13 A pentasaccharide segment of heparin
which binds with high affinity to the serum protein H2C
antithrombin causing it to inhibit most of the serine
protease enzymes participating in the blood coagulation
OSO3 –
process (see Chapter 12). See Lindahl et al.118
protein “receptors” within the extracellular matrix.
5. Plant Heteropolysaccharides
In contrast, chondroitin, dermatan, keratan, and heparan
sulfates are attached covalently to the proteins at the
Fibers of cellulose, which run like rods through
reducing ends of the polymer chains (see Section D).
the amorphous matrix of plant cell walls, appear to be
The attached polymers undergo enzyme-catalyzed
coated with a monolayer of hemicelluloses. Predom-
chemical alteration. In dermatan most of the glucu-
inant among the latter is a xyloglucan, which has the
ronate residues found in chondroitin have been epimer- basic cellulose structure but with α-1,6-linked xylose
ized to iduronate and sulfate groups in ester linkages
units attached to three-fourths of the glucose resi-
have been added. Chondroitin sulfate is especially
dues.104,120,121 L-Fucose may also be present in trisac-
abundant in cartilage; dermatan sulfate is concentrated charide side chains: L-Fucα1→2Galβ1→ 2Xylα1→.122
in skin. Heparan sulfates are more heterogeneous Pectins of higher plants contain β-1,4-linked poly-
than the other polymers of this group and have been
galacturonates interrupted by occasional 1,2-linked
described as “the most complex polysaccharides on
L-rhamnose residues. Some of the carboxyl groups of
the surface of mammalian cells.”110
theserhamnogalacturonan chains are methylated.123
In the mast cells of lungs, liver, and other cells
Arabinans and galactans are also present in pectin.
heparan sulfate chains are modified further and
A possible arrangement of cellulose fibers, hemicellu-
released into the bloodstream as heparin, a material
loses, and pectic materials in a cell wall has been
with important anticoagulant properties. Both the
proposed (Fig. 4-14).
amino groups and the 6-hydroxyls of the glucosamine
Agarose, an alternating carbohydrate polymer
residues of heparin carry sulfate groups. In some units
consisting of ~120-kDa chains, is the principal compo-
D-glucuronic acid or glucuronate-2-sulfate111 is present
nent of agar and the compound that accounts for most
inα-1,4 linkage, but more often L-iduronic acid-2-sulfate
of the gelling properties of that remarkable substance.
is the first unit in the disaccharide.112–114 The iduronate
A solid agar gel containing 99.5% water can be formed.
ring appears to have unusually high conformational
Agarose molecules form left-handed double helices
flexibility which may influence the biological activity
with a threefold screw axis, a pitch of 1.90 nm, and a
of heparin and related polysaccharides.115 Because of
central cavity containing water molecules.124,125
its anticoagulant property, heparin is an important
drug for prevention of blood clot formation.116 In the
United States, in 1976 six metric tons of heparin were HO O
used to treat 10 million patients.117 The anticoagulant OH O 1
O
activity resides in large part in a nonrepeating penta- O O OH
saccharide (Fig. 4-13).112,118 This portion of the heparin, 3 OH 1 4 OSO3 –
n
especially if part of a larger octasaccharide,113 binds
Agarose:
to several proteins including the enzyme inhibitors [-3-D-Galβ1→4-(3,6-anhydro)-L-Galα1→]n
heparin cofactor II and plasma antithrombin III
(Chapter 12). Heparin greatly accelerates the rate at
A similar structure has been established for the gel-
which these proteins bind and inactivate blood clotting
formingcarrageenans from red seaweed. The X-ray
factors. See also Section D,1. Lower invertebrates, as
data suggest that three of the disaccharide units form
well as marine brown algae, contain heavily sulfated
one turn of a right-handed helix with a pitch of 2.6 nm.
fucans which are largely 1,3-linked.119
A second chain with a parallel orientation, but displaced
by half a turn, wraps around the first helix.124 Such

--- Page 181 ---

178 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
double-helical regions provide “tie points” for the pairs and provide binding sites for calcium ions,
formation of gels (Fig. 4-10).104,127,128 which stabilize the gel. The presence of occasional
extra sulfate groups in these polymers causes kinks
OSO3 – in the chains because the derivatized pyranose rings
OH O
O reverse their conformation to the other chair form. This
O O
O O prevents the entire polysaccharide chain from assuming
3 OH OSO3 –
n
a regular helical structure.100,104
ι-Carrageenan: Alginates, found in cell walls of some marine
[3Gal (4 sulfate) β1→4 (3,6-anhydro) Gal (2-sulfate) α1→]n algae and also formed by certain bacteria, consist in
part of a linear β-1,4-linked polymer of D-mannuronate
Sulfate groups protrude from the structure in with a cellulose-like structure. Alginates also contain
BOX 4-B SILICON: AN ESSENTIAL TRACE ELEMENT
No one can doubt that ently bound tightly in etherlinkage. Perhaps ortho-
diatoms, which make their silicic acid, Si(OH) , reacts with hydroxyl groups of
4
skeletons from SiO , have an the carbohydrates to form bridges between two
2
active metabolism of silicon. chains as follows:
They can accumulate as much
as 0.7 µM soluble silicon,
HO OH HO OH HO OH
possibly attached to
proteins.a-d R1 Si R2 R1 Si Si R2
Silica skeleton of O O O O O
The radiolaria and
a radiolariane
sponges often accumulate
silicon and limpets make opal base plates for their In each of these formulas additional free OH groups
teeth. Silicon may account for as much as 4% of the are available on the silicon so that it is possible to
solids of certain grasses. Although silicon is usually crosslink more than two polysaccharide chains.
not considered an essential nutrient for all plants, Silicon may function as a biological crosslinking
there is much evidence that it is essential to some agent in connective tissue. Silaffins, small polypep-
and that it is often beneficial.f Silicon is found in tides containing polyamine side chains of modified
soil primarily as silicic acid, H SiO , whose concen- lysine residues, apparently initiate silica formation
4 4
tration ranges from 0.1–0.6 mM. Most of the silicon from silicic acid in diatoms.o
taken up by plants is deposited within cells, in cell
walls, between cells, or in external layers as hydrated a Robinson, D. H., and Sullivan, C. W. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.
12, 151–154
SiO . Presumably the organic components of the
2 b Round, F. E. (1981) in Silicon and Siliceous Structures in Biological
plant control the deposition. The SiO in some
2 Systems (Simpson, T. L., and Volcani, B. E., eds), pp. 97–128,
plants takes the form of sharp particles which may Springer, New York
have a defensive function. They abrade the enamel c Evered, D., and O’Connor, M. (1986) Silicon Biochemistry, Wiley,
New York
surfaces of the teeth of herbivores and can cause
d Round, F. E., Crawford, R. M., and Mann, D. G. (1990) The
other illnesses.g
Diatoms, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge UK
Silicon is essential for growth and development e Buchsbaum, R., Buchsbaum, M., Pearse, J., and Pearse, V.
of higher animals,h-l and it has been suggested that (1987)Animals Without Backbones, 3rd ed., Univ. Chicago Press,
humans may require 5–20 mg per day.m In the chick, Chicago
f Epstein, E. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 11–17
silicon is found in active calcification sites of young g McNaughton, S. J., and Tarrants, J. L. (1983) Proc. Natl. Acad.
bone.i Silicon-deficient animals have poorly calcified Sci. U.S.A.80, 790–791
bones and also an elevated aluminum content in h Schwarz, K. (1970) in Trace Element Metabolism in Animals
their brains.m Silicon is present in low amounts in (Mills, F., ed), pp. 25–38, Livingstone, Edinburgh, UK
i Schwarz, K., and Milne, D. B. (1972) Nature239, 333–334
the internal organs of mammals but makes up ~0.01% j Carlisle, E. M. (1972) Science278, 619–621
of the skin, cartilage, and ligaments, in which it is k Hoekstra, W. H., Suttie, J. W., Ganther, H. E., and Mertz, W.,
apparently bound to proteoglycans such as chon- eds. (1974) Trace Element Metabolism in Animals-2, University
Park Press, Baltimore, Maryland
droitin-4-sulfate, dermatan sulfate, and heparan
l Carlisle, E. M. (1988) Science Total Environment73, 95–106
sulfate (Fig. 4-11).m,n These polymers contain ~0.04% mNielsen, F. H. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2661–2667
silicon or one atom of silicon per 130–280 repeating n Schwarz, K. (1973) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.70, 1608–1612
units of the polysaccharides. Plant pectins contain o Kröger, N., Deutzmann, R., and Sumper, M. (1999) Science286,
1129–1132
about five times this amount. The silicon is appar-

--- Page 182 ---

C. Polysaccharides (Glycans) 179
α-L-guluronate, sometimes in homopolymeric “blocks” Meso-tartrate is joined to glucuronic acid in glycosidic
and sometimes alternating with the mannuronate linkage and by acetal formation to the aldehyde gly-
residues. Groups of adjacent guluronate units are oxylic acid, HOOC—CHO, which is also joined in an
thought to impart calcium-binding properties to algi- ether linkage to the next repeating unit.130 Similar
nates.129 open acetal linkages join monosaccharide units in
Polysaccharides with calcium-binding sites may some bacterial lipopolysaccharides and may occur
also serve to initiate deposition of calcium carbonate. more widely.130a
For example, the unicellular alga Pleurochrysis carterae Bacteria form and secrete a variety of heteropoly-
contains an unusual polysaccharide with the following saccharides, several of which are of commercial value
highly negatively charged repeating unit: because of their useful gelling properties. Xanthan
gum (formed by Xanthomonascampestris) has the basic
cellulose structure but every second glucose residue
COO– O H COO– H COO– carries an α-1,3-linked trisaccharide consisting of 6-O-
acetylmannose, glucuronic acid, and mannose in the
HO O 2 C3 C1 following repeating unit:131,132
C O O
OH n
H COO– (-4Glcβ1-4Glcβ1-)
[-4GlcAβ1→2-meso-tartrate-3→1-glyoxylate-1→] n
n 3
6-O-Acetyl-Manα1
2
Manβ1-4GlcAβ1
The polymer is further modified by reaction of
about half of the mannosyl residues with pyru-
vate to form ketals (Eq. 4-9).
COO–
Mannosyl
residue C O
(as PEP)
CH3 CH3
–OOC CH2
O
O
O OH
HO O
(4-9)
Acetan of Acetobacter xylinum has pentasac-
charide side chains that contain L-rhamnose.122
A helical structure for the strands has been
observed by atomic force microscopy.
6. Polysaccharides of Bacterial
Surfaces
The complex structure of bacterial cell
walls is discussed in Chapter 8. However, it is
appropriate to mention a few bacterial poly-
Figure 4-14 Tentative structure of the walls of suspension-cultured
saccharides here. The innermost layer of
sycamore cells. The wall components are in approximately proper
bacterial cell walls is a porous network of a
proportions but the distance between cellulose elementary fibrils is
highly crosslinked material known as pepti-
expanded to allow room to present the interconnecting structure.
doglycan or murein (see Fig. 8-29). The back-
There are probably between 10 and 100 cellulose elementary fibrils
across a single primary cell wall. From Albersheim et al.126 bone of the peptidoglycan is a β-1,4-linked

--- Page 183 ---

180 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
alternating polymer of N-acetyl-D-glucosamine and N- The enantiomorph of abequose
acetyl-D-muramic acid. Alternate units of the resulting i
s
s
u
c
r
o
fa
li
c
t
e
o s
a
e
n
,
t
a
ig
s
e
u
n
g
s
a
o
r
f
f
E
o
.
u
c
n
o
d
li .
in
chitin-like molecule carry unusual peptides that are
6 HO
attached to the lactyl groups of the N-acetyl-muramic CH3 CH3
O O
acid units and crosslink the polysaccharide chains. In HO
E. coli and other gram-negative bacteria the peptido-
glycan forms a thin (2 nm) continuous network around 3 7
HO Abequose is HO
the cell. This“baglike molecule” protects the organism OH acetylated here OH
in some antigens.
from osmotic stress. In addition, gram-negative bac- Paratose Abequose
teria have an outer membrane and on its outer surface
(3,6-dideoxy-D-ribohexose) (3,6-dideoxy-D-xylohexose)
a complex lipopolysaccharide. The projecting ends of
the lipopolysaccharide molecules consist of long car-
bohydrate chains with repeating units that have anti- CH3
O
genic properties and are called O antigens. Specific HO
HO The enantiomorph of tyvelose is ascarylose,
antibodies can be prepared against these polysaccha- found not only in certain bacterial antigens
rides, and so varied are the structures that 1000 differ- but also in the eggs ofAscaris.
ent“serotypes” of Salmonella are known. These are OH
classified into 17 principal groups. For example, Tyvelose
group E3 contains the following repeating unit, where
(3,6-dideoxy-D-arabohexose)
n may be ~50 on the average. Rha = L-rhamnose.
HO
HO
Glcα1 OH HO CH2OH
H2C
C
H
H C
O O
4 HO
(Galβ1→6Man1→4Rha→) HO
n HO HO COOH
Polysaccharides of groups A, B, and D contain the OH OH
repeating unit L-Glycero-D-mannoheptose 3-Deoxy-D-mannooctulosonic acid,
also called 2-keto-3-deoxyoctonate
or KDO
X
Figure 4-15 Structures of special sugars found in the
(Man→Rha→Gal→)
“antigens” of the outer cell walls of gram-negative bacteria.
n
where X is a 3,6-dideoxyhexose: paratose in type A,
abequose in type B, and tyvelose in type D (Fig. 4-15). Attached to this galactan are branched penta-D-arabinose
The existence of the many serotypes depends on the units:
variety of components, on the many types of linkage
(α and β, 1→2, 1→3, 1→4, and 1→6) in the repeating (Arafβ1→2Αrafα1) →3,5Arafα—
2
units, and on further structural variations at the chain
ends.
At the inner end of the O antigen is a shorter poly- These are further modified by esterification with my-
saccharide“core” whose structure is less varied than colic acids.133 Information on some other cell wall
that of the outer ends but which is remarkable in components is given in Chapter 20.
containing two sugars found only in bacterial cell
walls: a seven-carbon heptose and an eight carbon
α-oxo sugar acid, ketodeoxyoctonate (KDO). The D. Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans
structures are given in Fig. 4-15 and the arrangement
of these sugars in the Salmonella lipopolysaccharide is Many proteins, including almost all of those that
shown in Fig. 8-30. That figure also shows the manner are secreted from cells and many that are components
in which the oligosaccharide that bears the O antigen of cell surfaces, carry covalently attached oligosaccha-
is attached to a lipid anchoring group that is embedded rides.134–139 These glycoproteins may carry just one
in the outer membrane of the bacteria. or a few, often highly branched, oligosaccharide chains.
A great variety of polysaccharides are present in For example, ribonuclease B has a structure identical
the outer layers of other types of bacteria. For example, to that of ribonuclease A (Fig. 12-25) except for the
the mycobacteria have an alternating 5- and 6-linked presence of an oligosaccharide on asparagine 34.140
β-D-Galf polymer attached to their peptidoglycan. In other instances proteins carry a large number of

--- Page 184 ---

D. Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans 181
such chains and the carbohydrate may account for
over half of the mass of a glycoprotein. Most carbohy-
drate chains are attached either as O-glycosides with
the hydroxyl groups of the side chains of serine, threo-
nine, or other hydroxyamino acid residues or as N-
glycosyl groups through linkage to the amide groups The large proteoglycan of human cartilage is built
of asparagine side chains. Both types of linkage may upon the 246 kDa protein aggrecan. In the central
be present in a single protein. Here are some examples. half of the peptide chain are many Ser-Gly sequences
to which about one hundred 10- to 25-kDa chondroitin
Xylβ1→O-Ser(Thr) Proteoglycans of connective tissue; sulfate chains are attached. About 30 keratan sulfate
thyroglobulins
chains as well as other oligosaccharide groups are also
ε present. These proteoglycan subunits are joined with
→NLys Some dermatan sulfates the aid of 44- to 49-kDa link protein to molecules of
H hyaluronan144–146 (Fig. 4-16). Several types and sizes
Galβ1→O-Hydroxylysine Collagen, extension of proteoglycan are known.143,145–147 Dermatan sulfates
(Hydroxyproline) may be linked to these through either serine or aspar-
agine, depending upon the tissue. The polysaccharide
L-Araα1→O-4-Hydroxy-proline Plants
chains of the proteoglycans also bind to collagen fibrils
GalNAcα1→O-Ser(Thr) Many glycoproteins to form a “fiber-reinforced composite material”between
cells. Chondroitin and heparan sulfates may be attached
GlcNAcα1→O-Ser(Thr) Glycoproteins of cytoplasmic
surfaces at different Ser-Gly sites in a single peptide chain.148
Degradation of heparan proteoglycans may lead to
GlcNAcβ1→NH-βCH-Asn Many glycoproteins
2 the shorter free carbohydrate chains found in the
Some dermatan and heparan sulfates
circulating heparin. Commercial heparin preparations
used as anticoagulants are produced by oxidative
Linkage of a glycosyl group to a carbon atom of an
destruction of the attached proteins.113
indole ring of tryptophan has also been demonstrated.141
A quite different situation holds for collagen in
whichβ-galactosyl units and glucosyl-β-galactosyl
disaccharide units are attached to side chains of hydroxy-
1. O-Linked Glycosyl Groups
lysine formed by postsynthetic modification of the
original procollagen chain.
In the O-linked glycoproteins the sugar that is
attached directly to the protein is usually either xylose,
galactose, or N-acetylgalactosamine, all in the pyranose
+
NH
ring form. Xylose is found only in the intercellular 3
proteoglycans which carry the chondroitin, dermatan, CH 2 Side chain of
and related sulfated polysaccharide chains of connec- Glcα1→2Galβ1→O CH erythro-δ-hydroxylysine
tive tissues.141a,b Since amino sugars are a major constit-
uent, proteoglycans are often called glycosaminoglycans. (CH 2 ) 2
Chondroitin, dermatan, and heparan sulfates are all Cα
attached to “core” proteins by the same linkage, which
is illustrated here for chondroitin
A great deal of variation in the amount of glycosylation
is observed from one species to another. The human
Repeating unit of α-1(II) chains of collagen usually carry four disaccha-
chondroitin as in Fig. 4-11 Terminal unit rides and four monosaccharide units. In the related
collagen-likeextensins, which are found in plant
(→4GlcAβ1→3GalNAβ1) →4GlcAβ1 cell walls, the hydroxyproline (Hyp) side chains are
n
O-glycosylated, largely by short oligosaccharides of
3Galβ1 arabinose in furanose ring form,150–152 e.g., Arafβ1→
2Arafβ1→2Arafβ1→4Hyp. There are as many as 25
3Galβ1
repeats of Ser-Pro-Pro-Pro-Pro encoded in an extensin
4Xylβ1→O-Ser gene. Most of the prolines are hydroxylated and glyco-
sylated. The presence of two or more contiguous pro-
line residues seems to be the signal for the hydroxy-
Some IdoA may be present in the terminal unit of
lation reaction to take place.152
dermatan sulfate.142 Keratan sulfate has its own core
Another distinct family of O-linked glycoproteins
proteins143 and has different terminal units including
are the mucins, which are present in saliva and other
the following:107
→
→
→
Keratan→Gal→GlcNAc→
→GalNAc→O–Ser
Sia→Gal

--- Page 185 ---

182 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
A mucous secretions. The polypeptides consist largely
of serine, threonine, proline, and glycine, with up to
one-third of the residues being Ser + Thr. Mucins
may contain 70 to 85% carbohydrate linked through
N-acetylgalactosamine residues to the serine and
threonine hydroxyls.153–160a Salivary mucins of cows,
sheep, and dogs contain largely the following disac-
charide, which may contain either N-acetyl- or N-
glycolyl-neuraminic acid:
NeuNAcα2→6GlcNAcβ→Ser(Thr)
Up to 800 disaccharides are present on a single large
protein which is composed of disulfide-linked subunits.
The many negatively charged sialic acid (N-glycolyl-
neuraminic acid) groups are thought to cause expan-
sion and rigidity which increase the viscosity of the
protein. Some other mucins contain predominantly
large oligosaccharides, which often carry blood group
determinants.161,162
The ABO(H) family of blood group determinants
(Box 4-C) are oligosaccharide groups assembled from
0.5(cid:3)m D-galactose,N-acetyl-D-galactosamine, and L-fucose.
They are carried on the nonreducing ends of O-linked
oligosaccharides which may be attached to cell surface
proteins, to mucins, or to the sphingolipid known as
B ceramide (Chapter 8). Attachment to proteins is usually
via GalNAc. An example of a blood type A determi-
nant on an O-linked oligosaccharide is the following,
where the linkage between the galactose and N-acetyl-
glucosamine may be either β-1,3 or β-1,4:
GalNAcα1→3Galβ1→3(4)GlcNAcβ1→3GalNAc→O-Ser(Thr)
2
↑
Fucα1
2. Asparagine-Linked Oligosaccharides
In many glycoproteins oligosaccharides are linked
through N-acetylglucosamine to the side chain of
asparagine.134,163,164
HOCH2 O
R O
O
CH2 Cα
β
HO N Amide N of
H asparagine
N
O
C
H
Figure 4-16 (A) Dark field electron micrograph of a proteo- CH3
glycan aggregate from bovine articular cartilage (from bearing
surfaces of joints). Courtesy of Joseph A. Buckwalter. The
filamentous backbone consists of hyaluronic acid, as in (B).
This structure also illustrates one of the hydrogen-
The proteoglycan subunits extend from the backbone. From
bonding possibilities through which the sugar can
Rosenberg.149

--- Page 186 ---

D. Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans 183
interact with the protein. Since the site of glycosylation saccharide in the endoplasmic reticulum and residues
is often at β bends in the surface of the protein, the amide of glucosamine, galactose, and sialic acid (Sia) may be
groups of the N-acetylglucosamine may alternatively added. Thus, Y and Y in the foregoing structure
1 2
hydrogen bond to amide groups of the peptide.165 often become
This asparagine linkage is very common. For example,
it is present in 97% of glycoproteins of blood plasma166 Siaα2→3(6)Galβ1→4GlcNAcβ1→
and it is also predominent in the glycoproteins of
tissue surfaces.167 There are numerous structures for Here, the sialic acid may be linked either 2,3 or 2,6 and
asparagine-linked oligosaccharides but many contain the GlcNAc either 1,2 or 1,3. Both Y groups may consist
the following core to which additional glycosyl groups of trisaccharides of this type in “biantennary” oligo-
may be attached: saccharides and a third trisaccharide (Y ) may be added
3
to form a “triantennary” molecule. An additional
N-acetylglucosamine is often linked by β-1,4 linkage
±Fucα1 to the central mannose of the core and fucosyl residues
inα-1,6 linkage are often linked to the N-acetylgluco-
Manβ1→4GlcNAβ1→4GlcNAβ1→Asn samine next to the asparagine.168 The Galβ1→4GlcNAc
disaccharide unit in the above Y group is also called
N-acetyllactosamine because of its relationship to
lactose. It is often repeated in long Y groups, e.g., as
Here the ±Fuc indicates that this residue is present (→3Galβ1→4Glc-NAcβ1—) , the oligosaccharides
n
only on some of the chains. being called poly-N-acetyllactosamino-glycans. These
Notice the three mannose residues on the left side. structures are also principal carriers of the ABO blood
In the high mannose type oligosaccharide, Y , Y , and type determinants on erythrocyte surfaces.169
1 2
Y are additional mannose units. In many instances ManyN-linked oligosaccharides are highly branched.
3
Y = Y = Y = Manα→Man. These “extra” mannose For example, in ovomucoid, a protease inhibitor of hen
1 2 3
units are put onto the oligosaccharide during the eggs,“pentaantennary” oligosaccharides have two
original biosynthesis and before it is attached to the and three N-acetylglucosamine rings, respectively,
protein (Chapter 20). Some of the mannose units may attached to the terminal mannose units of the oligosac-
then be removed during the “processing” of the oligo- charide core in 1,2, 1,4 and 1,6 linkages. Another large
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1 ±Fucα1
→ →
4 3
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1→4Galβ1 (→4GlcNAcβ1→3Galβ1) →4GlcNAcβ1
p
→3 →3
±NeuAcα2 ±Fucα1
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1 ±Fucα1
→ →
4 3 6
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1→4Galβ1 (→4GlcNAcβ1→3Galβ1) →4GlcNAcβ1→4 Manα1 Asp
q
→3 →3 2
Ala
±NeuAcα2 ±Fucα1
Ala
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1 ±Fucα1
→ →
Ser
4 3
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1→4Galβ1 (→4GlcNAcβ1→3Galβ1) r →4GlcNAcβ1 6 Manβ1→4GlcNAβ1→4GlcNAβ1→Asn
→3 →3 3
±NeuAcα2 ±Fucα1
Gln
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1 ±Fucα1 Thr
→ →
4 3 Val
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1→4Galβ1 (→4GlcNAcβ1→3Galβ1) →4GlcNAcβ1
s
→3 →3 Ser
±NeuAcα2 ±Fucα1
4 Manα1
2
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1 ±Fucα1 Figure 4-17 A large N-linked glycan from the
→ →
4 3 fertilized egg of the teleost fish oryzias.171 On
±NeuAcα2→3Galβ1→4Galβ1 (→4GlcNAcβ1→3Galβ1)
t
→4GlcNAcβ1
the average, only two of the “antenna” contain
→3 →3
the repeated unit in parenthesis, i.e., p + q + r +
±NeuAcα2 ±Fucα1
s + t = 1.9; an average of about 4.6 residues of
sialic acid are present.
→
Yα1
3
Y 2 α1→3Manα1→
6 6
→3
Yα1→2Manα1
1
→
6

--- Page 187 ---

184 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
BOX 4-C THE BLOOD GROUP DETERMINANTS
The role of carbohydrates in biological commu-
nication is well illustrated by the human blood types.a,b
According to the ABO system first described by
Landsteiner in 1900, individuals are classified into
types A, B, AB, and O. Blood of individuals of the
same type can be mixed without clumping of cells,
but serum from a type O individual contains anti-
bodies that agglutinate erythrocytes of persons of
types A and B. Serum of persons of type B causes
type A cells to clump and vice versa. Individuals of
none of the four types have antibodies against type
O erythrocytes. For this reason, persons with type
O blood are sometimes inaccurately described as
“universal donors.”
The ABO blood types are determined by specific
blood group determinants which are attached to
the nonreducing ends of O-linked oligosaccharides of
surface glycoproteins, mucins, glycolipids, and, to a
lesser extent, N-linked oligosaccharides. The blood
group determinants are found on erythrocytes and
all endothelial cells of the body. In about 80% of the
population they are also present on glycoproteins of
the saliva and other secretions.
The minimal determinant structures, attached
to“carrier” R, are as follows:
GalNAcα1→3 Galβ2→R
Fucα1
Here R refers to a “carrier oligosaccharide” which
can be as simple as
or may be a complex lactosaminoglycan or an oligo-
saccharide such as that in Fig. 4-17. The minimal
determinants can be linked to the carrier oligosac-
charide by either a β-1,3 (type I chain) or β-1,4 (type
II chain) glycosidic bond.
The genetic basis for the ABO blood groups is
well understood. There are three alleles, variants
of a gene, that encodes a glycosyltransferase. In
A type individuals, this enzyme transfers N-acetyl-
galactosamine from a carrier molecule, called UDP
→
A determinant
2
Galα1→3 Galβ1→R
Fucα1
→
B determinant
2
Galβ1→R
Fucα1
→
H(O) determinant
2
Galβ1→3GlcNAcβ1→
Fucα1
→
Galβ1→3(4) GlcNAcβ1→
2 H
GDPFuc
FUT 3
GDP
Galβ1→3GlcNAcβ1→
Fucα1
→
4
Fucα1
→
Galβ1→4GlcNAcβ1→
2
Fucα1
→
GDPFuc
FUT 3
GDP
3
Lex or SSEA-1
Leb 3-Fucosyl-N-acetyllactosamine
→
(Chapter 17), onto the terminal positions of the
H(O) determinant. The enzyme specified by the B
allele transfers galactose. The two enzymes differ
in only four amino acid residues but the result is an
altered substrate specificity.a,c,d The O allele produces
inactive enzyme as a result of a single base deletion
in the gene.a The H gene has been identified as that
of an α-1,2 fucosyltransferase that transfers α-L-fucose
from the carrier GDP to the galactose unit in the
foregoing structure.e Persons with an inactive H
transferase gene may have the rare type I, which
results from addition of glucosamine branches to
the repetitive H antigen structures of polylactos-
aminoglycans.f More often though, the H antigen
Galα1→3Galβ1→
Fucα1
H-transferase
FUT 1
FUT 2 Fucα1
4
Galβ1→3GlcNAcβ1→
Lea
GDPFuc
FUT 3
GDP
→
Galβ1→3(4) GlcNAcβ1→
Fucα1
2
→
[–3Galβ1→4GlcNAcβ1→]
n
2
GlcNAcα1
→
Galβ1→3(4) GlcNAcβ1→
Precursor; type 1 has Galβ-1,3,
type 2, Galβ-1,4 linkage
GDPFuc
H-transferase
GDP
3
H
UDPGalNAc
A-transferase
UDP
GalNAcα1→3Galβ1→
Fucα1
→
UDP-GlcNAc UDP
I
UDPGal
B-transferase
UDP
2
A B
is acted upon by a different fucosyltransferase
encoded by the Legene, which determines the
Lewis blood group. This enzyme places α-1,4-
linkedL-fucose onto the H antigen to give the Leb
antigen. The same fucosyltransferase (which is
→3(4)GlcNAcβ1→3Galβ1→4Glcβ1—O—Ser (Thr, ceramide)

--- Page 188 ---

185
BOX 4-C Continued
designated FUT 3) acting on type 2 precursor chains The Cad antigen, also found on glycophorin as well
forms the Leaantigen. The same transferase adds a as on gangliosides, has an additional β-1,4-linked
β-1,3-linked fucose to type 2 chains to give the Lex GalNAc at the indicated position.m The Kell blood
antigen, which is also called SSEA-1.g,h Lactosamine- group antigens are carried on a 93 kDa glycoprotein
type precursors carrying α-2,3-linked sialic acid at of erythrocyte surfaces.n The P blood group depends
their nonreducing ends on surfaces of granulocytes, upon surface carbohydrates such as the tetrasaccha-
monocytes, and natural killer cells can be converted ride part of the ganglioside called globoside; see
to sialylated Lex (s-Lex).i,j Fig. 20-9. Its characteristic antigenic activities are
destroyed by treatment with dilute periodate.
Other antigens, including those of the Rh and
NeuAcα2→3Galβ1→4GlcNAc→ LW groups, are represented by exposed parts of
proteins on the erythrocyte surfaces.o
Fucα1
a Yamamoto, F., Clausen, H., White, T., Marken, J., and
Hakomori, S. (1990) Nature345, 229–233
b Frevert, J., and Ballou, C. E. (1985) Biochemistry24, 753–759
Individuals with active gene Se (for secretion) c Feizi, T. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 330–331
secrete glycoproteins bearing the blood group sub- d Yamamoto, F., and Hakomori, S. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265,
stance into saliva and other body fluids. The Se 19257–19262
e Larsen, R. D., Ernst, L. K., Nair, R. P., and Lowe, J. B. (1990)
gene is another H-transferase present in epithelial
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.87, 6674–6678
cells and salivary glands. In individuals with active f van den Eijnden, D., Koenderman, A., and Schiphorst, W.
Se genes (~80% of most populations) most soluble (1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 12461–12471
H antigens are converted to Leb oligosaccharides.k g Mollicone, R., Reguigne, I., Kelly, R. J., Fletcher, A., Watt, J.,
Chatfield, S., Aziz, A., Cameron, H. S., Weston, B. W., Lowe, J.
There are at least 12 other well established
B., and Oriol, R. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 20987–20994
human blood groups, several of which involve h Nishihara, S., Narimatsu, H., Iwasaki, H., Yazawa, S.,
oligosaccharides attached to glycoproteins or gly- Akamatsu, S., Ando, T., Seno, T., and Ikuyo, N. (1994) J. Biol.
colipids. The MN antigens consist of a sequence Chem.269, 29271–29278
i Natsuka, S., Gersten, K. M., Zenita, K., Kannagi, R., and Lowe,
of amino acids near the N terminus of the protein
J. B. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 16789–16794
glycophorin (Chapter 8) with attached sialic acid-
j Murray, B. W., Wittmann, V., Burkart, M. D., Hung, S.-C., and
containingO-linked oligosaccharides,l e.g., as in the Wong, C.-H. (1997) Biochemistry36, 823 – 831
following structure: k Kelly, R. J., Rouquier, S., Giorgi, D., Lennon, G. G., and Lowe, J.
B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 4640–4649
l Adamany, A., Blumenfeld, O., Sabo, B., and McCreary, J. (1983)
J. Biol. Chem.258, 11537–11545
mGillard, B., Blanchard, D., Bouhours, J.-F., Cartron, J.-P., van
Kuik, J. A., Kamerling, J., Vliegenthart, J., and Marcus, D. (1988)
Biochemistry27, 4601–4606
n Redman, C., Avellino, G., Pfeffer, S., Mukherjee, T., Nichols, M.,
Rubinstein, P., and Marsh, W. L. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261,
9521–9525
o Bloy, C., Hermand, P., Blanchard, D., Cherif-Zahar, B.,
Goossens, D., and Cartron, J.-P. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265,
21482–21487
→
2 s-Lex
NeuAcα2→3Galβ1→3GalNAc→O—Ser (Thr)
GalNAcβ1
→
NeuAcα2
6
4
→
D. Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans
}in Cad antigen
N-linked glycan is pictured in Fig. 4-17. Like many cell surfaces. Some glycoproteins carry sulfate or
others, it has a number of sialic acid residues at the phosphate groups that have similar effects. The glyco-
nonreducing ends and also contains N-acetyllactos- proteins of the slime mold Dictyosteliumcontain both
amine units. The major component of the cell walls of mannose-6-P and mannose-6-sulfate residues.163
yeast (S. cerevisiae) is a mannoprotein that carries long Oligosaccharides on the protein subunits of flagella
N-linked oligosaccharides with highly branched outer of halobacteria contain sulfate esters of glucuronic
chains of over 100 mannose residues170 (see also Section acid.172 Some N-linked oligosaccharides carry chains
C,3). of keratan sulfate in place of the sialic acid in the Y
1
The special importance of sialic acids in glycopro- and Y groups of the oligosaccharide.173
2
teins may lie in the negative electrical charges and the
resultant Ca2+-binding properties that they impart to

--- Page 189 ---

186 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
are ready to differentiate into an aggregating form
3. Glycoproteins in Biological Recognition
(Chapter 1). Then it is produced in abundance.178
Discoidin I has a second binding site specific for the
The clusters of sugar rings that form the oligosac-
peptide sequence Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) which is known
charides on glycoproteins play a vital role in many
to be involved in cell adhesion and which binds to
aspects of biological recognition.139,174–176 A good
such surface proteins as fibronectin and laminin
example is provided by the human blood groups
(Chapter 8). Many animal tissues contain soluble
whose characteristics are determined largely by oligo-
lactose-binding lectins known as galectins or S-Lac
saccharides (Box 4-C). The adhesion of viruses, bacteria,
lectins. The best known member is a dimer of 14-kDa
and eukaryotic parasites to cell surfaces and of one cell
subunits;187,188 many other related lectins have been
to another in multicellular organisms is also dependent
found.189,192 Another family are Ca2+-dependent or
on carbohydrates. Recently, it has become clear that
the oligosaccharides of cell surfaces change during
C-type lectins which are specific for mannose, L-fucose,
or other sugars.105,193 Lectin domains are being
growth and development and provide an important
discovered in many proteins.
mechanism by which cells can recognize each other
and respond. Why are carbohydrates used for this
Carbohydrate-binding sites. The structures of
purpose? It has been pointed out by Sharon and Lis175
the sites that recognize and bind sugar rings in lectins,
that four different nucleotides can make only 24 distinct
enzymes, transporter proteins, and other carbohydrate-
tetranucleotides but that four different monosaccharides
binding proteins vary greatly, as does the tightness of
can make 35,560 unique tetrasaccharides.
binding. However, there are certain common features:
Sugar rings are bound by hydrogen bonds, which are
Lectins and other carbohydrate-binding pro-
often numerous. An example is the galactose chemo-
teins. Much of biological carbohydrate-dependent
receptor protein from E. coli. It binds both α and β
recognition is a result of interaction of individual
glycosyl groups or of oligosaccharides on a glycopro-
anomers of either D-glucose or D-galactose and is
utilized by the bacteria in searching for food (see
tein with a second protein. In some cases that protein
is referred to as a receptor; in other cases the glycosyl
Chapter 19). The structure of D-glucose bound to this
protein is shown in Fig. 4-18. Notice the many hydrogen
groups may be called the receptor. Carbohydrate-
bonds. Two of the –OH groups have the maximum of
binding proteins include antibodies, enzymes, and
three hydrogen bonds apiece. There are three negatively
carriers that help sugars to cross cell membranes.
charged aspartate side chains and one positively charged
In addition, there is a large group of carbohydrate
guanidinium group. These provide strong ion–dipole
binding proteins called lectins (from the latin lectus;
interactions which add strength to the bonds. The
to select).24,174,177,178
presence of ionized groups in varying numbers and
The first lectins discovered were proteins of plant
constellations is another common feature of protein–
seeds with specific sugar-binding properties and the
carbohydrate interactions. A third common feature is
ability to agglutinate erythrocytes. Ricin, a very toxic
the presence of aromatic rings, which often lie against
protein from castor beans, was isolated in 1888.178,179
one face of the sugar. The stereoscopic drawing of
Perhaps the best known lectin is concanavalin A, a
Fig. 4-18A shows an indole ring of a tryptophan residue
protein crystallized by Sumner in 1919.180 Concana-
in front and a phenylalanine side chain behind the
valin A makes up 2–3% of the protein of the jack bean.
sugar.194 Sugars bind to lectins,181,184,195 to enzymes
It is one of a family of legume lectins that resemble
(Chapter 12), and to antibodies196 through similar
favin, whose structure is shown in Fig. 2-15.177,181,182
interactions.
Many lectins, including ricin, have quite different
three-dimensional structures but share the common
Binding of viruses and bacteria to cells. The
characteristic of having a selective binding site for one
m
or
a
m
nn
o
o
re
p y
g
r
ly
a
c
n
o
o
s
s
y
e
l
o
r
r
in
α
g
-
s
D
.
- g
C
lu
on
co
c
p
an
y
a
ra
v
n
a
o
li
s
n
e
A
w
b
it
i
h
n d
u
s
n
t
m
o
o
α
d
-D
i-
-
b
ch
in
o
d
le
t
r
o
a
S
to
ia
x
→
in
G
a
a
n
l
d
g
a
r o
r
u
el
p
a
s
t e
a
d
tt
t
a
o
c
x
h
i
e
c
d
p
t
r
o
o t
g
e
l
i
y
n
c
f
o
r
l
o
ip
m
id
E
s
.
(
c
g
o
a
li
n-
gliosides, Chapter 8) of erythrocytes and other cells.197
fied hydroxyl groups at C-3, C-4, and C-6.183,184
The influenza virus gains access to our body cells by
Tighter binding is observed if additional mannose
first binding through a viral surface hemagglutinin.
residues are present in an oligosaccharide.178,183 The
This is a protein that binds specifically to NeuAcα2→
protein also has specific binding sites for Ca2+ and for
6Gal or NeuAcα2→3Gal of cell surface oligosaccha-
a transition metal ion such as Mn2+. Soybean lectin
rides.174,175,198 Removal of sialic acid from erythrocyte
bindsD-N-acetylgalactosamine and D-galactose units,
surfaces abolishes the ability of the influenza and some
while wheat lectin is specific for D-N-acetylglucosamine.
other viruses to bind. It seems somewhat surprising
Animal cells also produce lectins.24,105,185–193
that a second surface protein on the influenza virus
The amebas of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium
is a neuraminidase (or sialidase) which catalyzes
synthesize a classical lectin called discoidin I that
the removal of sialic acid from cell surface proteins,
binds GalNAc or Gal. It is absent from cells until they

--- Page 190 ---

D. Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans 187
destroying unoccupied virus receptors.199,200 This may specific and depends upon interaction of sperm recep-
facilitate movement of a virus particle through the tors with O-linked oligosaccharides of the extracellular
mucin layer surrounding a cell. Bacteria and other coat of the ovum.
invading parasites also produce neuraminidases.201
Trypanosamas cruzi, the causative agent of chagas Growth and differentiation. The exact structures
disease, employs a transsialidase to transfer sialic of the oligosaccharides and polysaccharides of cell
acid from a Galβ on the host cell onto a protein on the surfaces vary not only with cell and tissue type but
parasite surface. This is essential for successful inva- also with the position of a cell and with time. Actions
sion of the host.202 of numerous glycosyl transferases alter these saccha-
The adherence of cells of E. coli to mannosyl units ride groups as an organism grows and develops.
of cell surface proteins may initiate the infections that Other enzymes alter them by hydrolytic removal of
sometimes occur with this bacterium.174,203 However, sugars, by isomerizaion, oxidation, and addition of
cells of E. coli from strains that cause urinary infections other components such as phospho, sulfo, and acetal
bind to Galα1→4Gal on glycolipids that carry the groups. For example, the presence of the H-antigen
blood group P antigens (Box 4C).174,204 Neuropatho- determinant, whose structure is shown in Box 4-C,
genic strains of E. coli or of Neisseria meningitidis, is strictly regulated, both temporally and spatially,
which may cause neonatal meningitis, bind to during vertebrate development.215,216 The relative
α-2,8-polysialic acid chains on nerve cells.135,205,206 amounts of the H determinant vs Lex, sLex(Box 4-C)
Helicobacter pylori, the stomach ulcer
bacterium, binds to the human
Lewisb blood group antigen (Box A
4-C).207 Entamoeba histolytica, which
causes amebic dystentery, binds
to Gal and GalNAc-containing
oligosaccharides such as
GalNAcα1→3Galα.208
Aggregation and adherence
of cells. Differences among cell
surfaces are fundamental to the
formation of multicellular organisms
and to many physiological processes.
Proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids
all contribute material to exposed
cell surfaces. The adhesion of one B
R156
cell to another is mediated by a group N211 D236
ofadhesion proteins together with N236
N
oligosaccharide groups and some- H H
O
times polysaccharides. Families of O N +
–
adhesion proteins include integrins O H N H
H
andcadhedrins (discussed in N H O H N H O
Chapter 8), various members of H H H
D154
theimmunoglobulin superfamily, O O
H
thecell differentiation antigens, O O H O –
(often designated CD44, etc.), the H
C-type lectins known as selectins, 4
O O
and proteoglycans. H H
H
Here are two of many known N
examples of specific cell–cell adhe- O – N
sion. The species-specific reaggrega- O 6 H N
D14 O
tion of dissociated cells of marine H H152
sponges (Chapter 1) depends upon O N91
a 20-kDa proteoglycan of unique
structure209–211 together with a cell
Figure 4-18 (A) Stereoscopic view of the interactions between the E. coli
surface receptor protein and calcium
ions. The recognition of egg cell
galactose chemoreceptor protein and a bound molecule of D-glucose. (B)
Schematic drawing showing many of these interactions and the state of ioniza-
surfaces by sperm212–214 is species
tion deduced for the aspartate and arginine side chains. From Vyas et al.194

--- Page 191 ---

188 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
and other surface groupings is controlled by fucosyl-
E. Some Special Methods
transferases, sialyltransferases, etc. Human cancers
often accumulate large amounts of fucosylated glyco-
Small monosaccharides and oligosaccharides can
proteins and glycolipids carrying Lea, Lex, and sialyl-Lex
be separated readily from polymeric constituents and
antigens175,216,217 and sialomucins.218 Glycoproteins
can be purified further by chromatographic procedures
help to control many metabolic processes. For example,
including gel filtration as is illustrated in Fig. 3-3.
a protein calnexin (a chaperonin, Chapter 10) helps
However, polysaccharides and complex oligosaccha-
glycoproteins to fold correctly.219 On the other hand,
rides are harder to purify. A few of these, such as
removal of terminal sialic acid residues from blood
cellulose and glycogen, are sufficiently stable that
plasma proteins leads to rapid removal of the proteins
other materials can be dissolved away from them by
from circulation and to catabolism by liver cells.175 This
prolonged boiling in strongly basic solutions. Complex
process depends upon a receptor protein specific for
carbohydrates are usually cut into smaller oligosaccha-
oligosaccharides with terminal galactosyl residues
rides or glycopeptides. These may be separated by
(Chapter 20).
HPLC, capillary electrophoresis, or thin-layer chroma-
tography134,231–235 (Fig. 4-19) or by chromatography on
Recognition and adhesion by leukocytes. A
immobilized lectins.234 Quantities of less than 25 pico-
group of three calcium-dependent lectins known as
moles can be separated by use of mass spectrometry with
selectins bind the sialyl Lewis x (sLex) antigen and
liquid chromatography.236,237 High resolution Fourier
play important roles in adhesion to cells of the vascular
transform mass spectroscopy is very useful in the study
endothelium and leukocytes175,220–224 and also to
of posttranslational glycosylation of proteins.237a,b
platelets. Although all of the selectins bind the sLex
antigen, the binding is weak and these multidomain
proteins may simultaneously bind to other ligands
1. Release of Oligosaccharides from
such as heparan sulfate.225 The leukocyte L-selectin
Glycoproteins
(CD62L) binds very tightly to the 3'-sialyl-6'-sulfo-Lex
determinant220,226 which occurs on mucin-like glyco-
TheO-linked oligosaccharides of glycoproteins or
proteins. The interaction with P selectin helps leuko- glycolipids can be split off from the proteins by β
cytes to bind to surfaces on endothelial cells in lymph
elimination (see also Chapter 13):
nodes and sites of chronic or acute inflammation. In a
similar way E selectin is synthesized in vascular endo-
thelial cells that have been transiently “activated” by HO–
H+
cytokines in response to injury and other inflammatory
H H Glycosidic
stimuli. The E selectin binds the sulfated sLex antigen N CH2 O linkage
on surfaces of neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils, C C
Oligosaccharide
and basophils.220,222,227–230 P selectin is stored in secre-
O
tory granules of platelets and endothelial cells and
is released to the cell membrane upon activation by + Oligosaccharide
thrombin.220 H
N CH2
C C
OH
O
(4-10)
HO
O O–
HO
O N H O 2 α 3 Gal HO
O HO O
HO
β
H3C NeuAc HO 1 4 1 O
O β
O α O N
O 3
6'-Sulfate S O 1 O
O
HO H3C
3'–Sialyl–6'–Sulfo–Lex
O–
OH O GlcNAc
determinant
Fuc
CH3
HO

--- Page 192 ---

E. Some Special Methods 189
1 ascent 2 ascents 3 ascents 4 ascents HOH2C
RO O O
H
HO N C CH2 Peptide
Glc NH
Oligosaccharide
Ac
Mal (G2)
a H2N NH2
G3
HOH2C
RO O O
G4
G5
HO NH2 + H2N NH C CH2 Peptide
NH
G6
Ac
G7 b Acetic anhydride
G8
HOH2C
O
RO
G9
H
HO N Ac
G10
NH
G11
Ac (4-11)
G12
G13
G14
linked oligosaccharide chains are released (Eq. 4-
11).239,243–245 In addition to the glycosylamine product
of step a, the corresponding 1–OH and –NH–NH
2
compounds are also formed. These are all converted
Solvent: MeCN/EtOAc/PrOH-1/H O
2 to the stable acetyl derivative (step b), after which the
85 20 50 50
oligosaccharides may be characterized by mass spec-
trometry and high-field NMR spectoscopy.234,246–248
Crystallization of oligosaccharides in complex mixtures
Figure 4-19 Ascending thin-layer chromatography of a
is difficult to impossible.
mixture of maltooligosaccharides obtained by the hydrolysis
of linear starch. G2 (maltose), G3 (maltotriose), G4 (malto-
tetraose), G5 (maltopentaose) – G14 represent oligosaccha-
rides with the indicated number of glucose residues, all in 2. Hydrolysis
α-1,4 linkage. In the multiple ascent technique the chroma-
tographic solvent, whose composition (by volume) is indicated, Most glycosidic linkages are hydrolyzed readily
is allowed to ascend the thin-layer plate repeatedly with the
by heating with 1 N mineral acids. The mechanism of
plate allowed to dry between ascents. The separation of the
the hydrolytic reaction is similar to that employed by
higher oligosaccharides is distinctly improved by a larger
the enzyme lysozyme (Chapter 12). Some linkages are
number of ascents. Photograph courtesy of John Robyt.
unusually sensitive to acid and a few are very resistant.
Thus, a variety of conditions may be applied for partial
acid hydrolysis as an aid to characterization.249 Aceto-
Treatment with 0.1–0.5 M NaOH for several hours lysis, cleavage by acetic anhydride, is also of value.250
will completely liberate the oligosaccharides, whose A battery of hydrolytic enzymes specific for sugars
released carbonyl groups may then be reduced with that are joined in a given type of glycosidic linkage
NaBH , NaB2H , or 3H-labeled borohydride to form are available.251 These are useful in determining
4 4
stable sugar alcohols (Eq. 4-2).238 Asparagine-linked sequences of oligosaccharides released from glyco-
oligosaccharides are often recovered as glycopeptides proteins. Radioactive tracer techniques can also be
prepared by complete proteolytic digestion of the applied.252
denatured glycoprotein. These can be separated by
high voltage electrophoresis in borate buffers.239 The
oligosaccharides can be released from the glycopep- 3. Methylation
tides by enzymes such as endo-N-acetylglucosamini-
dase240 or glycopeptidyl amylase of almonds.241,242 An important general method in characterization
These release the oligosaccharide as a 1-amino deriva- of carbohydrates is the classical exhaustive methyl-
tive. ation (permethylation). Repeated treatment with a
When a dry glycoprotein is heated at 105° with methylating agent such as methyl iodide converts all
anhydrous hydrazine for 8–12 h all of the asparagine- free OH groups to OCH groups. Then, complete acid
3

--- Page 193 ---

190 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
hydrolysis, followed by separation of the methylated
sugars and their quantitative determination, reveals
the relative amounts of end units (containing four
methoxyl groups), straight chain units (containing
three methoxyl groups), and branch points (contain- 2,3,4,6-Me 4 -Glc 2,3,4,6-Me 4 -Glc
ing two methoxyl groups). In addition, the structure
of the methylated derivatives provides information on
the positions of the linkages in the sugar rings.
After a methylated polysaccharide is subjected to 2,3,6-Me 3 -Glc 2,3,6-Me 3 -Glc
2,4,6-Me-Glc 2,4,6-Me-Glc
partial hydrolysis, the newly exposed hydroxyl groups 3 3
(or those created by borohydride reduction of carbonyl 2,3,4-Me 3 -Glc 2,3,4-Me 3 -Glc
groups) can be labeled by ethylation or propylation.
One procedure for sequencing complex carbohydrates
makes use of high-resolution reversed-phase liquid
chromatography to separate the many alkylated oligo-
saccharides produced by methylation followed by 2,3-Me 2 -Glc 2,3-Me-Glc
2,4-Me-Glc 2
partial acid hydrolysis, reduction, and ethylation.233 3,4-Me 2 -Glc 2,4-Me 2 -Glc
2 3,4-Me-Glc
Reductive cleavage of the glycosidic linkages in methy- 2
lated polysaccharides allows uniquivocal determina-
tion of ring size.253 Branch points may be located by
methanolysis of the permethylated polysaccharide
followed by conversion of free –OH groups to p-bromo-
benzoate esters. The latter are separated and the
circular dichroism (Chapter 23) is measured. Mass
1 2 3
spectrometry has also been applied successfully.246
A simple procedure that can be conducted in any
Figure 4-20 Separation of a mixture of O-methylated
laboratory using thin-layer chromatography is illus-
glucoses by ascending thin-layer chromatography. Whatman
trated in Fig. 4-20.254
K6 TLC plates were used with two ascents of the solvent
acetonitrile/chloroform/methanol in the ratio 3/9/2, V/
V/V. Courtesy of John Robyt.
4. Periodate Oxidation (Smith Degradation)
One of the most important reagents in investiga-
tions of carbohydrate structure is periodic acid (or amino groups, formic acid is liberated from the central
sodium periodate).255 This reagent oxidatively cleaves atom and can also be measured quantitatively. After
C–C bonds bearing adjacent OH or NH groups to destruction of excess periodate the dialdehyde can be
2
form dialdehydes (Eq. 4-12). The method is quanti- reduced by addition of solid sodium borohydride to
tative. After some hours of reaction, excess periodate form stable CH OH groups. Following mild acid
2
not consumed in the oxidation can be determined. hydrolysis to split the acyclic acetal linkages, the frag-
If three consecutive carbon atoms bear hydroxyl or ments can be separated and identified. The sequence
of reactions is known as the Smith degradation. If
OH sodium borotritide (NaB3H 4 ) is used for the reduction
the fragments will be radioactive and can be located
CH2 on chromatograms by fluorography. Periodate oxi-
O
RO dation can also be used to alter all surface oligosaccha-
rides.99 Removal of O-linked oligosaccharides from
HO
glycoproteins can be accomplished by periodate
OH
OR' oxidation and alkaline β elimination from the dialde-
hyde product of Eq. 4-12 if OR’ is part of a serine or
HIO4
other hydroxyamino acid side chain in a protein.256
OH
CH2 5. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
O
RO
As in other areas of biochemistry, NMR has
HC
CH become an extremely important tool in carbohydrate
O research. The mixtures of anomers of various ring
O OR' (4-12)

--- Page 194 ---

E. Some Special Methods 191
BOX 4-D ANTIFREEZE AND ICE-NUCLEATION PROTEINS
Fish living in Arctic and Antarctic waters may
encounter temperatures as low as –1.9°C. The
freezing point depression provided by dissolved
salts and proteins in the blood is insufficient to pro-
tect the fish from freezing. As winter approaches,
they synthesize and accumulate in their blood
serum a series of eight or more special antifreeze
proteins.a– d One type of antifreeze glycoprotein
from winter flounder contains the following unit
repeated 17 – 50 times.
(–Ala–Ala–Thr–)
n
GalNAcα1→O
3
Galβ1
Destruction of the galactosyl residues by oxidation
with periodate, acetylation of the free hydroxyl
groups of the oligosaccharides, or their removal by
β elimination all lead to loss of antifreeze activity.
The same fish contain a second series of alanine-
rich antifreeze polypeptides that are not glycosylated
but which exist as amphipathic helices. One of these
(Type I) contains ~40 residues in a single helix.e– i A
third family of antifreeze proteins (Type II), found
in the sea raven are globular proteins, rich in cysteine
andβ structures. They are members of the lectin
family.d,j A fourth type (Type III) found in the sea pout
and some other fishes are 62- to 66-residue globular
proteins containing an orthogonal β sandwich struc-
ture.k,l Messenger RNA molecules coding for the
antifreeze proteins are found in the livers of flounder
in the winter but are absent in the summer.m
Antifreeze proteins, that are 3 – 4 times as effec-
tive as those in fish, have been isolated from some
insects and other arthropods.m,n,o They help beetle
larvae to overwinter.m The insect proteins have a
parallelβ helix structure resembling that in Fig. 2-17
and stabilized by S — S bridges.o,p Some plants also
synthesize antifreeze proteins.n,q,r One of these,
isolated from carrots, is a member of the leucine-
rich-repeat family.q
How do antifreeze proteins work? The major
effect is to greatly slow the freezing rather than to
decrease the freezing point. The proteins apparently
accomplish this by binding to the surfaces of small
ice crystals and preventing their growth.d,f,h,i,k,l,s,t
This provides the fish with enough time for the
blood to pass back into the liver, in which a high
enough temperature is maintained to melt any
microcrystals before the blood again circulates
through the colder tissues. Some of the proteins
have clusters of polar side chains that bind to
specific faces of the ice crystals and inhibit growth.s
→
A few fishes tolerate a high internal osmotic
pressure and accumulate glycerol in their blood up
to a concentration of 0.4 M.t Insects may accumulate
up to 3 M glycerol and some species utilize various
other cryoprotectants, such as mannitol, sorbitol,
erythritol, threitol, trehalose, glucose, fructose, proline,
and alanine.u Some amphibians and reptiles can
survive freezing and recover fully. For the most
studied wood frog, rapid freezing is fatal, but slow
freezing leaves the frog, whose heart ceases to func-
tion, with a 200-fold increased glucose concentration
and a decreased water content in its organs. It resumes
normal activities within 14 – 24 h of thawing.t
Having an effect opposite to that of the anti-
freeze proteins are surface proteins of some bacteria
of the genera Pseudomonas,Erwinia,andXanthomonas.
These proteins provide nuclei for growth of ice
crystals from supercooled water.v,w
a Feeney, R. E., Burcham, T. S., and Yeh, Y. (1986) Ann. Rev.
Biophys. Biophys. Chem.15, 59–78
b Eastman, J. T., and DeVries, A. L. (1986) Sci. Am.255(Nov), 106–114
c Davies, P. L., and Hew, C. L. (1990) FASEB J.4, 2460–2468
d Gronwald, W., Loewen, M. C., Lix, B., Daugulis, A. J., Sönnichs-
en, F. D., Davies, P. L., and Sykes, B. D. (1998) Biochemistry37,
4712–4721
e Chakrabartty, A., Ananthanarayanan, V. S., and Hew, C. L. (1989)
J. Biol. Chem.264, 11307–11312
f Yang, D. S. C., Sax, M., Chakrabartty, A., and Hew, C. L. (1988)
Nature (London)333, 232–237
g Madura, J. D., Wierzbicki, A., Harrington, J. P., Maughon, R. H.,
Raymond, J. A., and Sikes, C. S. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116,
417–418
h Sicheri, F., and Yang, D. S. C. (1995) Nature (London)375, 427–431
i Wierzbicki, A., Taylor, M. S., Knight, C. A., Madura, J. D.,
Harrington, J. P., and Sikes, C. S. (1996) Biophys. J.71, 8–18
j Ng, N. F. L., and Hew, C. L. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 16069–16075
k Chao, H., Sönnichsen, F. D., DeLuca, C. I., Sykes, B. D., and
Davies, P. L. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 1760–1769
l Jia, Z., DeLuca, C. I., Chao, H., and Davies, P. L. (1996) Nature
(London)384, 285–288
mGourlie, B., Lin, Y., Price, J., DeVries, A. L., Powers, D., and
Huang, R. C. C. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 14960–14965
n Li, N., Chibber, B. A. K., Castellino, F. J., and Duman, J. G.
(1998)Biochemistry37, 6343–6350
o Graether, S. P., Kuiper, M. J., Gagné, S. M., Walker, V. K., Jia, Z.,
Sykes, B. D., and Davies, P. L. (2000) Nature (London)406, 325–328
p Liou, Y.-C., Tocilj, A., Davies, P. L., and Jia, Z. (2000) Nature
(London)406, 322–324
q Worrall, D., Elias, L., Ashford, D., Smallwood, M., Sidebottom,
C., Lillford, P., Telford, J., Holt, C., and Bowles, D. (1998) Science
282, 115–117
r Sidebottom, C., Buckley, S., Pudney, P., Twigg, S., Jarman, C.,
Holt, C., Telford, J., McArthur, A., Worrall, D., Hubbard, R., and
Lillford, P. (2000) Nature (London)406, 256
s Knight, C. A., (2000) Nature (London) 406, 249–251
t Costanzo, J. P., Lee, R. E., Jr., DeVries, A. L., Wang, T., and Layne,
J. R., Jr. (1995) FASEB J.9, 351–352
u Storey, K. B., and Storey, J. M. (1990) Sci. Am.263 (Dec), 92–97
v Wolber, P., and Warren, G. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 179–182
wGurian-Sherman, D., and Lindow, S. E. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1338–1343

--- Page 195 ---

192 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
Figure 4-21 Stereoscopic view of an
N-linked oligosaccharide whose structure
has been deduced by two-dimensional
NMR spectroscopy and energy calcula-
tions. This is one of a range of allowed
conformations. From Homans et al.257
sizes (Eq. 4-1) can be analyzed with proton or 13C NMR measurements to deduce conformations of sugar
NMR.10,257 A variety of newer NMR techniques, some rings, three-dimensional structures, and the degree of
of which have been described in Chapter 3, have been conformational flexibility in various parts of N-linked
applied.28,258–267 A problem with NMR spectroscopy oligosaccharides (Fig. 4-21). Measurement of C–O–C
of these compounds has been the lack of the large –C spin-coulping constants is also of value.270 Use of
number of nuclear Overhauser enhancements (NOEs) multidimensional NMR has permitted analysis of
that can be observed.268,269 Nevertheless, when com- mixtures of cellulose oligosaccharides.269
bined with energy calculations it is possible to use
References
1. Pigman, W. W., and Horton, D., eds. (1972) 16. Benning, C., Beatty, J. T., Prince, R. C., and 29. Wolfe, S., Whangbo, M.-H., and Mitchell, D. J.
The Chemistry of Carbohydrates, 2nd ed., Somerville, C. R. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (1979)Carbohydrate Res.69, 1–26
Academic Press, New York U.S.A.90, 1561–1565 30. Kirby, A. J. (1983) The Anomeric Effect and
2. Guthrie, R. D. (1974) Guthrie and Honeyman’s 17. Dijkema, C., Kester, H. C. M., and Visser, J. Related Stereoelectronic Effects at Oxygen,
Introduction to Carbohydrate Chemistry, 4th ed., (1985)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 14–18 Springer, Berlin
Oxford Univ. Press (Clarendon), London and 18. Tarczynski, M. C., Jensen, R. G., and 31. Perrin, C. L., Armstrong, K. B., and Fabian, M.
New York (p. 17) Bohnert, H. J. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. A. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 715–722
3. Binkley, R. W. (1988) Modern Carbohydrate U.S.A.89, 2600–2604 32. Cui, W., Li, F., and Allinger, N. L. (1993) J. Am.
Chemistry, Dekker, New York 19. Yamanouchi, T., Tachibana, Y., Sekino, N., Chem. Soc.115, 2943–2951
4. Shalenberger, R. S. (1982) Advanced Sugar Akanuma, H., Akaoka, I., and Miyashita, H. 33. Westhof, E., and Sundaralingam, M. (1980) J.
Chemistry: Principles of Sugar Stereochemistry, (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 9664–9668 Am. Chem. Soc.102, 1493–1500
AVI Publ. Co., Westport, Connecticut 20. Nadano, D., Iwasaki, M., Endo, S., Kitajima, 33a. French, A. D., Dowd, M. K., and Reilly, P. J.
5. El-Khadem, H. S. (1988) Carbohydrate K., Inoue, S., and Inoue, Y. (1986) J. Biol. (1997)J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem), 395 –396
Chemistry, Academic Press, San Diego, Chem.261, 11550–11557 34. Gabb, H. A., and Harvey, S. C. (1993) J. Am.
California 21. Schauer, R. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, Chem. Soc.115, 4218–4227
6. Prince, R. C., Gunson, D. E., Leigh, J. S., and 357–360 35. Plavec, J., Tong, W., and Chattopadhyaya, J.
McDonald, G. G. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 22. Faillard, H. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, (1993)J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 9734–9746
239–240 237–241 36. Ellervik, U., and Magnusson, G. (1994)
7. Wertz, P. W., Garver, J. C., and Anderson, L. 23. Roth, J., Kempf, A., Reuter, G., Schauer, R., J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 2340–2347
(1981)J. Am. Chem. Soc.103, 3916–3922 and Gehring, W. J. (1992) Science256, 673– 36a. French, A. D., and Murphy, V. G. (1973)
8. Ha, S., Gao, J., Tidor, B., Brady, J. W., and 675 Carbohydr. Res.27, 391– 406
Karplus, M. (1991) J. Am. Chem. Soc.113, 24. Powell, L. D., and Varki, A. (1995) J. Biol. 37. Robyt, J. F., and White, B. J. (1996) Biochemical
1553–1557 Chem.270, 14243–14246 Techniques, Theory and Practice, 2nd ed.,
9. Angyal, S. J. (1979) in Asymmetry of Carbo- 25. Stoddart, J. F. (1971) Stereochemistry of Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, Illinois
hydrates (Harmon, R. E., ed), p. 15, Decker, Carbohydrates, Wiley-Interscience, New York 38. Lipták, A., Fügedi, P., Szurmai, Z., and
New York 26. Brady, J. W. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc.108, Harangi, J. (1990) CRC Handbook of Oligo-
10. Gray, G. R. (1976) Acc. Chem. Res.9, 418 8152–8160 saccharides. Vol. I: Disaccharides, CRC Press,
11. Pierce, J., Serianni, A. S., and Barker, R. (1985) 26a. Marszalek, P. E., Pang, Y.-P., Li, H., Yazal, J. Boca Raton, Florida
J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 2448–2456 E., Oberhauser, A. F., and Fernandez, J. M. 39. Cerami, A. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11,
12. Maple, S. R., and Allerhand, A. (1987) J. Am. (1999)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 7894– 311–314
Chem. Soc.109, 3168–3169 7898 40. Watkins, N. G., Neglia-Fisher, C. I., Dyer, D.
13. Goux, W. J. (1985) J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 4320– 27. Venkataraman, G., Sasisekharan, V., Cooney, G., Thorpe, S. R., and Baynes, J. W. (1987)
4327 C. L., Langer, R., and Sasisekharan, R. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.262, 7207–7212
14. Barker, S. A., and Baggett, N. (1978) Trends Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 6171–6175 41. Súarez, G., Rajaram, R., Oronsky, A. L., and
Biochem. Sci.3, 140–141 28. Hajduk, P. J., Horita, D. A., and Lerner, L. E. Gawinowicz, M. A. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264,
15. Benson, A. A. (1963) Adv. Lipid Res.1, 387–394 (1993)J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 9196–9201 3674–3679

--- Page 196 ---

193
References
42. Takata, K., Horiuchi, S., Araki, N., Shiga, M., 71. French, D. (1973) J. Animal Sci.37, 1048–1061 101. Minke, R., and Blackwell, J. (1978) J. Mol. Biol.
Saitoh, M., and Morino, Y. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 72. Maddelein, M. L., Libessart, N., Bellanger, F., 120, 167–181
263, 14819–14825 Delrue, B., D’Hulst, C., Van den Koornhuyse, 102. Roberts, G. A. F. (1992) Chitin Chemistry,
43. Hayase, F., Nagaraj, R. H., Miyata, S., N., Fontaine, T., Wieruszeski, J. M., Decq, A., MacMillan, London
Njoroge, F. G., and Monnier, V. M. (1989) and Ball, S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 25150– 103. Blackwell, J., and Weih, M. A. (1980) J. Mol.
J. Biol. Chem.264, 3758–3764 25157 Biol.137, 49–60
44. Goldberg, R. N., and Tewari, Y. B. (1989) 73. Jane, J., Kasemsuwan, T., Leas, S., Zobel, H., 104. Rees, D. A., and Welsh, E. J. (1977) Angew.
J. Biol. Chem.264, 9897–9900 and Robyt, J. F. (1994) Starch/Stärke46, 121– Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.16, 214–224
45. Tewari, Y. B., and Goldberg, R. N. (1989) 129 105. Lee, Y. C. (1992) FASEB J.6, 3193–3200
J. Biol. Chem.264, 3966–3971 74. Meyer, K. H. (1943) Adv. Enzymol.3, 109–136 106. Laurent, T. C., and Fraser, J. R. E. (1992)
46. Goldberg, R. N., Tewari, Y. B., and Ahluwalia, 75. French, D. (1969) in Symposium on Foods: FASEB J.6, 2397–2404
J. C. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 9901–9904 Carbohydrates and their Roles (Schultz, H. W., 107. Hardingham, T. E., and Fosang, A. J. (1992)
47. Weissborn, A. C., Rumley, M. K., and Kennedy, ed), pp. 26–54, AVI Publ. Co., Westport, FASEB J.6, 861–870
E. P. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 8062–8067 Connecticut 108. Fransson, L. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12,
48. Reymond, P., Grünberger, S., Paul, K., Müller, 76. Rundle, R. E., and French, D. (1943) J. Am. 406–411
M., and Farmer, E. E. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Chem. Soc.65, 1707–1710 109. Morris, E. R., Rees, D. A., and Welsh, E. J.
Sci. U.S.A.92, 4145–4149 77. Hybl, A., Rundle, R. E., and Williams, D. E. (1980)J. Mol. Biol.138, 383–400
49. Nacharaju, P., and Acharya, A. S. (1992) (1965)J. Am. Chem. Soc.87, 2779–2788 110. David, G. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1023–1030
Biochemistry31, 12673–12679 78. Teitelbaum, R. C., Ruby, S. L., and Tobin, J. M. 111. Yamada, S., Murakami, T., Tsuda, H., Yoshida,
50. Baynes, J. W., and Monnier, V. M., eds. (1989) (1980)J. Am. Chem. Soc.102, 3322–3328 K., and Sugahara, K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
the Maillard Reaction in Aging, Diabetes and 79. Winter, W. T., and Sarko, A. (1974) Biopolymers 8696–8705
Nutrition, Liss, New York 13, 1461–1482 112. Lane, D. A., and Björk, I., eds. (1992) Heparin
51. Larsen, M. L., Hørder, M., and Mogensen, E. 80. Kainuma, K., and French, D. (1972) And Related Polysaccharides, Plenum, New York
F. (1990) N. Engl. J. Med.323, 1021–1025 Biopolymers11, 2241–2250 113. Edens, R. E., Fromm, J. R., Linhardt, R. J., and
52. Luthra, M., and Balasubramanian, D. (1993) J. 81. Wu, H.-C., H, and Sarko, A. (1978) Carbohydr. Weiler, J. M. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2400–2407
Biol. Chem.268, 18119–18127 Res.61, 7–25 114. Linhardt, R. J., Ampofo, S. A., Fareed, J.,
53. Urbanowski, J. C., Cohenford, M. A., and 82. Gidley, M. J., and Bociek, S. M. (1988) J. Am. Hoppensteadt, D., Mulliken, J. B., and
Dain, J. A. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257, 111–115 Chem. Soc.110, 3820–3829 Folkman, J. (1992) Biochemistry31, 12441–
54. Grandhee, S. K., and Monnier, V. M. (1991) J. 83. Lomako, J., Lomako, W. M., Whelan, W. J., 12445
Biol. Chem.266, 11649–11653 Dombro, R. S., Neary, J. T., and Norenberg, M. 115. Casu, B., Petitou, M., Provasoli, M., and Sinaÿ,
55. Brownlee, M., Cerami, A., and Vlassara, H. D. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1386–1393 P. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 221–225
(1988)N. Engl. J. Med.318, 1315–1320 84. Chen, W., Avison, M. J., Zhu, X. H., and 116. Oates, J. A., and Wood, A. J. J. (1991) N. Engl.
56. Papoulis, A., Al-Abed, Y., and Bucala, R. Shulman, R. G. (1993) Biochemistry32, 11483– J. Med.324, 1565–1574
(1995)Biochemistry34, 648–655 11487 117. Rosenberg, R. D., and Lam, L. (1979) Proc.
57. Wells-Knecht, K. J., Zyzak, D. V., Litchfield, J. 85. Ohana, P., Delmer, D. P., Steffens, J. C., Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.76, 1218–1222
E., Thorpe, S. R., and Baynes, J. W. (1995) Matthews, D. E., Mayer, R., and Benziman, M. 118. Lindahl, U., Kusche-Gullberg, M., and Kjelln,
Biochemistry34, 3702–3709 (1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 13742–13745 L. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 24979–24982
58. French, D. (1975) in International Review of 86. Mol, P. C., Park, H., Mullins, J. T., and Cabib, 119. Mulloy, B. A., Ribeiro, A.-C., Alves, A.-P.,
Biochemistry, Vol. 5 (Whelan, W. J., ed), p. 269, E. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 31267–31274 Vieira, R. P., and Mourao, P. A. S. (1994) J. Biol.
Univ. Park Press, Baltimore, Maryland (Series 87. Yamamoto, R., and Nevins, D. J. (1978) Chem.269, 22113–22123
One) Carbohydrate Res.67, 275–280 120. Gibeaut, D., and Carpita, N. C. (1994) FASEB
59. Atkins, E. D. T., ed. (1986) Polysaccharides, 88. Marchessault, R. H., and Deslandes, Y. (1979) J.8, 904–915
Topics in Structure and Morphology, VCH Carbohydrate Res.75, 231–242 121. Hayashi, T., and Matsuda, K. (1981) J. Biol.
Publisher, New York 89. Kang, M. S., and Cabib, E. (1986) Proc. Natl. Chem.256, 11117–11122
60. Whistler, R. L., and BeMiller, J. N., eds. (1993) Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 5808–5812 122. Millane, R. P. (1992) in Frontiers in Carbohy-
Industrial Gums, 3rd ed., Academic Press, San 90. Harada, T., Terasaki, M., and Harada, A. drate Research-2 (Chandrasekaran, R., ed), pp.
Diego, California (1993) in Industrial Gums, 3rd ed. (Whistler, R. 168–190, Elsevier, London
61. Rao, V. S. R., and Sathyanarayana, B. K. (1972) L., and BeMiller, J. N., eds), pp. 427–445, 123. Rolin, C. (1993) in Industrial Gums, 3rd ed.
Biopolymers11, 1379–1394 Academic Press, San Diego, California (Whistler, R. L., and BeMiller, J. N., eds), pp.
62. French, A. D., and Dowd, M. K. (1993) in 91. Walker, G. J. (1978) in International Review of 257–293, Academic Press, San Diego,
Cellulostics: Chemical,Biochemical and Materials Biochemistry, Vol. 16 (Manners, D. J., ed), p. 75, California
Aspects (Kennedy, J. F., Phillips, G. O., and Univ. Park Press, Baltimore, Maryland 124. Arnott, S., Scott, W. E., Rees, D. A., and
Williams, P. A., eds), pp. 51–56, Ellis 92. de Belder, A. N. (1993) in Industrial Gums, 3rd McNab, C. G. A. (1974) J. Mol. Biol.90, 253–
Harwood, New York ed. (Whistler, R. L., and BeMiller, J. N., eds), 267
63. Duda, C. A., and Stevens, E. S. (1993) J. Am. pp. 399–425, Academic Press, San Diego, 125. Selby, H. H., and Whistler, R. L. (1993) in
Chem. Soc.115, 8487–8488 California Industrial Gums, 3rd ed. (Whistler, R. L., and
64. Liébecq, C., ed. (1992) Biochemical Nomencla- 93. Yang, X., Miller, M. A., Yang, R., Evans, D. F., BeMiller, J. N., eds), pp. 87–103, Academic
ture, Portland Press, London and Chapel Hill, and Edstrom, R. D. (1990) FASEB J.4, 3140– Press, San Diego, California
North Carolina (for the International Union of 3143 126. Albersheim, P., Bauer, W. D., Keestra, K.,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) 94. Tsujisaka, Y., and Mitsuhashi, M. (1993) in Talmadge, K. W. (1973) Biogenesis of Plant Cell
65. Preston, R. D. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, Industrial Gums, 3rd ed. (Whistler, R. L., and Wall Polysaccharides, (Loewus, F., ed.),
377–380 BeMiller, J. N., eds), pp. 447–460, Academic Academic Press, New York
66. Ross, P., Mayer, R., and Benziman, M. (1991) Press, San Diego, California 127. Rees, D. A. (1972) Biochem. J.126, 257–273
Microbiol. Rev.55, 35–58 95. Arnott, S., Fulmer, A., Scott, W. E., Dea, I. C. 128. Therkelsen, G. H. (1993) in Industrial Gums,
67. Sugiyama, J., Vuong, R., and Chanzy, H. M., Moorehouse, R., and Rees, D. A. (1974) J. 3rd ed. (Whistler, R. L., and BeMiller, J. N.,
(1991)Macromolecules24, 4168–4175 Mol. Biol.90, 269–284 eds), pp. 145–180, Academic Press, San
68. Dudley, R. L., Fyfe, C. A., Stephenson, P. J., 96. Shibata, N., Ikuta, K., Imai, T., Satoh, Y., Diego, California
Deslandes, Y., Hamer, G. K., and Satoh, R., Suzuki, A., Kojima, C., Kobayashi, 129. Clare, K. (1993) in Industrial Gums, 3rd ed.
Marchessault, R. H. (1983) J. Am. Chem. Soc. H., Hisamichi, K., and Suzuki, S. (1995) J. Biol. (Whistler, R. L., and BeMiller, J. N., eds), pp.
105, 2469–2472 Chem.270, 1113–1122 105–143, Academic Press, San Diego,
69. Gebler, K., Kraub, N., Steiner, T., Betzel, C., 97. Kollár, R., Petráková, E., Ashwell, G., Robbins, California
Sandmann, C., and Saenger, W. (1994) Science P. W., and Cabib, E. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 130. Marsh, M. E., Chang, D. C., and King, G. C.
266, 1027–1029 1170–1178 (1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 20507–20512
69a. Langan, P., Nishiyama, Y., and Chanzy, H. 98. Preston, R. D. (1968) Sci. Am.218(Jun), 102–108 130a.Vinogradov, E., and Bock, K. (1999) Angew.
(1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 9940 – 9946 99. Turvey, J. R. (1978) in International Review of Chem. Ed. Engl.38, 671–674
70. Grover, J. A. (1993) in Industrial Gums, 3rd ed. Biochemistry, Vol. 16 (Manners, D. J., ed), Univ. 131. Sutherland, I. W. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4,
(Whistler, R. L., and BeMiller, J. N., eds), pp. Park Press, Baltimore, Maryland 55–59
475–504, Academic Press, San Diego, 100. Kirkwood, S. (1974) Ann. Rev. Biochem.43,
California 401–417

--- Page 197 ---

194 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
References
132. Kang, K. S., and Pettitt, D. J. (1993) in 156. Carter, S. R., Slomiany, A., Gwozdzinski, K., 188. Barondes, S. H., Cooper, D. N. W., Gitt, M. A.,
Industrial Gums, 3rd ed. (Whistler, R. L., and Liau, Y. H., and Slomiany, B. L. (1988) J. Biol. and Leffler, H. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269,
BeMiller, J. N., eds), pp. 341–397, Academic Chem.263, 11977–11984 20807–20810
Press, San Diego, California 157. Jentoft, N. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 291– 188a.Varela, P. F., Solís, D., Díaz-Maurino, T.,
133. Wolucka, B. A., McNeil, M. R., de Hoffmann, 294 Kaltner, H., Gabius, H.-J., and Romero, A.
E., Chonjnacki, T., and Brennan, P. J. (1994) J. 158. Butenhof, K. J., and Gerken, T. A. (1993) (1999)J. Mol. Biol.294, 537–549
Biol. Chem.269, 23328–23335 Biochemistry32, 2650 – 2663 189. Chiu, M. L., Parry, D. A. D., Feldman, S. R.,
134. Kobata, A. (1984) in Biology of Carbohydrates, 159. Toribara, N. W., Roberton, A. M., Ho, S. B., Klapper, D. G., and O’Keefe, E. J. (1994) J. Biol.
Vol. 2 (Ginsburg, V., and Robbins, P. W., eds), Kuo, W.-L., Gum, E., Hicks, J. W., Gum, J. R., Chem.269, 31770–31776
pp. 87–161, Wiley, New York Byrd, J. C., Siddiki, B., and Kim, Y. S. (1993) J. 190. Madsen, P., Rasmussen, H. H., Flint, T.,
135. Lennarz, W. J., ed. (1980) The Biochemistry of Biol. Chem.268, 5879–5885 Gromov, P., Kruse, T. A., Honoré, B., Vorum,
Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans, Plenum, New 160. Sadler, J. E. (1984) in “Biology of Carbohy- H., and Celis, J. E. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
York drates”, Vol. 2 (Ginsburg, V., and Robbins, P. 5823–5829
136. Montreul, J. (1982) in Comprehensive Biochemistry, W., eds), pp. 199–288, Wiley, New York 191. Cho, M., and Cummings, R. D. (1995) J. Biol.
1st ed., Vol. 19B, Part II (Florkin, M., and Stotz, 160a.Perez-Vilar, J., and Hill, R. L. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.270, 5207–5212
E. H., eds), pp. 1–188, Elsevier, Amsterdam Chem.274, 31751–31754 192. Gitt, M. A., Wiser, M. F., Leffler, H.,
137. Rademacher, T. W., Parekh, R. B., and Dwek, 161. Fukuda, M., Carlsson, S. R., Klock, J. C., and Herrmann, J., Xia, Y.-R., Massa, S. M., Cooper,
R. A. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biochem.57, 785–838 Dell, A. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 12796–12806 D. N. W., Lusis, A. J., and Barondes, S. H.
138. Roberts, D. D., and Mecham, R. P., eds. (1993) 162. Gerken, T. A., and Jentoft, N. (1987) (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 5032–5038
Cell Surface and Extracellular Glycoconjugates: Biochemistry26, 4689–4699 193. Weis, W. I., Kahn, R., Fourme, R., Drickamer,
Structure and Function, Academic Press, San 163. Freeze, H. H., and Wolgast, D. (1986) J. Biol. K., and Hendrickson, W. A. (1991) Science254,
Diego, California Chem.261, 127–134 1608–1615
138a.Varki, A., Cummings, R., Esko, J., Freeze, H., 164. Carver, J. P., and Brisson, J.-R. (1984) in 194. Vyas, N. K., Vyas, M. N., and Quiocho, F. A.
Hart, G., and Marth, J., eds. (1999) Essentials of Biology of Carbohydrates, Vol. 2 (Ginsburg, V., (1988)Science242, 1290–1295
Glycobiology, Cold Spring Harbor Lab. Press, and Robbins, P. W., eds), pp. 289–329, Wiley, 195. Shaanan, B., Lis, H., and Sharon, N. (1991)
Cold Spring Harbor, New York New York Science254, 862–865
139. Fukuda, M., and Hindsgaul, O., eds. (1994) 165. Bush, C. A., Duben, A., and Ralapati, S. (1980) 196. Cygler, M., Rose, D. R., and Bundle, D. R.
Molecular Glycobiology, Oxford Publishing, Biochemistry19, 501–504 (1991)Science253, 442–445
Oxford 166. Finne, J., and Krusius, T. (1979) Eur. J. Biochem. 197. Ångström, J., Teneberg, S., and Karlsson, K.-
140. Williams, R. L., Greene, S. M., and McPherson, 102, 583–588 A. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91,
A. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 16020–16031 167. Järnefelt, J., Finne, J., Krusius, T., and Rauvala, 11859–11863
141. Hofsteenge, J., Müller, D. R., de Beer, T., H. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 110–114 198. Sauter, N. K., Hanson, J. E., Glick, G. D.,
Löffler, A., Richter, W. J., and Vliegenthart, J. 168. Kornfeld, R., and Kornfeld, S. (1980) in The Brown, J. H., Crowther, R. L., Park, S.-J.,
F. G. (1994) Biochemistry33, 13524–13530 Biochemistry of Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans Skehel, J. J., and Wiley, D. C. (1992)
141a.Iozzo, R. V. (1998) Ann. Rev. Biochem.67, 609– (Lennarz, W. J., ed), Plenum, New York Biochemistry31, 9609–9621
652 169. Fukuda, M., Dell, A., and Fukuda, M. N. 199. Janakiraman, M. N., White, C. L., Laver, W.
141b.Bernfield, M., Götte, M., Park, P. W., Reizes, (1984)J. Biol. Chem.259,4782–4791 G., Air, G. M., and Luo, M. (1994) Biochemistry
O., Fitzgerald, M. L., Lincecum, J., and Zako, 170. Hernández, L. M., Olivero, I., Alvarado, E., 33, 8172–8179
M. (1999) Ann. Rev. Biochem.68, 729 –777 and Larriba, G. (1992) Biochemistry31, 9823– 200. Bossart-Whitaker, P., Carson, M., Babu, Y. S.,
142. Sugahara, K., Ohkita, Y., Shibata, Y., Yoshida, 9831 Smith, C. D., Laver, W. G., and Air, G. M.
K., and Ikegami, A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 171. Taguchi, T., Seko, A., Kitajima, K., Muto, Y., (1993)J. Mol. Biol.232, 1069–1083
7204–7212 Inoue, S., Khoo, K.-H., Morris, H. R., Dell, A., 201. Crennell, S. J., Garman, E. F., Laver, E. G.,
143. Funderburgh, J. L., Funderburgh, M. L., and Inoue, Y. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 8762– Vimr, E. R., and Taylor, G. L. (1993) Proc. Natl.
Brown, S., Vergnes, J.-P., Hassell, J. R., Mann, 8771 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 9852–9856
M. M., and Conrad, G. W. (1993) J. Biol. Chem. 172. Wieland, F., Paul, G., and Sumper, M. (1985) J. 202. Colli, W. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1257–1264
268, 11874–11880 Biol. Chem.260, 15180–15185 203. Ofek, I., Beachey, E. H., and Sharon, N. (1978)
144. Neame, P. J., Christner, J. E., and Baker, J. R. 173. Funderburgh, J. L., Funderburgh, M. L., Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 159–160
(1987)J. Biol. Chem.262, 17768–17778 Mann, M. M., and Conrad, G. W. (1991) J. Biol. 204. Lindberg, F., Lund, B., and Normark, S. (1986)
145. Scott, J. E. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 318– Chem.266, 14226–14231 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 1891–1895
321 174. Sharon, N., and Lis, H. (1989) Science246, 205. Cho, J.-W., and Troy, F. A. (1994) Proc. Natl.
146. Rosenberg, L., Tang, L.-H., Pal, S., Johnson, T. 227–229 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 11427–11431
L., and Choi, H. U. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 175. Sharon, N., and Lis, H. (1993) Sci. Am. 206. Baumann, H., Brisson, J., Michon, F., Pon, R.,
18071–18077 268(Jan), 82 – 89 and Jennings, H. J. (1993) Biochemistry32,
147. Choi, H. U., Johnson, T. L., Pal, S., Tang, L.-H., 176. Opdenakker, G., Rudd, P. M., Ponting, C. P., 4007–4013
Rosenberg, L., and Neame, P. J. (1989) J. Biol. and Dwek, R. A. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1330–1337 207. Falk, P. G., Bry, L., Holgersson, J., and
Chem.264, 2876–2884 177. Sharon, N. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 221– Gordon, J. I. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
148. Kokenyesi, R., and Bernfield, M. (1994) J. Biol. 226 92, 1515–1519
Chem.269, 12304–12309 178. Barondes, S. H. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 208. Adler, P., Wood, S. J., Lee, Y. C., Lee, R. T.,
149. Rosenberg, L. (1975) in Dynamics of Connective 480–482 Petri, W. A., and Schnaar, R. L. (1995) J. Biol.
Tissue Macromolecules (Burleigh, P. M. C., and 179. Sphyris, N., Lord, J. M., Wales, R., and Chem.270, 5164–5171
Poole, A. R., eds), p. 107, North-Holland Roberts, L. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 20292– 209. Misevic, G. N., and Burger, M. M. (1990) J.
Publ., Amsterdam 20297 Biol. Chem.265, 20577–20584
150. Chen, J., and Varner, J. E. (1985) Proc. Natl. 180. Sumner, J. B., and Howell, S. F. (1936) J. 210. Spillmann, D., Hård, K., Thomas-Oates, J.,
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 4399–4403 Bacteriol.32, 227–237 Vliegenthart, J. F. G., Misevic, G., Burger, M.
151. Kieliszewski, M., deZacks, R., Leykam, J. F., 181. Bourne, Y., Rougés, P., and Cambillau, C. M., and Finne, J. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268,
and Lamport, D. T. A. (1992) Plant Physiol.98, (1990)J. Biol. Chem.265, 18161 – 18165 13378–13387
919–926 182. Sharon, N., and Lis, H. (1990) FASEB J.4, 211. Spillmann, D., Thomas-Oates, J. E., van Kuik,
152. Kieliszewski, M. J., O’Neill, M., Leykam, J., 3198–3208 J. A., Vliegenthart, J. F. G., Misevic, G., Burger,
and Orlando, R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 183. Mandal, D. K., and Brewer, C. F. (1993) M. M., and Finne, J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
2541–2549 Biochemistry32, 5116 – 5120 5089–5097
153. Eckhardt, A. E., Timpte, C. S., Abernethy, J. L., 184. Derewenda, Z., Yariv, J., Helliwell, J. R., Kalb, 212. Rosati, F., and De Santis, R. (1980) Nature
Toumadje, A., Johnson, W. C., and Hill, R. L. A. J., Dodson, E. J., Papiz, M. Z., Wan, T., and (London)283, 762–764
(1987)J. Biol. Chem.262, 11339–11344 Campbell, J. (1989) EMBO J.8, 2189 – 2193 213. Seppo, A., Penttilä, L., Niemelä, R.,
154. Timpte, C. S., Eckhardt, A. E., Abernethy, J. L., 185. Drickamer, K. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 9557– Maaheimo, H., and Renkonen, O. (1995)
and Hill, R. L. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 1081– 9560 Biochemistry34, 4655–4661
1088 186. Krusius, T., Gehlsen, K. R., and Ruoslahti, E. 214. Litscher, E. S., Juntunen, K., Seppo, A.,
155. Gupta, R., and Jentoft, N. (1989) Biochemistry (1987)J. Biol. Chem.262, 13120–13125 Penttilä, L., Niemelä, R., Renkonen, O., and
28, 6114–6121 187. Gitt, M. A., and Barondes, S. H. (1991) Wassarman, P. M. (1995) Biochemistry34,
Biochemistry30, 82–89 4662–4669

--- Page 198 ---

195
References
215. Hitoshi, S., Kusunoki, S., Kanazawa, I., and 241. Plummer, T. H., Jr., and Tarentino, A. L. (1981)
Tsuji, S. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 8844–8850 J. Biol. Chem.256, 10243–10246
216. de Vries, T., Srnka, C. A., Palcic, M. M., 242. Risley, J. M., and Van Etten, R. L. (1985) J. Biol.
Swiedler, S. J., van der Eijnden, D. H., and Chem.260, 15488–15494
Macher, B. A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 8712– 243. Takasaki, S., Mizuochi, T., and Kobata, A.
8722 (1982)Meth. Enzymol.83, 263–268
217. Stroud, M. R., Levery, S. B., Mårtensson, S., 244. Parente, J. P., Wieruszeski, J.-M., Strecker, G.,
Salyan, M. E. K., Clausen, H., and Hakomori, Montreuil, J., Fournet, B., van Halbeek, H.,
S. (1994) Biochemistry33, 10672–10680 Dorland, L., and Vliegenthart, J. F. G. (1982) J.
218. Hull, S. R., Sugarman, E. D., Spielman, J., and Biol. Chem.257, 13173–13176
Carraway, K. L. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 245. Patel, T., Bruce, J., Merry, A., Bigge, C.,
13580–13586 Wormald, M., Jaques, A., and Parekh, R.
219. Ware, F. E., Vassilakos, A., Peterson, P. A., (1993)Biochemistry32, 679–693
Jackson, M. R., Lehrman, M. A., and Williams, 246. Sweeley, C. C., and Nunez, H. A. (1985) Ann.
D. B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 4697–4704 Rev. Biochem.54, 765–801
220. Leppänen, A., Mehta, P., Ouyang, Y.-B., Ju, T., 247. Dua, V. K., Roa, B. N. N., Wu, S.-S., Dube, V.
Helin, J., Moore, K. L., van Die, I., Canfield, E., and Bush, C. A. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261,
W. M., McEver, R. P., and Cummings, R. D. 1599–1608
(1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 24838 – 24848 248. Tsai, P.-K., Dell, A., and Ballou, C. E. (1986)
221. Chandrasekaran, E. V., Jain, R. K., Larsen, R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 4119–4123
D., Wlasichuk, K., and Matta, K. L. (1995) 249. Lindberg, B., Lönngren, L., and Svensson, S.
Biochemistry34, 2925–2936 (1975)Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem.31,
222. Kogan, T. P., Revelle, B. M., Tapp, S., Scott, D., 185–240
and Beck, P. J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 14047– 250. Guthrie, R. D., and McCarthy, J. F. (1967) Adv.
14055 Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem.22, 11–23
223. Waddell, T. K., Fialkow, L., Chan, C. K., 251. Edge, C., Parekh, R., Rademacher, T.,
Kishimoto, T. K., and Downey, G. P. (1995) J. Wormald, M., and Dwek, R. (1992) Nature
Biol. Chem.270, 15403–15411 (London)385, 693–694
224. Bertozzi, C. R., Fukuda, S., and Rosen, S. D. 252. Varki, A. (1991) FASEB J.5, 226–235
(1995)Biochemistry34, 14271–14277 253. Rolf, D., and Gray, G. R. (1982) J. Am. Chem.
225. Norgard-Sumnicht, K., and Varki, A. (1995) J. Soc.104, 3539–3541
Biol. Chem.270, 12012–12024 254. Mukerjea, R., Kim, D., and Robyt, J. F. (1996)
226. Hemmerich, S., Leffler, H., and Rosen, S. D. Carbohydrate Res. 292, 11–20
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 12035–12047 255. Bobbitt, J. M. (1956) Adv. Carbohydr. Chem.
227. Yuen, C.-T., Bezouska, K., O’Brien, J., Stoll, Biochem.11, 1–41
M., Lemoine, R., Lubineau, A., Kiso, M., 256. Rich, A., Nordheim, A., and Wang, A. H.-J.
Hasegawa, A., Bockovich, N. J., Nicolaou, K. (1984)Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 791–846
C., and Feiz, T. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 1595– 257. Homans, S. W., Dwek, R. A., and Rademacher,
1598 T. W. (1987) Biochemistry26, 6571–6578
228. Patel, T. P., Goelz, S. E., Lobb, R. R., and 258. Homans, S. W., Pastore, A., Dwek, R. A., and
Parekh, R. B. (1994) Biochemistry33, 14815– Rademacher, T. W. (1987) Biochemistry26,
14824 6649–6655
229. Graves, B. J., Crowther, R. L., Chandran, C., 259. Cumming, D. A., Shah, R. N., Krepinsky, J. J.,
Rumberger, J. M., Li, S., Huang, K.-S., Presky, Grey, A. A., and Carver, J. P. (1987) Biochemistry
D. H., Familletti, P. C., Wolitzky, B. A., and 26, 6655–6663
Burns, D. K. (1994) Nature (London)367, 532– 260. Reuben, J. (1985) J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 1747–
538 1755
230. Lasky, L. A. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, 113– 261. Cumming, D. A., Dime, D. S., Grey, A. A.,
139 Krepinsky, J. J., and Carver, J. P. (1986) J. Biol.
231. Ginsburg, V. E. (1982) Meth. Enzymol.83, all Chem.261, 3208–3213
232. Churms, S. C. (1990) CRC Handbook of 262. Vuister, G. W., de Waard, P., Boelens, R.,
Chromatography Carbohydrates, Vol. 2, CRC Vliegenthart, J. F. G., and Kaptein, R. (1989)
Press, Boca Raton, Florida J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 772–774
233. Valent, B. S., Darvill, A. G., McNeil, M., 263. Gronenborn, A. M., and Clore, G. M. (1989)
Robertsen, B. K., and Albersheim, P. (1980) Biochemistry28, 5978–5984
Carbohydrate Res.79, 165–192 264. Abeygunawardana, C., and Bush, C. A. (1991)
234. Chaplin, M. F., and Kennedy, J. F., eds. (1994) Biochemistry30, 8568–8577
Carbohydrate Analysis A Practical Approach, 265. Rivière, M., and Puzo, G. (1992) Biochemistry
Oxford University, Oxford 31, 3575–3580
235. Robyt, J. F., and Mukerjea, R. (1994) Carbohydr. 266. van Duynhoven, J. P. M., Goudriaan, J.,
Res.251, 187–202 Hilbers, C. W., and Wijmenga, S. S. (1992) J.
236. Green, E. D., and Baenziger, J. U. (1989) Trends Am. Chem. Soc.114, 10055–10056
Biochem. Sci.14, 168–172 267. Wu, J., Bondo, P. B., Vuorinen, T., and
237. Carr, S. A., Huddleston, M. J., and Bean, M. F. Serianni, A. S. (1992) J. Am. Chem. Soc.114,
(1993)Protein Sci.2, 183–196 3499–3505
237a.Fridriksson, E. K., Beavil, A., Holowka, D., 268. Homans, S. W. (1990) Biochemistry29, 9110–
Gould, H. J., Baird, B., and McLafferty, F. W. 9118
(2000)Biochemistry39, 3369 – 3376 269. Bose, B., Zhao, S., Stenutz, R., Cloran, F.,
237b.Burlingame, A. L., Carr, S. A., and Baldwin, Bondo, P. B., Bondo, G., Hertz, B., Carmichael,
M. A., eds. (2000) Mass Spectrometry in Biology I., and Serianni, A. S. (1998) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
and Medicine, Hamana Press, Totowa, New 120, 11158–11173
Jersey 270. Flugge, L. A., Blank, J. T., and Petillo, P. A.
238. Downs, F., and Pigman, W. (1969) Biochemistry (1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 7228 – 7238
8, 1760–1766
239. Narasimhan, S., Harpaz, N., Longmore, G.,
Carver, J. P., Grey, A. A., and Schacter, H.
(1980)J. Biol. Chem.255, 4876–4884
240. Cohen, R. E., and Ballou, C. E. (1980)
Biochemistry19, 4345–4358

--- Page 199 ---

196 Chapter 4. Sugars, Polysaccharides, and Glycoproteins
Study Questions
1. A nonreducing disaccharide gives an octamethyl 7. Write the structural formulas for (a) 1,6 anhydro
derivative with dimethyl sulfate and alkali. On β-D-glucopyranose; (b) 1,6 anhydro β-D-altrose.
acid hydrolysis, this derivative yields 1 mol of Compound (b) is many times more stable than
2,3,4,6-tetramethyl-D-glucose and 1 mol of 2,3,4,6- compound (a). Explain this on stereochemical
tetramethyl-D-galactose. The disaccharide is grounds.
hydrolyzed rapidly by either maltase or lactase (a
β-galactosidase). 8. The disaccharide nigerose is α-D-Glup-(1→ 3)-D-glu.
Write out its structure. How would you prove this
Give an adequately descriptive name of the disac- structure using methylation, periodate oxidation,
charide, and draw its Haworth projection formula. and other methods.
2. An aldopentose (A) of the D-configuration on 9. Inositol is 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexahydroxycyclohexane.
oxidation with concentrated nitric acid gives a Draw configurational formulas for all possible
2,3,4-trihydroxypentanedioic acid (a stereoisomers and indicate which would be
trihydroxyglutaric acid) (B) which is optically expected to be optically active.
inactive. (A) on addition of HCN, hydrolysis,
lactonization, and reduction gives two stereoiso- 10.Why do you suppose that the major form of
meric aldohexoses (C) and (D). (D) on oxidation D-fructose in solution is the pyranose form but
affords a 2,3,4,5-tetrahydroxy-hexanedioic acid (a D-fructose in sucrose is in the furanose form?
saccharic acid) (E) which is optically inactive. Give
structures of compounds (A)-(E). 11.D-Xylose is an easily prepared sugar, potentially
available in enormous quantity. What is a common
3. What products are formed when periodic acid source? How can it be obtained from this source?
reacts with sorbitol?
4. A 10.0 g sample of glycogen gave 6.0 millimol of 12.How can xylitol be obtained from xylose? Discuss
2,3-di-O-methylglucose on methylation and acid the stereochemical properties of xylitol.
hydrolysis.
13.The enzyme xylose isomerase is important indus-
a. What percent of the glucose residues in glyco- trially. Why?
gen have chains substituted at the α−1→6
position? 14.Glucose reacts non-enzymatically with amino acids
and proteins, including hemoglobin, egg-white
b. What is the average number of glucose residues proteins and serum albumin. For example, if
per chain? glucose is not removed prior to drying, dried egg
whites slowly turn brown and develop off-flavors
c. How many millimols of 2,3,6-tri-O-methyl- and odors. What do you propose as the most likely
glucose were formed? first step in the non-enzymatic glucose-protein
chemical reaction? How can the first product
d. If the molecular weight of the polysaccharide is transform spontaneously into a ketose derivative?
2× 106, how many glucose residues does it
contain? 15.What characteristics would you expect in a binding
site for a sugar ring in an enzyme, lectin, or other
e. How many nonreducing ends are there per proteins?
molecule or equivalently how many chains are
there per molecule? 16.Using structural formulas, descirbe the two major
types of linkage of carbohydrate chains or clusters
5. D-Mannitol is a symmetric molecule, yet it is to proteins to form glycoproteins or proteoglycans.
optically active. Explain.
17.What products would you expect from cellulose as
6. When D-glucose is treated with acidic methanol, a result of methylation analysis? Periodate oxida-
the first products which can be isolated are mainly tion? The Smith degradation? The action of an
methyl furanosides, but after extensive reaction the alpha amylase?
furanosides disappear and methyl glucopyrano-
sides accumulate. Why?

--- Page 200 ---

197
Study Questions
18.When glycoproteins are treated with alkaline brohy-
dride, amino acid analysis often indicates a decrease in
the amount of serine and a corresponding increase
in the amount of alanine, or a decrease in threonine
with the appearance of α-aminobutyric acid.
Explain.

--- Page 201 ---

198 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
DNA spreading from the broken head of a bacteriophage T2 phage. This classic
electron micrograph, published by A. K. Kleinschmidt and coworkers in 1962
(Biochem. Biophys. Acta. 61, 857–864, 1962) was prepared by spreading the phage
particles suspended in a protein–salt solution as a mixed monolayer on a water-
air interface. The resultant osmotic shock burst the head and confined the DNA
as a single thread near the phage ghost. After transfer to a suitable carbon
surface, removal of water, and shadowing with platinum, the micrograph was
obtained. Courtesy of Albrecht K. Kleinschmidt
Contents
203 A. Structure and Chemistry of Nucleotides 249 H. Methods of Study
203 1. Names and Abbreviations 249 1. Isolation and Separation of Nucleic Acids
204 2. Acid–Base Chemistry and Tautomerism 249 2. Hydrolysis and Analysis
205 3. Absorption of Ultraviolet Light 251 3. Characteristic Reactions of the Bases and Backbone
207 4. Chemical Reactions of the Bases 251 Reactions of nucleophiles
207 5. Base Pairs, Triplets, and Quartets 253 Reactions with electrophilic reagents
209 Strengths of base pairs 254 Reactions causing cleavage of the sugar-phosphate
209 Stacking of bases backbone
211 Tautomerism and base pairing 255 4. Melting, Hybridization, and Polynucleotide Probes
211 6. Conformations of Nucleotides 258 5. Synthesis of Oligonucleotides and Polynucleotides
213 B. Double Helices 260 6. The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
213 1. The B Form of DNA 260 7. Sequence Determination
213 2. Other Double-Helical Forms of DNA 260 Preparing the DNA
216 3. The Conformational Flexibility of Double Helices 260 Restriction maps and Southern blots
217 Rotational and translational movements of bases 262 The Sanger dideoxy method
217 Bends and bulges 264 The method of Maxam and Gilbert
218 Interactions with ions 264 Sequencing RNA
218 C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic Acids 265 Nearest neighbor analysis
218 1. Rings, Catenanes, and Knots 265 Understanding sequences
219 2. Supercoiled DNA 266 8. Protein–DNA Interactions
222 3. Intercalation 266 9. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
226 4. Polynucleotides with Three or Four Strands
226 H-DNA 270 References
226 R-DNA 278 Study Questions
227 Designed third strands
227 Tetraplex (quadruplex) structures Boxes
228 5. Junctions 206 Box 5-A The Alkali Metal Ions
230 D. Ribonucleic Acids (RNA) 224 Box 5-B Antitumor DNA Drugs
230 1. RNA Loops and Turns 235 Box 5-C The RNA World
231 2. Transfer RNAs 259 Box 5-D DNA Fingerprinting
232 3 . Properties and Structures of Some Other
RNA Molecules Tables
234 4. Modified Nucleotides 203 Table 5-1 Names of Pyrimidine and Purine Bases,
234 5. RNA Aptamers Nucleosides, and 5’-Nucleotides
235 E. The Genetic Code 210 Table 5-2 Gibbs Energies of Formation ∆G° at
236 1. The “Reading Frames” 25°C for Addition of One Base P f air to an
237 2. Variations Existing RNA Helix
238 3. Palindromes and Other Hidden Messages 216 Table 5-3 Helix Parameters for Three Types of DNA
239 4. The Base Composition of DNA and RNA 232 Table 5-4 Some Specialized RNA Molecules
239 F. Interaction of Nucleic Acids with Proteins 236 Table 5-5 The Genetic Code
239 1. The Helix–Turn–Helix Motif 237 Table 5-6 The Sixty-Four Codons of the Genetic
241 2. Other DNA-binding Motifs Code
241 Leucine zipper proteins 245 Table 5-7 Characteristics of Some Individual
241 Zinc fingers Viruses and Groups of Viruses
241 Beta ribbons
243 The winged helix family
243 3. RNA-Binding Proteins
244 G. Viruses and Plasmids
244 1. Viruses with Single-Stranded DNA
244 2. Viruses with Double-Stranded DNA
247 3. Viruses Containing RNA
248 4. Viruses without Nucleic Acid?
248 5. Life Cycles
248 6. Plasmids and Transposable Genetic Elements

--- Page 202 ---

199
5
The Nucleic Acids
0.5(cid:1)m
The phosphorus- and nitrogen-containing materials or RNA. He assumed that nucleic acids must be regular
that came to be known as nucleic acids were first iso- repeating polymers for which there was no obvious
lated from cells around 1870 by Friedrich Miescher biological function. It was not until 1944 that there
but were long regarded as something of a curiosity.1
Nevertheless, the structures of the monomer units, the
nucleotides, were established by 1909 and the correct 4 6 7
polynucleotide structure of the chains of DNA and 3 N 5 1N 5 N
RNA was proposed by Levene and Tipson in 1935.2,3 8
The nucleotides are made up of three parts: 2 N 6 2 N 4 N9
H
1 3
1. One of the pyrimidine or purine “bases” Pyrimidine Purine
uracil, cytosine, adenine, or guanine (Fig. 5-1).
O NH
All four of these bases are present in RNA, 2
while DNA contains thymine instead of uracil. H With a methyl group
here it's thymine, N
Atoms in the bases are numbered 1–6 or 1–9. N N
present in DNA
2. A sugar, either D-ribose or D-2-deoxyribose.
Carbon atoms in sugars are numbered 1’–5.’ O N N N
3. Phosphoric acid
H The circled H's are the H
ones removed when Adenine
Although the biological synthesis is indirect, we Uracil the bases are attached to
can imagine that nucleotides are formed from these sugars in nucleosides
parts by elimination of two molecules of water as indi- NH 2 and nucleotides O
cated in Eq. 5-1. In nucleic acids the nucleotides are
H
combined through phosphodiester linkages between N N N
the 5'-hydroxyl of the sugar in one nucleotide and the
3'-hydroxyl of another. Again, we can imagine that
O N HN N N
these linkages were formed by the elimination of water 2
(Eq. 5-2). The structures of a pair of short polynucleo- H H
Guanine
tide strands in DNA are shown in Fig. 5-2. That of a
Cytosine
segment of double-helical DNA is shown in Fig. 5-3
Note: all of these molecules are almost perfectly flat!
and that of a transfer RNA in Figs. 5-30 and 5-31.
Despite the fact that Levene had deduced the
correct structure for polynucleotides, he was thrown
Figure 5-1 Structures of the major pyrimidine and purine
off the trail of a deeper understanding by the roughly
bases of DNA and RNA.
equal amounts of the four bases found in either DNA

--- Page 203 ---

200 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
Uracil,
one of the
O pyrimidine
bases
HC O
2 H
O
The sugar
D-ribose
HO OH OH is replaced by H
inD-2-deoxyribose,
found in DNA
2HO
2
was concrete evidence that DNA carried genetic infor-
mation (see Chapter 26). However, it was James Watson
and Francis Crick’s recognition of the double-helical
structure of DNA4-9 in 1953 and the mechanism of rep-
lication that this structure implied that captured the
imagination of biologists and chemists alike and paved
the way for the present-day explosion of knowledge
of DNA, RNA, and of the encoded proteins.
Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is a double
helix of two antiparallel polynucleotide chains (Figs. 5-2
and 5-3). The structure was deduced from model build-
ing together with knowledge of the X-ray diffraction
data of Maurice F. Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin9a on
N
O
N H
O
HO O
P
O
The heavy green HC
arrows mark the 2 two reactive groups O
involved in the
polymerization to
form nucleic acids
O OH
H
The nucleotide
uridine monophosphate
(UMP or uridylic acid)
N
O
N H
O
HO O artificially formed DNA fibers. An additional key
P piece of information was the discovery by Erwin
–O OH
Phosphate Chargaff that in all double-stranded DNA the content of
ion H adenine equals that of thymine and the content of guanine
equals that of cytosine.
The most significant feature of the proposed struc-
H
ture was the pairing of bases in the center through
hydrogen bonding. The pairs and triplets of hydrogen
bonds (Fig. 5-2) could form in the manner shown only
if adenine (A) was paired with thymine (T) and cyto-
sine (C) with guanine (G) at every point in the entire
DNA structure. Thus, the nucleotide sequence in one
chain is complementary to but not identical to that in the
other chain. It was apparent almost immediately that
the sequence of bases in a DNA chain must convey the
encoded genetic information. The complementarity
–O of the two strands suggested a simple mechanism for
replication of genes during cell divisions. The two
5’
strands could separate and a complementary strand
4’ 1’ could be synthesized along each strand to give two
3’ 2’ molecules of the DNA, one for each of the two cells.
H
3' 5'
N N H O CH3
(5-1) H 2’ H H2C O
O 3’ N N H N O H
H O N N
HO – 3P
O
5'
Sugar-base
– O
O
P O 4’ CH2 5’ A
N
H
H O
O T
N
H H2C H O
H
O P O O –
3' O
O O
H N H N N O
5' O
H + HO P O Sugar-base O N N H H P –
O– 3' OH H O C O H N H G O O
H
2
O
O O
CH2 3'
– 5' – P
HO3P O Sugar-base O
3'
O O N O
H
P
–O O 5' Sugar-base O N N H
H O N
3'
O
O O
CH2 G N
H
H
H (5-2) – P
O H2C O
H N H
O N
H O T O
O O
CH2
– PP
O
Helix axis
O
5'
Figure 5-2 A distorted (flattened) view of the Watson–Crick
structure of DNA showing the hydrogen-bonded base pairs.

--- Page 204 ---

201
The essential correctness of the van der Waals
contact surface
concept has been proved.
Major
Two extremely important develop- groove
ments came in the 1970s: (1) Methods
were found for cutting and rejoining Top view H H Helix axis
D t d n c h a e u N e t v c i m o A i l s e n e i o f n d o r t a f i b f g d o t a h m e r c e t r e s s e a n e e r p i t q t a s i e u d a a c e n h d n n d n d e c t i f e e q ( o 2 r s u r ) m . e w c s T i l n a o i h s a y n e t n s i i a o n o w p n w g p e o r li f e - –O P H O H O O O 2 5 C C ’ O H C 2 H C H H O CH C N O O N H H H N N H N N N HC O H H CH C 2 O C C 5 O O H O ’ 2 H O P O–
providing startling advances in –O P O 3’ ~ R 1 a .0 d i n u m s Minor 3’ O P O–
biology and medicine. In 1970 we groove
knew virtually nothing about the
sequences of nucleotides in genes
~ 2° twist in center
but today, we know the sequences of base pair –O
for many thousands of genes of all Side view –O O P O– O CH2 O P O– T-A
t
b
y
e
p
e
e
n
s
e
.
s
B
ta
y
b
t
l
h
is
e
h
1
ed
98
f
0
o
s
r
s
h
e
e
q
m
ue
o
n
g
c
lo
es
b i
h
n
a
,1
d
1 O
O H O2 N3
H O
O
γ-globulins,12 collagen,13 and for –O P
O
O C
–
H2 H O
N3
O
O
O P O– O A-T
m ge a n n e y s e e q n u z e y n m ce e s f . o r A m n i t e o x c a h m on p d le r i i a s l the –O O P O O O O –O P O
aspartate aminotransferase (Fig. 5-4).14 O 5’ O Major
I o
p
t f
a
s
i
m c
r
o
e
o d
d
n i n
a
o
s
g n u
i
r
n
e c g l
F
e i
i
o o
g
n t
.
i s d
5
c
-
e
2
o s n ,
in
s th i s
d
e t
o
o b
u
f a
b
1 s
l
e 2
e
s 9
h
9 b
e
e p
l
i a
i
n
c
ir g
a
s
l
–O 3 P ’
O
O
–O O
O–
P O
N4 H O
P O
C-G
g
~
r
2
o
.2
o v
n
e
m
OO H
form. Complete DNA sequences O N4 H O6 N8 O Pitch,
are known for numerous viruses –O P
O
O H P O– C-G 3.46 nm
i D n N cl A ud p in ro g v t i h ru e s 9 f 7 o 4 r 0 m -b o a f s t e h p e a R ir N ( A bp v ) irus “Stacked” –O O P
O
O H C H O4 H
H
N6H N8 O O O P O– T-A
that causes AIDS15 and for bacterial base pairs N8 O6 H N4 O
v
( t m h 3
ir
9 i e t
u
, o 9 1
s
c 3 9
e
h 6
s
8 o 0
s
b n s
u
p d
c
w )
h
r .1 e i 6
a
a r
s
l e A D
T
s l e s
7
N q o
b
A u d
a
e
c
e ( n
t
1 t
e
c e 6
r
e r ,
i
5 m s
o
9
p
o i 8 n
h
f b
a
e h
g
d p u
e
) m i , n 17 an A re
a W
c
r
b o
e a
a g
a
s
in l
n e
s
i p
v
z
c a
e a
o
d
n
i
n
r
t d
b c
a
a y
e c
n
t r
g b ro e ups
–O P
O H N4 O P –O O O
O
O
O
P
O O–
G-C
G-C
M g ~ r 1 o i . n 2 o o v n r e m
and of chloroplast DNA from the facing the grooves. O O O T-A
toba
I
c
n
c o
1 9
p
9
l
5
a n
th
t
e
(1
f
5
ir
5
s
,8
t
4
c
4
o m
bp
p
)
l
.
e
18
te
This is a GC pair
O
–O
O
P O O N3 O O P O O
O
– T-A
sequences of bacterial genomes –O P O O O O P O–
were obtained (Table 1-3).19,20 These O O 3’ O2 H N2H N3 O O C-G
were followed by sequences of many –O P O O O O P O G-C
O–
other bacterial genomes,21 including O HN NH O
the 4.2 x 106 bp E. coli genome (Table –O O
P
O O O O
O
P O–
0 1.0 nm
1-3). Sequencing of the 16 chromo- O O
somes of the 12.07 Mbp genome of P O–
yeast22,23 containing ~6300 genes was
completed in 199624 and that of the
97 Mbp genome of the nematode
Figure 5-3 The double-helical structure of DNA. The structure shown is that
Caenorhabditis elegans in 1998. By
of the B form and is based on coordinates of Arnott and Hukins.10 The major
2000 the sequence of the 180 Mbp
and minor grooves, discussed on p. 213, are marked.
genome of the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster was largely completed,
and most sequences of the 3 x 109 bp
human genome were known.24a insulin and the antiviral protein interferon were two of
Cloning of DNA has not only provided an essential the first proteins produced in this way. Methods now
step in sequence determination but also has given birth in use permit us to introduce at will alterations at any
to a new industry devoted to producing proteins from point in a DNA sequence. We are able to locate and
genes cloned in bacteria, yeast, or other cells. Human study the genes responsible for many genetic defects.

--- Page 205 ---

202 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
–200 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ –150 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅
5’- CATGACCTCCGTGGAGGCGTCGTCGTTCTACCCCCGACCGCAAGGGGCCGCTGACATGATTCGCTCCAGCGCAGGGCCGCT
⋅ –100 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ –50 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ +1
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ Me
CTAGCCACGCCCAGGGAAGTCACTGTCCTCACCTTTTAGGAGCCCGCGCCTCGGTTCCAGCGGACGCTTCCCCAGATCTCGGCTCTACCACCATCCACTGCCGTCTTACCGCCCACC AT
t Ala Leu Leu His Ser Ser Arg Ile Leu Ser Gly Met Ala Ala Ala Phe His Pro Gly Leu Ala Ala Ala Ala Ser Ala Arg Ala Se
G GCC CTC CTG CAC TCC AGC CGC ATC CTC TCC GGG ATG GCT GCT GCC TTT CAC CCT GGC CTA GCT GCT GCA GCC TCT GCC AGA GCC AG GTG
A
INTRON 1 r Ser
AGCCGAGGGATACAGAGATGCAGCGGCACCGGGCCTGCCCTGCCAGCCGAAGTGTGGACCCTGTGAA----(10.2 kb)----ATGGCTGGGGTAACCTATTTCTCATTTCAG C TCC
Trp Trp Thr His Val Glu Met Gly Pro Pro Asp Pro Ile Leu Gly Val Thr Glu Ala Phe Lys Arg Asp Thr Asn Ser Lys Lys Met Asn
TGG TGG ACC CAT GTT GAA ATG GGA CCT CCA GAT CCC ATC CTG GGC GTT ACC GAA GCC TTC AAG AGA GAT ACC AAC AGC AAG AAG ATG AAC
Leu Gly Val Gly Ala Tyr Arg Asp Asp Asn Gly Lys Pro Tyr Val Leu Pro Ser Val Arg Lys A
CTG GGA GTT GGT GCC TAC CGG GAT GAT AAC GGA AAA CCT TAC GTG CTC CCC AGT GTC CGG AAG G GTGAGCTTGGCACTCGTCTCCTGCCAGCTAGGAT
INTRON 2 la Glu Ala Gln Ile Ala Ala Lys Asn Leu Asp Lys Glu Tyr Leu Pro Ile
GTGGAA----(1.4 kb)----AAAAACTAAGACTTATGATTTTCTTGTCTAG CA GAG GCC CAG ATT GCT GCA AAA AAT TTG GAC AAA GAA TAC CTG CCC ATT
Gly Gly Leu Ala Glu Phe Cys Lys Ala Ser Ala Glu Leu Ala Leu Gly Glu Asn Asn Glu Val Asn Glu Val Leu Lys Ser Gly Arg
GGG GGA CTG GCT GAA TTC TGT AAG GCT TCT GCA GAA CTG GCC CTG GGC GAG AAC AAT GAA GTG AAT GAA GTG TTG AAA AGC GGC CGG GTAA
INTRON 3 Phe Val Thr Val Gln Thr Ile Ser Gly
GCCAGCGGAGTCGGGCTTGAGCTTGATA----(1.2 kb)----TGTAAAGGGTAGAGAGAGTGACTCTGTGTATCCCCTGCAG TTC GTC ACT GTG CAG ACC ATT TCC GGG
Thr Gly Ala Leu Arg Val Gly Ala Ser Phe Leu INTRON 4
ACT GGA GCC TTA AGG GTC GGG GCC AGT TTT CTG GTCAGTGGAACTCTTTCAAGAATGAATCTTTTGGGGTGGC----(2.2 kb)----CTTTCTTCATTTTCTCATTC
Gln Arg Phe Phe Lys Phe Ser Arg Asp Val Phe Leu Pro Lys Pro Ser Trp Gly Asn His Thr Pro Ile Phe Arg
CCTTTTATCCCGACTTTTAG CAA AGG TTT TTT AAG TTC AGC CGA GAT GTC TTT CTG CCC AAA CCA TCC TGG GGA AAT CAC ACG CCC ATC TTC AGG
Asp Ala Gly Met Gln Leu Gln Gly Tyr Arg Tyr Tyr Asp Pro Lys Thr Cys Gly Phe Asp Phe Ser Gly Ala Leu Glu Asp Ile Ser
GAT GCC GGC ATG CAG CTC CAA GGT TAT CGC TAC TAT GAC CCC AAG ACT TGC GGT TTT GAC TTC TCC GGA GCC CTA GAA GAC ATA TCA GTAA
INTRON 5 Lys Ile Pro Glu Gln Ser Val Leu Leu Leu
GTGTGGCTTTCCAGGCCCGACTTCTG----(0.2 kb)----GAAGCTGCACAGCCAAAAATCTCGATGTTTCTCCTTAG AAA ATC CCA GAG CAG AGT GTC CTC CTC CTG
His Ala Cys Ala His Asn Pro Thr Gly Val Asp Pro Arg Pro Glu Gln Trp Lys Glu Ile Ala Ser Val Val Lys
CAT GCC TGC GCT CAC AAC CCC ACC GGC GTG GAC CCG CGT CCC GAG CAG TGG AAG GAG ATA GCG TCC GTG GTG AAG GTGAGGAGGATGAAGCGTCA
INTRON 6 Lys Lys Asn Leu Phe Ala Phe Phe Asp Met Ala Tyr Gln Gly
GGAGCTGGTTGCTTAACC----(0.2 kb)----TCAAACACTGGTCTTCTCATTCCTTCCCAG AAA AAG AAT CTC TTC GCA TTC TTT GAC ATG GCC TAC CAA GGC
Phe Ala Ser Gly Asp Gly Asp Lys Asp Ala Trp Ala Val Arg His Phe Ile Glu Gln Gly Ile Asn Val Cys Leu Cys Gln Ser Tyr Ala
TTT GCC AGC GGT GAT GGT GAT AAG GAT GCC TGG GCC GTG CGG CAC TTC ATC GAG CAG GGC ATC AAT GTC TGC CTC TGC CAA TCG TAT GCC
Lys Asn Met Gly Leu Tyr G INTRON 7 ly Glu
AAG AAC ATG GGC CTG TAC G GTAAGCCAGAGGGCCCAATATAAGGTGTGTT----(1.2 kb)----GTTTCAGCCTGCTAGAAGACAGTATCCTCTGTCTTTTCAG GT GAG
Arg Val Gly Ala Phe Thr Val Val Cys Lys Asp Ala Glu Glu Ala Lys Arg Val Glu Ser Gln Leu Lys Ile Leu Ile Arg Pro Leu Tyr
CGT GTG GGA GCC TTC ACG GTG GTC TGC AAA GAT GCA GAA GAA GCC AAA AGG GTG GAG TCA CAG CTG AAG ATC TTG ATC CGT CCC CTG TAT
Ser Asn Pro Pro Leu Asn Gly Ala Arg Ile Ala Ala Thr Ile Leu Thr Ser Pro Asp Leu Arg Lys Gln Tr
TCC AAC CCA CCT CTC AAT GGG GCC CGG ATC GCA GCA ACC ATC CTG ACT TCT CCA GAC TTC CGG AAG CAA TG GTAACGATTACTAGCTGTATACCGT
INTRON 8 p Leu Gln Glu Val Lys Gly Met Ala Asp Arg Ile Ile Ser Met
GACTACAGCTCCATGA----(2.4 kb)----GAGCACGGCATCCCTCTGCTTTCCTCACAG G TTG CAA GAG GTG AAA GGC ATG GCT GAC CGC ATC ATC AGC ATG
Arg Thr Gln Leu Val Ser Asn Leu Lys Lys Glu Gly Ser Ser His Asn Trp Gln His Ile Thr Asp Gln Ile Gly Met Phe Cys Phe Thr
AGG ACC CAG CTG GTC TCC AAC CTG AAG AAA GAG GGC TCT TCC CAC AAC TGG CAG CAC ATC ACC GAC CAG ATC GGC ATG TTC TGT TTC ACC
Gly Leu Lys Pro Glu Gln INTRON 9 Val Glu
GGC CTA AAG CCA GAG CAG GTGAGTGGGCTCTGGTTCCCCACAGCCAACCCCCGC----(2.0 kb)----ACCAGAAGTGGTTATCTAGCTCTTTTCTTTCTGCAG GTA GAG
Arg Leu Thr Lys Glu Phe Ser Val Tyr Met Thr Lys Asp Gly Arg Ile Ser Val Ala Gly Val Thr Ser Gly Asn Val Gly Tyr Leu Ala
CGG CTG ACC AAG GAG TTC TCG GTC TAC ATG ACA AAG GAT GGC CGA ATC TCC GTG GCA GGG GTC ACC TCT GGC AAT GTG GGC TAC CTT GCC
His Ala Ile His Gln Val Thr Lys *
CAT GCC ATT CAC CAG GTC ACC AAG TAA TTCCCAAGTGCAAAGGAACAGAGACCACTTTCCCGACAGCCTTTGCGCTCGTGAGCGTCACGTGCAGGGTGAGGGAGGGTGGGT
G
GGTGGTGAATAGATCCGGTTTCCAACCACGGTGCATAACTCAGCGACTGAACTCGCTCCTCGGAAGAGAGGTAGGGCAGAGGCTTCCTCGGCTGGTATCTGGAACTTCGTCGGCTCTAAA
CCAAACTCCCTCATCCTTTTGTCTCCAGCTTTTCTGAAAGTTTACACACGCAAGAAAAATCACAGCACCAAACACCTGTCAGCCATGGCACTGGAATAGG← 620 bases →
CACCATCTGCTCTAATCATGTAGACGTACTGCCGCCTGGTTTCTCTGTTACAATAAAATTACTATAGACCCAGCCACTGTCTGCTTTTCTACTTACTGAGAGGGAAGGGGTAAGAGTGGA -3’
Figure 5-4 The nucleotide sequence of the gene for mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase from the mouse. From Tsuzuki et al.14
The gene encodes a 433-residue protein requiring 1299 nucleotide pairs (1.3 kb). However, 29 residues are cut off from the N terminus
to form the mature mitochondrial protein. In addition, the gene is split by nine introns which vary in length from 0.2–10.2 kb. The
sequences at the ends of the introns are shown. There is also an “upstream” region (of which 200 nucleotides are shown) at the 5'-end
of the gene. It contains two binding sites for transcription factor Sp1 (boxed). At the 3' end the 993 additional nucleotides contain
signals (boxed) surrounding the polyadenylation site (green arrow) for 3’ processing and termination of transcription. The mature
messenger RNA is about 2400 nucleotides (2.4 kb) in length but the gene, with introns, occupies about 25 kb. The +1 marks the
position of the first nucleotide of the initiation codon ATG (encoding methionine) and the asterisk (*) the termination codon TAA.
These are AUG and UAA in the mRNA. Other codons are indicated by amino acid abbreviations.

--- Page 206 ---

A. Structure and Chemistry of Nucleotides 203
The first successes in using virus-like particles to carry novice may find these confusing! Even worse than the
new pieces of DNA into the cells to help correct these names in the table is hypoxanthine (Hyp), which is
defects have been reported. Our ability to breed new derived from adenine by replacement of its –NH
2
varieties of plants and microorganisms has been enor- group with –OH and tautomerization:
mously enhanced. We can foresee the production of
artificially designed enzymes to conduct many industrial OH O H
chemical processes. These are among the many reasons
for the excitement today in the fields of nucleic acid C N C N
chemistry and molecular genetics.
The nucleoside formed from hypoxanthine and ribose
is known as inosine (Ino or I) and the corresponding
A. Structure and Chemistry of Nucleotides nucleotide as inosinic acid. Further substitution at
C-2 of –H by –OH and tautomerization yields xanthine
1. Names and Abbreviations (Xan). Its nucleoside is xanthosine (Xao, X). A similar
hydroxylation at C-7 converts xanthine to uric acid,
The purine and pyrimidine ring compounds an important human urinary excretion product derived
found in nucleic acids are known as “bases,” even from nucleic acid bases.
though some of them have almost no basic character.
Nucleosides are the N-glycosyl derivatives of the bases O O
H
with ribose or 2-deoxyribose. The nucleotides are
H H
N N
phosphate esters of nucleosides. Similar names are N N
applied to related compounds such as adenosine tri- O
phosphate (ATP) that are not present in DNA or RNA. O N N O N N
The names of the principal nucleotides from which the H H
H H
nucleic acids are formed are given in Table 5-1. The Xanthine Uric acid
TABLE 5-1
Names of Pyrimidine and Purine Bases, Nucleosides, and 5'-Nucleotidesa
A Nucleotide units of RNA (abbreviations in parentheses)b
Base: Uracil (Ura) Cytosine (Cyt) Adenine (Ade) Guanine (Gua)
Nucleoside: Uridine (Urd or U) Cytidine (Cyd or C) Adenosine (Ado or A) Guanosine (Guo or G)
5'-Nucleotide: Uridine Cytidine Adenosine Guanosine
5'-phosphate 5'-phosphate 5'-phosphate 5'-phosphate
or or or or
5'-uridylic acid 5'-cytidylic acid 5'-adenylic acid 5'-guanylic acid
(Urd-5'-P or UMP) (Cyd-5'-P or CMP) (Ado-5'-Por AMP) (Guo-5'-P or GMP)
B Nucleotide units of DNA C Abbreviations used in describing polynucleotide
sequences
These contain 2-deoxyribose and the nucleosides and
nucleotides are called deoxyadenosine (dAdo or dA), deoxy- U,T,C,A,G Uracil, thymine, cytosine, adenine, guanine
adenosine 5'-phosphate (dAMP), etc. Y or Pyr Pyrimidine (T or C)
DNA contains thymine (Thy) rather than uracil. The R or Pur Purine (A or G)
deoxyribose derivatives are thymidine (dThd or dT) and M Amino base (A or C)
thymidine 5'-phosphate. The ribose derivatives of thymine K Keto base (G or T)
are the nucleoside ribosylthymidine (Thd) and ribosylthy- S Strongly pairing (G or C)
midine 5'-phosphate (Thd-5'-P). W Weakly pairing (A or T)
H Not G (any other base)
B Not A
V Not T or U
D Not C
N Any base
a From “Biochemical Nomenclature”Liébecq, C., ed.25
b Isomers of the 5'-nucleotides, in which the phosphate is attached to the oxygen on C-3', are the 3'-nucleotides. Care must be taken to avoid
ambiguity. The simple abbreviations UMP, CMP, AMP, and GMP always refer to the 5'-nucleotides.

--- Page 207 ---

204 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acid structures are abbreviated in several phosphate backbone of the polymeric chains remains
ways. For example, the sugar rings may be portrayed negatively charged. However, depending on the pH,
by vertical lines. The abbreviations A, C, U, T, and G the bases can be protonated or deprotonated with a
for the individual bases or Pu (purine) and Py (pyrimi- resultant breaking of the hydrogen bonds that hold
dine) are placed at the upper ends of the lines, and the pairs of bases together.26,27
slanted lines with P in the centers represent the 3'–5' Pyrimidines and purines, which contain the –NH
2
phosphodiester linkages in a polynucleotide. group, are weakly basic. The cationic protonated con-
jugate acid forms of cytidine, adenosine, and guanosine
have pK values of 4.2, 3.5, and 2.7, respectively. Similar
a
A U G Pu Py values are observed for the 5'-nucleotides. In these
compounds it is not the –NH group that binds the
3' 2
proton but an adjacent nitrogen atom in the ring (Eq.
P P P P P OH
5-3).
5'
Terminal 5' -phosphate Terminal 3' —OH NH2 N + H2 NH2
H + H
N N + N
–H
The same structure can be further abbreviated
pKa = 4.2
O N O N O N
5' end pApUpGpRpY 3' end
or 5' end A U G R Y 3' end Ribose Ribose Ribose
(5-3)
Here purine is abbreviated R and pyrimidine Y. By
convention the 5' end of a polynucleotide is ordinarily We can understand this if we recognize that the
placed to the left in these formulas. Lengths of nucleic bases have substantial aromatic character.26,28 In ani-
acid chains are usually given as a number of bases or line (aminobenzene) electrons are withdrawn from
kilobases (kb). For double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) the amino group into the aromatic ring with a strong
the length is given as base pairs (bp), kilobase pairs decrease in basicity of this –NH group (the pK is 4.6).
2 a
(kbp), or megabase pairs (Mbp). However, in most Similarly, electrons are withdrawn from the NH groups
2
places, including this book, the abbreviations kb and of cytosine, adenosine, and guanine into the pyrimidine
Mb will be used for a length of DNA whether single and purine rings as is indicated by the small curved
or double stranded. arrows on the left-hand structure of Eq. 5-3. The effect
For double-stranded DNA, one strand, usually the is even stronger than in aniline, largely because of the
coding strand, from which the amino acid sequence presence of the nitrogen atoms in the rings. In cytosine
can be read using the code in Tables 5-4 or 5-5 (Section it is primarily N-3 that serves as the electron acceptor.
C), has the 5' end at the left while the complementary As a consequence this nitrogen becomes more basic
strand has the 3' end at the left, e.g., than the –NH group and is the major site of protona-
2
tion. However, as is indicated in Eq. 5-3, the positive
charge on the cation is shared by resonance with the
Ala Tyr Gly Pro Phe Cys Gln Termination
exocyclic amino group.
5' G C C T A T G G A C C T T T C T G C C A G T G A 3' Adenosine is similar to cytosine in its acid–base
3' C G G A T A C C T G G A A A G A C G G T C A C T 5'
chemistry; N-1, adjacent to the –NH group, is the
2
principal site of protonation. A tautomer of the cation
protonated at N-3 is formed in smaller amounts. Gua-
2. Acid–Base Chemistry and Tautomerism nosine is electronically more complex, being protonated
mainly at N-7 and to a lesser extent at N-329. This can
The ionized phosphate groups of the polymer be understood in terms of electronic interaction with
“backbone” give nucleic acid molecules a high nega- the adjacent oxygen as indicated in the resonance
tive charge. For this reason DNA in cells is usually structure to the right in the following diagram:
associated with basic proteins such as the histones
orprotamines (in spermatozoa), with polycations of
O O–
amines such as spermidine (H +NCH CH CH CH H H
3 2 2 2 2
NH +CH CH CH NH +), or with alkaline earth cations + +
2 2 2 2 3 N7 N
such as Mg2+. If the pH of a solution containing double- H N H N
helical DNA is either lowered to ~3 or raised to ~12,
the two strands unravel and can be separated. H2N N N H + 2N N N
Over the entire range of pH the alternating sugar- 3
Ribose Ribose

--- Page 208 ---

205
Under basic conditions the proton on N-3 of uridine biologically important because of the resultant
or thymine or on N-1 of guanosine can dissociate with induction of mutations, a natural result of exposure
a pK of ~9.2. These “bases” are actually weak acids! to sunlight. In the laboratory the same property is
a
useful in identification and quantitative analysis of
nucleotides. The ultraviolet spectra of four nucleo-
O O– O– sides are shown in Fig. 5-5. Notice the changes that
accompany protonation or deprotonation of the ring.
HN
H+N
–H+ N The absorption bands, which are related to those of
benzene26,32 (see Chapter 23), provide another indica-
O N –O N O N tion of the partial aromatic character of the bases.
+
Chapter 23 also provides information on photo-
Ribose Ribose Ribose
chemical reactions of the pyrimidines.
(5-4)
Look at the “Kekule” resonance
structure shown in the center of
Eq. 5-4. The two negative charges 20
flanking the dissociable proton are
sufficient to hold it firmly to the
16
ring at low pH. The proton is half
dissociated only when the pH is
12
raised to 9.2. At still higher values of
pH (pK ~12.4) a proton dissociates
a from a ribose hydroxyl group. 8
The tautomerism of pyrimidines
was discussed in Chapter 2, Section 4
A,6. The tautomeric forms shown
in Fig. 5-1 predominate. However, 0
30 34 38 42 46 50
it is possible that minor tautomers Wave number (cm–1)× 10–3
such as the following are sometimes
preferentially bound into active 300 250 220 200
sites of enzymes where the dielectric
OH
N
A minor tautomer of uridine
O N
Ribose
constantmay be low and where the
geometrical arrangement of amino
acid functional groups may favor
protonation on oxygen rather than
nitrogen.30,31
3. Absorption of Ultraviolet
Light
Nucleic acids strongly absorb
ultraviolet light of wavelengths below
about 300 nm, with an absorption
maximum at ~260 nm and a stronger
one below 200 nm. This property is
3–01
×
tneiciffeoc
noitcnitxe
raloM
20
Cytidine Uridine
16
2
12
3
1 8 4
4
0
30 34 38 42 46 50
Wave number (cm–1)× 10–3
300 250 220 200
Wavelength (nm) Wavelength (nm)
20 20
Adenosine Guanosine
16 6 16
5
12 12
7
8
8 8
4 4
0 0
30 34 38 42 46 50 30 34 38 42 46 50
Wave number (cm–1)× 10–3 Wave number (cm–1)× 10–3
300 250 220 200 300 250 220 200
Wavelength (nm) Wavelength (nm)
3–01
×
tneiciffeoc
noitcnitxe
raloM
A. Structure and Chemistry of Nucleotides
Figure 5-5 Near ultraviolet absorption spectra of cytidine, uridine, adenos-
ine, and guanosine. 1. Monoprotonated form of cytidine (for which pK = 4.2).
a
2. Neutral form (pH ~ 7) of cytidine. 3. Neutral form of uridine (for which pK
a
= 9.2). 4. Monoanionic form of uridine. 5. Monoprotonated form of adenosine
(pK = 3.5). 6. Neutral form of adenosine. 7. Neutral form of guanosine
a
(pK = 9.2). 8. Monoanion of guanosine.
a

--- Page 209 ---

206 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
BOX 5-A THE ALKALI METAL IONS
The many negative charges along a nucleic acid carboxyl groups or enolate anions and elimination reac-
backbone interact with all of the cations in a cell. This tions yielding enols as well as some enzymes dependent
box discusses some of these ions with emphasis on the upon the coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate.h–j In all of
group IA metal ions. Although sodium and potassium these enzymes NH +, Rb+, or Tl+ can usually replace K+.
4
occur in similar amounts in the crust of the earth, living This permits study of the binding site for Tl+ by the very
cells all accumulate potassium ions almost to the exclu- sensitive205Tl NMR spectroscopy.k The discovery that
sion of sodium.a-c Sodium ions may be required only by K+ is preferentially bound in some tetraplex DNA struc-
certain marine organisms and by multicellular animals tures (see Fig. 5-8) further emphasizes the significant
that regulate their internal body fluids. Most nonmarine difference in biological properties of the alkali metal
plants have no demonstrable need for sodium. ions. Various synthetic macrocyclic compounds are also
The tendency to accumulate K+ is even more remark- able to selectively bind specific alkali metal ions.l
able since seawater is ~0.46 M in Na+ and only 0.01 M in The following tabulation gives concentrations not
K+. Other alkali metals occur in even smaller amounts, only of K+ and Na+ but also of the other principal ionic
e.g., 0.026 mM Li+, 0.001 mM Rb+, and a trace of Cs+. constituents in human blood plasma and within cells of
Soil water is ~0.1 mM in K+ and 0.65 mM in Na+. Again, skeletal muscle.m Units are mmol/kg H O.
2
strong discrimination in favor of potassium is observed
in uptake by plants.
Intracellular concentrations of K+ range from 200 Skeletal muscle
mM in E. coli and 150 mM in mammalian muscle to ~30 Ion Blood plasma (intracellular)
mM in freshwater invertebrates such as clams, hydra,
and some protozoa. While K+ cannot be replaced by Na+ 150 14
Na+, a partial replacement by Rb+ and to a lesser extent K+ 5 150
by Cs+ is usually possible. In many microorganisms Mg2+ 0.9 8
rubidium can almost completely replace potassium, and Ca2+ 2.5 1
even a rat can survive for a shorttime with almost com- Cl– 105 16
plete substitution of K+ by Rb+. Protons replace most K+ HCO – 27 10
3
in brown algae.d The human nutritional requirement Proteins– 17* 50*
for potassium is high, amounting to ~2 g/day. Present Other anions† 6 146
populations may suffer a chronic deficiency of potassium
as a result of food processing and boiling of vegetables.e * Milliequivalents/kg H 2 O
†Phosphates and other nonprotein anions.
Sodium is also essential to higher animals, and rats
die on a sodium-free diet. The sodium content of cells
varies among species, but it is usually no more than 0.1 a Kernan, R. P. (1965) Cell K, Butterworth, London
–0.2 times that of K+. A measurement of the [Na+] b Suelter, C. H. (1974) in Metal Ions in Biological Systems, Vol. 3
(Sigel, H., ed), pp. 201–251, Dekker, New York
within heart cells gave a concentration of ~9 mM, which
c Suelter, C. H. (1970) Science168, 789–795
was increased by a factor of ~2.5 in a low Ca2+ insulin-
d Steinbach, H. B. (1962) Comp. Biochem. Physiol.4, 677–720
containing medium.f In this measurement the NMR e Weber, C. E. (1970) J. Theor. Biol.29, 327–328
resonance of the abundant external Na+ was shifted by f Wittenberg, B. A., and Gupta, R. K. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260,
use of a paramagnetic reagent (e.g., a dysprosium (III) 2031–2034
complex), that remained outside the cell. The signal g Kaunitz, H. (1956) Nature (London)178, 1141–1144
from the internal Na+ was then seen clearly. In blood, h Toney, M. D., Hohenester, E., Cowan, S. W., and Jansonius, J. N.
(1993)Science261, 756–759
the relationship between Na+ and K+ concentrations is
i Antson, A. A., Demidkina, T. V., Gollnick, P., Dauter, Z., Von
reversed from that within cells. Human plasma is 0.15 Tersch, R. L., Long, J., Berezhnoy, S. N., Phillips, R. S.,
M in Na+ and 0.005 M in K+. Curiously, the taste for salt Harutyunyan, E. H., and Wilson, K. S. (1993) Biochemistry32,
in the diet appears to be largely an acquired one.g 4195–4206
It is not immediately obvious why K+ is the preferred j Metzler, C. M., Viswanath, R., and Metzler, D. E. (1991) J. Biol.
Chem.266, 9374–9381
counterion within tissues, but a fundamental reason
k Markham, G. D. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 1507–1509
may lie in the differences in hydration between Na+ and
l Christensen, J. J., Hill, J. O., and Izatt, R. M. (1971) Science174,
K+(Chapter 6). On the other hand, the relationship of 459–467
these ions to the excitability of membranes (Chapter 30) mComposite data from Muntwyler, E. (1968) Water and Electrolyte
may be of paramount importance, even in bacteria. The Metabolism and Acid–Base Balance, p. 14. Mosby, St. Louis,
concentration differences in the two ions across mem- Missouri; White, A., Handler, P., and Smith, E. L. (1973)
Principles of Biochemistry, 5th ed., p. 802. McGraw-Hill, New
branes represent a readily available source of Gibbs
York; Long, C. (1961) Biochemist’s Handbook, p. 670. Van
energy for a variety of membrane-associated activities.
Nostrand, Princeton, New Jersey. Reported ranges for some
Cells actively pump Na+ out and K+ into cells (Chapter 8). constituents are very wide.
Many intracellular enzymes require K+ for activity.b,c
These include those promoting phosphorylation of

--- Page 210 ---

A. Structure and Chemistry of Nucleotides 207
double helix, and also to proteins. Figure 5-6 shows
4. Chemical Reactions of the Bases
the shapes and the hydrogen bonding groups avail-
able in the bases. The number of both electron donor
The purines and pyrimidines are relatively stable
groups and proton donors available for hydrogen
compounds with considerable aromatic character.
bonding is large and more than one mode of base pair-
Nevertheless, they react with many different reagents
ing is possible.
and, under some relatively mild conditions, can be
completely degraded to smaller molecules. The chem-
istry of these reactions is complex and is made more so
by the fact that a reaction at one site on the ring may
H
enhance the reactivity at other sites. The reactions of H N H
nucleic acids are largely the same as those of the indi-
vidual nucleosides or nucleotides, the rates of reaction
H N
are often influenced by the position in the polynucleo-
H H N
tide chain and by whether the nucleic acid is single or N
O
double stranded. The reactions of nucleosides and
N
nucleotides are best understood in terms of the electronic N
H Cytosine
properties of the various positions in the bases.26,33
N H
Most of the chemical reactions are nucleophilic addition N
Thymine
or displacement reactions of types that are discussed
in Chapters 12 and 13. Adenine
Positions 2, 4, and 6 of pyrimidine bases are defi-
H O
cient in electrons and are therefore able to react with
nucleophilic reagents. The 6 position is especially
H N H
reactive toward additions, while the 2 position is the
O
least reactive. The corresponding electron-deficient N
positions in the purine bases are 2, 6, and 8. These N H O
N
positions, which are marked by asterisks on the fol- H
lowing structures, have electrophilic character in all N N N H Uracil
of the commonly occurring pyrimidines and purines. H
Guanine
O NH2
4 * * 6 7
H– N 5 1 N N Figure 5-6 Outlines of the purine and pyrimidine bases of
nucleic acids showing van der Waals contact surfaces and
*8
2 * * * some of the possible directions in which hydrogen bonds
O N 6 3 N N9 may be formed. Large arrows indicate the hydrogen bonds
present in the Watson–Crick base pairs. Smaller arrows
R
R indicate other hydrogen bonding possibilities. The directions
of the green arrows are from a suitable hydrogen atom in the
base toward an electron pair that serves as a hydrogen acceptor.
All of the oxygen and nitrogen atoms in the pyrimidines, This direction is opposite to that in the first edition of this book
as well as the 5 position of the ring, have nucleophilic to reflect current usage.
character and can therefore react with electrophilic
centers of various reagents. A number of specific reac-
tions that have been found useful to biochemists are
described in Section H,3. The base pairs proposed by Watson and Crick are
shown in Fig. 5-2 and again in Fig. 5-7. While X-ray dif-
fraction studies indicate that it is these pairs that usually
5. Base Pairs, Triplets, and Quartets exist in DNA, other possibilities must be considered.
For example, Hoogsteen proposed an alternative A-T
The purine and pyrimidine bases are the “side pairing using the 6-NH and N-7 of adenine.34 Here
2
chains” of the nucleic acids. The polar groups that are the distance spanned by the base pair, between the
C-1' sugar carbons, is 0.88 nm, less than the 1.08 nm
of the Watson–Crick pairs. Duplexes of certain sub-
C O, NH, and NH2
stituted poly (A) and poly (U) chains contain only
present in the bases can form hydrogen bonds to other Hoogsteen base pairs35 and numerous X-ray structure
nucleic acid chains, e.g., in the base pairs of the DNA determinations have established that Hoogsteen pairs

--- Page 211 ---

208 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
CH
3
N
T*
O N O
H
H CH
O 3
N H
N
H N T
A N N N
N O
N
C
H
O N+ N
H H H
H N
O
N Watson-
Crick
N C pair
N G N H N
N O
N H
H
neetsgooH
riap
+
+ –
+
+ –
neetsgooH
riap
H do occur in true nucleic acids.36 Figure 5-7 shows the
structures of two Hoogsteen pairs. In each case the
N N
purine component has formed a Watson–Crick pair
H
O CH3 with a third base to give a base triplet. The first of
N 4 these triplets may be designated T*A·T, where *repre-
N sents the Hoogsteen hydrogen bonding and · repre-
H N sents the Watson–Crick bonding. The second triplet
N
N in Fig. 5-7, C+ *G·C, can form only with the N-1 proto-
nated form (low pH form) of cytosine.
O
Reversed Watson–Crick or Hoogsteen AU or AT
0.88 nm
pairs are formed if the 2-carbonyl rather than the 4-car-
Hoogsteen A*T base pair bonyl of the U or T makes a hydrogen bond with the
amino group of adenine.27 Because of the resulting
arrangement of the ribose rings the base pairs cannot
A fit into the ordinary Watson–Crick double-stranded
DNA structure. A reversed Watson–Crick pair can also
be formed between G and C but with only two hydro-
gen bonds, while a reversed Hoogsteen pair can form
only if a minor tautomer of cytosine is used.
Hoogsteen pairs were first observed in nature in
transfer RNA molecules (Fig. 5-31). These molecules
contain mostly Watson–Crick base pairs but there are
Watson- also two reversed Hoogsteen pairs. One of them, be-
Crick
tween U8 and A14, is invariant in all tRNAs studied. pair
Hoogsteen pairing also occurs in four-stranded DNA,
which has important biological functions. A G quartet
from a DNA tetraplex held together by Hoogsteen
B base pairs is shown in Fig. 5-8.
+
H H R
N N N
H
R N N H
N
N H
N O
O H
N
H N H M+ H N H
N
H
O
O N
1.08 nm
H
N
N
Minor groove
H N N R
H
N
N N
Figure 5-7 Two base triplets that form in triple-stranded H
R
DNA and involve both Watson–Crick and Hoogsteen base H
pairing. (A) The triplet T*A·T, where the T (marked T*) of
the third strand is hydrogen bonded as a Hoogsteen pair
( ) to an adenine of a Watson–Crick AT pair (whose Figure 5-8 A guanine quartet held together by Hoogsteen
hydrogen bonds are indicated ( ). (B) The triplet base pairing. This structure is found in the telomeres at the
C+*G·C, where C+is cytosine in its N-1 protonated (low pH) ends of linear chromosomes. Four segments of DNA, each
form. The Watson–Crick strands are antiparallel, as indicated of which may be part of a single folded strand, (see p. 227)
by the + and – signs. The third strand may have either give structures in which four or more of these G quartets are
orientation, but when it contains largely pyrimidines it is stacked one above the other. Monovalent ions, usually K+
parallel to a purine-rich strand. An example is shown in or Na+, are bound in the center, although not always in the
Fig. 5-24. plane of the bases. See Fang and Cech38 and Gellert et al.39

--- Page 212 ---

A. Structure and Chemistry of Nucleotides 209
H H N
O
N
U8 N N H N
O H
N 2 A reversed N H + Ethyl
N Hoogsteen base N N
N H N pair present in N
tRNA molecules
O
N Cyclohexyl K = [complex]/
f
[1-cyclohexyluracil][9-ethyladenine]
O K = [dimer]/ = 100 l mol–1
A14 f [cyclohexyluracil]2 ∆G°≈–11 kJ mol–1
= 6 l mol–1
∆G°≈–5 kJ mol–1
Another pairing that occurs in tRNAs allows gua- Dimer H
nine to pair with uracil, e.g., G4 with U69. This was O H N N
originally proposed to account for codon–anticodon
interactions betweentRNA molecules and messenger
N
N H N
RNA (Chapter 29). It is commonly called wobble
pairing because the uracil must wobble away from N N Ethyl
its orientation in the normal Watson–Crick pair.27,37
O
Cyclohexyl
Complex (base pair) (5-5)
O
or organic solvents. Molecules of these substances
N O H N prefer neither type of solvent but adhere tightly to
each other in solid crystals. Both experimental mea-
N N surements and theoretical computations41 suggest that
N H O hydrogen bonding is the predominant force in the
G4 N U69 pairing of bases in a vacuum or in nonpolar solvents.
However, in water stacking becomes important.42 In a
N H
fully extended polynucleotide chain consecutive bases
H
are 0.7 nm apart, twice the van der Waals thickness of
A“wobble” base pair a pyrimidine or purine ring, but in double-helical DNA
of the B type (Figs. 5-3, 5-12) the distance between con-
Strengths of base pairs. How strong are the secutive base pairs is only 0.34 nm. They are touching.
bonds between pairs of bases in DNA? The question One effect of stacking is a decrease in the expected
is hard to answer because of the strong interaction of intensity of light absorption. The molar extinction co-
the molecules with polar solvents through hydrogen efficient of a solution of double-helical DNA or RNA
bonding and hydrophobic effects. Some insight has is always less by up to 20–30% than that predicted
come from studies of the association of bases in non- from the spectra of the individual nucleosides (Fig. 5-5).
polar solvents. Thus, 1-cyclohexyluracil forms a dimer Thishypochromic effect is considered further in
involving either hydrogen bonding or stacking, but Chapter 23.
the association is weak with the Gibbs energy of for- Because both hydrogen bonding and stacking
mation∆G° = 5 kJ mol–1. When the same compound are involved, the thermodynamics of base pairing in
f
was mixed with 9-ethyladenine, a base-paired complex nucleic acids is complicated.43 The hydrophobic parts
formed between the two compounds with a formation of exposed bases tend to induce an ordering of the sur-
constant over ten-fold greater than that for the dimer rounding water molecules and therefore a decrease in
(Eq. 5-5).40 When the circled hydrogen atom in Eq. 5-5 their entropy. However, hydrogen bonding of the polar
was replaced by –CH , which blocked the pairing, K groups of the bases to the solvent causes a decrease in
3 f
fell below 1 kJ/mol (∆G° > 0). The difference in ∆G in water structure. This is greater than the increase in
f
the two cases was only 7 kJ mol–1. Many other estimates structure around the hydrophobic regions and the
have been made.40a,40b The small energies summed stacking of bases leads to a net decrease in entropy.
over the many base pairs present in the DNA molecule The entropy change ∆S for addition of a base pair to
help provide stability to the structure. the end of a double-stranded RNA helix in a hairpin
loop such as that displayed in Fig. 5-9 ranges from
Stacking of bases. The purines and pyrimidines –0.05 to –0.15 kJ/degree per base pair.44,45
of nucleic acids, as well as many other compounds The enthalpy change ∆H tends to be small and
with flat ring structures and containing both polar and positive for association of alkyl groups in water and
nonpolar regions, are sparingly soluble in either water nearly zero for association of aromatic hydrocarbons

--- Page 213 ---

210 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
(Chapter 2). However, ∆H is distinctly negative for to∆G°. The exact amount depends upon whether an A
f
association of heterocyclic bases. This has also been or a U is at the 5' end in the existing helix. If an AU pair
attributed to a decrease in the ordering of solvent is added to the helix terminating in CG or GC, about
around the bases as a result of exclusion of water. –9 kJ/mol is added. Larger increases in –∆G° result
f
Attraction or repulsion of partial charges on the polar from addition of GC pairs, which contain three hydrogen
groups comprising the purine and pyrimidine bases bonds between the bases versus the two in AU pairs.27,41,52
may also be an important factor.43,46–48 For addition UG pairs provide a very small amount of stabiliza-
of a base pair to an RNA helix, the change in enthalpy, tion to an RNA double helix, while the presence of
∆H, varies from about –24 to –60 kJ/mol.44,45 unpaired bases has a destabilizing effect. The most stable
Since∆G = ∆H–T∆S,the net result is a negative hairpin loops contain four or five bases. Depending upon
value of ∆G, a“hydrophobic effect” that favors asso- whether the loop is “closed” by CG or AU, the helix is
ciation of bases. Substantial efforts have been made to destabilized by 20–30 kJ/mol. “Bulge loops,” which pro-
estimatequantitatively the Gibbs energies of formation trude from one side of a helix, have a smaller destabiliz-
of helical regions of RNA molecules in hairpin stem- ing effect. An example of the way in which Table 5-2 can
loops such as that of Fig. 5-9.44,45,49–51 Table 5-2 shows be used to estimate the energies of formation of a loop in
the observed increments in ∆G° of such a helix upon a straight-chain RNA is illustrated in Fig. 5-9. Similar
f
addition of onebase pair at the end of an existing analysis of base pairing in DNA can also be done.53–55
helix. Addition of an AU pair supplies only –4 to –5 kJ
A
A C TABLE 5-2
H l a o i o rp p in U U +25 kJ mol–1 Gibbs Energies of Formation (cid:2)G f ° at 25°C for Addition of One
U A Base Pair to an Existing RNA Helixa,b
–7.5
A U
–5.0 Base pair at end Base pair ∆G° ∆G°
A U f f
–9 of existing helix added (kcal mol–1±10%) (kJ mol–1±10%)
G C
–21
G C A A
–9 · · –1.2 –5.0
U A
Bulge A –5.0 + 12 U U
loop U A
–7.5 Uc A
A U · · –1.8 –7.5
–5.0
A U A U
–5.0
A U
C Gd A
U U · or · · –2.2 –9
+ 8 G C U
U C
C G C G
A U C –9 + 13 · · –3.2 –13
–7.5 G C
U A
–9
G C G C G
–13 · · or · –5.0 –21
C G C G C
–9
U A
–5.0 G U
U A · · –0.3 –1
–9 U G
G C
Internal
loop C U + 8 Hairpin loops of 4 or 5 bases
G C Closed by GC +5 +21
–21
G C Closed by AU +7 +29
0 Bulge loops
U G
1 base +3 +12
5' 3'
4–7 bases +5 +21
Σ = –91 kJ mol–1
a Table modified from that of Tinoco et. al.58
Figure 5-9 The contribution of base- b All base pairs in the table are oriented as follows: 5'—A→3'
·
paired regions and loops to the Gibbs en- 3'←U—5'
ergy of a possible secondary structure for c ∆G° is the same for U added to an A end.
a 55 base fragment from R17 virus. The f · ·
A U
stem-loop structure shown here is part of
a larger one considered by Tinoco et al.58 d ∆G° is the same for C or G added to an A end.
f · · ·
G C U

--- Page 214 ---

A. Structure and Chemistry of Nucleotides 211
Tautomerism and base pairing. Tautomerism photochemical transfer of one proton a second is trans-
has an interesting relationship to the formation of the ferred within a few picoseconds.
pairs and triplets of hydrogen bonds in DNA or RNA.
Each base exists predominately as one preferred
6. Conformations of Nucleotides
H
The furanose ring of ribose or deoxyribose is flexible
H H
N and can be interconverted smoothly among an infinite
N
number of envelope (E) and skew or twist (T) confor-
H
N
N N mations. See Chapter 4, Section A,2. However, there
N are limits set by steric and anomeric effects.27,62–64
N Conformations are often described as in Fig. 5-10 by
N
N N H stating which atom in an envelope conformation lies
H
mostly out of the plane of the other four atoms. If this
A B (5-6)
atom lies above the ring, i.e., toward the base, the ring
tautomer, but at any moment a very
small fraction is present as less stable
tautomers. Watson and Crick sug- A C5' C5' B C5' B
B
gested that this fact may be respon- 2' B 3' 2' C5' 3'
sible for the occurrence of some
3' 2' 3' 2'
mutations.56,57 Thus, tautomer B of 04' 04' 04' 04'
Eq. 5-6 would not be able to pair with 2E 2E 2E 2E
thymine, its proper pairing partner, C(2’)-endo C(3’)-endo C(3’)-exo C(2’)-exo
but could pair with cytosine. Envelope conformations
Similarly, tautomer B of uracil
in Eq. 2-4 could pair with guanine C5' B
instead of its proper partner adenine. C5' 2' B C5' 3' B B C5'
If a similar event occurred to an AT
3' 2'
pair during gene replication an in- 2T 3 * 3T 2 Superimposed silhouettes
correct copy of the gene, differing C(2’)-endo-C(3’)-exo C(2’) exo-C(3’)endo
in a single “code letter,” would be Twist conformations
formed. However, because the tau- *This may be designated 2 3T if twist is symmetric
tomerism is affected so strongly by
the environment (Chapter 2), the ex- B syn sp C anti
tent to which it may cause mispairing 0° 0°
while replication enzymes act is un-
certain.59 Both bases in a pair could sc -sc
be tautomerized by synchronous 60° 4' χ 04' 60° 4' 04'
-60° -60°
t
h
r
r
e
y
a
t
d
i
n
c
r
s
a
o
f
l
e
g
c
r
e
a
o
n
lc
f
b
u
p
o
l
r
a
n
o
t
d
t
io
o
s
n
n
.
s
s
H
p
in
o
r
w
e
t
d
w
e
i
v
o
ct
e
p
r
a
,
a
t
h
r
h
a
ig
e
ll
o
h
e
-
l
h
s
ig
y
h
n
3'
2'
C 4 Purine
3'
2'
Pyrim
id
ine
C
χ h
an
ig
ti
h
energy barrier to this process.60 2
Proton transfer, which can also be 120° -120° 120° 0 -120°
ac -ac
induced by light, has been studied
on a femtosecond scale.61 After
180° 180°
ap
D P i
α(ω)
Figure 5-10 Conformational properties of nucleosides. (A) Representations of O
β(φ)
d
se
o
v
w
er
n
a
t
l
h
c
e
o n
N
fo
–
r
C
m
a
a
x
ti
i
o
s
n
jo
s
i
o
n
f
i n
a
g
r i
a
b o
p
s
u
e
r
o
in
r
e
d
b
eo
a
x
se
y r
t
i
o
b o
th
se
e
r
s
i
u
n
g
g
a
i
r
n
i n
a
a
n u
n
c
u
l
c
e
l
o
e
s
o
i
s
d
i
e
d
.
e
(
i
B
n
)
a
V
s
i
y
e
n
w H
2
C5' χ Base
O
conformation. The atom marked C4 is in the six-membered ring, which protrudes γ(ψ) 4'
further over the sugar ring. The angle χ is measured from 0° to ±180°. Syn confor- δ(ψ') 3' 2' 1'
mations are those for which χ falls in the region of the heavy semicircle. (C) An ε(φ') Direction
of chain
anti conformation of a pyrimidine nucleoside. Other anti conformations fall in the O
5' to 3'
region of the heavy semicircle. (D) Labeling of the conformational angles of the
main chain in a polynucleotide.25,27,37,37a See also Fig. 2-2.
ζ(ω')
P i+1

--- Page 215 ---

212 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
conformation is known as endo; when below the ring, ring to restore the original conformation. P is taken as 0°
it is known as exo. The C(2')-endo (2E) and C(3')-endo for the symmetric 3T twist, –18° for E , +18° for 3E, +54°
2 2
(3E) conformations are most commonly approximated
in nucleotides and nucleic acids.65 The C(3')-exo con-
formation is designated E 3 , the twist conformation RO CH 2 ν 4 O ν 0 Base
C(2')-endo-C(3')-exo as 2T , etc. A conformation can be
specified more precisely 3 by the five torsion angles ν 0 to ν 4 H ν H ν 1 H
(which have also been designated τ 0 to τ 4 ). All of the 3 ν OH
envelope and twist conformers can be interconverted 2
O
readily. The interconversions can be imagined to occur R'
in a systematic way by pseudorotation, a rotation of
the pucker around the sugar ring. In a commonly used for4E, +198° for E , etc. The five torsion angles ν, for j
3 j
convention a pseudorotation phase angle P ranges from = 0 – 4 as defined in the foregoing diagram, are related
0° to 360° as the pucker moves twice around the ribose toP as follows:
ν j = ν max . cos[P + j . φ] (5-7)
A Pyrimidine nucleosides where φ = 720°/5 = 144°. The maxi-
NH2 NH2 mum torsion angle, ν
max
, is about
40°. See Saenger27 for details.
N N
Conformational alterations of
ribose and deoxyribose rings can
O N N O
occur within polynucleotides and
HOCH2 O HOCH2 O are of biochemical importance. An
interesting consequence of changes
in ring conformation is that the dis-
OH OH OH OH tance between the C(5') and N atoms
syn anti
attached to the sugar ring of a nucleo-
B Purine nucleosides side may vary by as much as 0.05
nm (see Fig. 5-10A). The orientation
NH2 NH2 of a base with respect to the sugar is
N N specified by the angle χ. In one con-
N N
vention (Fig. 5-10B,C) its zero value
N N N N is taken as that in which the N(1)–C(2)
HOCH2 O HOCH2 O bond of a pyrimidine or the N(9)–C(4)
bond of a purine is cis to the C(1')–
O(4') bond, [sometimes called the
OH OH OH OH C(1')–O(1') bond]. However, other
syn anti definitions have been used.27 Typi-
cal values of χ for nucleotides and
C Ball and stick models of purine nucleosides nucleosides vary between –75° and
–165°. In these anti conformations
the CO and NH groups in the 2 and
3 positions of the pyrimidine ring
(or in positions 1, 2, and 6 of the
purine ring) are away from the sugar
ring, while in the syn conformations
they lie over the ring. Anti confor-
syn anti mations are more often present than
syn in nucleic acids. A different
view of syn and anti pairs of nucle-
otides is shown in Fig. 5-11.
syn anti
An additional five torsion angles
are needed to specify the backbone
conformation of a polynucleotide.
According to the convention adopted
Figure 5-11 Views of a nucleoside in syn and anti conformations.66
(C) Courtesy of Dr. Muttaiya Sundaralingam. by the IUB the six angles are desig-

--- Page 216 ---

B. Double Helices 213
natedα,β,γ,δ,ε, and ζ, as is indicated in Fig. 5-10D.25,27 attraction between the flat bases which stack together;
In an older but much used convention,66 starting at (3) the fact that on the outside of the molecule are many
any phosphorus atom the angles ω,φ, and ψ specify oxygen atoms, some negatively charged, which are
the next three torsion angles as one moves toward the able to form strong hydrogen bonds with water, with
3' end of the chain, while ω’,φ’, and ψ’ specify the angles small ions, or with proteins that surround the DNA;
lying toward the 5' end (these are shown in parentheses and (4) the ability to form superhelices (see Section
in Fig. 5-10D). Notice that δ(ψ’) = ν + 120°. C,3). Nevertheless, the long DNA chains present in
3
our chromosomes are frequently broken and an elabo-
rate system of repair enzymes is needed to preserve
B. Double Helices the reliability of this master code for the cell.73,74
Today it is generally accepted that most DNA
exists in nature as a double helix resembling the B
1. The B Form of DNA form. However, doubts were expressed as recently as
1980. The reason for the uncertainty lay in the fact that
This form of DNA, whose structure is depicted in X-ray data from the stretched “paracrystalline” DNA
Figs. 5-3 and 5-12, is stable at high humidity and is fibers used in earlier studies are much less precise than
thought to approximate that of most DNA in cells.27,37,67 those from true crystals.10 The X-ray data for B-DNA
If we look directly at the axis of the double helix and fibers could also be interpreted in terms of an alterna-
perpendicular to one of the base pairs, and ignore the tive“side-by-side” structure which would permit
fact that the base pair is asymmetric, we see that the easier separation of strands during replication.75
nucleotide unit in one chain is related to the nucleotide However, numerous high-resolution X-ray structure
unit lying across from it in the opposite plane by a two- determinations on single crystals of synthetic DNA
fold axis of rotation (dyad axis). This symmetry ele- fragments have confirmed the double-helical structure
ment, which arises from the antiparallel arrangement and the presence of Watson–Crick base pairs.68,69,76– 84
of the chains, makes the DNA molecules from the out- Similarly, fragments related to the double helices of
side look nearly identical whether viewed from one RNA have been crystallized and the structures deter-
end or the other – and whether viewed as a model by mined to atomic resolution.85– 87 The right-handed
the human eye or through contact with an enzyme helical structure of DNA in solution has also been
which might act on the molecule. Actually, the two confirmed by independent methods based on electron
chains are not identical, and the genetic information can microscopy,88 scanning probe microscopy,89,90 fluores-
be read off from the functional groups exposed in two cence resonance energy transfer,91 and computation.92
grooves in the surface of the helix (Figs. 5-3 and 5-7). Dickerson and associates discovered78,79 that
The broader groove in the Β form, which is referred to B-DNA has a “spine” of water in the minor groove
as the major groove, is about 0.85 nm deep and 1.1–1.2 of regions rich in A-T base pairs. Two water molecules
nm wide when allowance is made for the van der Waals per base pair are hydrogen bonded to form a long
radii of the atoms. In some other forms of DNA the chain. Half of the water molecules in the chain also
major groove is narrow, but it can always be identified form hydrogen bonds to oxygen and nitrogen atoms
by the larger of the arcs that can be drawn between the that are exposed in the minor groove while the others
two N– C bonds of the nucleosidic linkages in a nucleo- hydrogen-bond to a second chain of water molecules,
tide pair. The minor groove or narrow groove, which forming a ribbon of hydration (Fig. 5-14A).81,93-95
is defined by the smaller arc between the two N– C Additional water binds to polar groups in the major
bonds, is ~ 0.75 nm deep and 0.6 nm wide in B-DNA. groove. The hydration pattern is largely local, i.e.,
The diameter of the double helix of B-DNA, mea- each base has characteristic hydration sites (Fig. 5-
sured between phosphorus atoms, is just 2.0 nm. The 14B).94 Some of the hydration sites may be occupied
rise per turn, the pitch, is 3.4 nm. There are about partially by the nomovalent ions, Na+ or K+, depend-
ten base pairs per turn (9.7 and 10.6 in two different ing upon the medium. Bound divalent metal ions
crystal forms).68,69 Thus, the rise per base pair is 0.34 are also sometimes seen in X-ray structures.81,83a
nm, just the van der Waals thickness of an aromatic However, most cations are thought to remain mobile.
ring (Table 2-1). It is clear that the bases are stacked in
the center of the helix. A 1000-bp (1-kb) gene would be
a segment of DNA rod about 340 nm long, about 1/40 2. Other Double-Helical Forms of DNA
the length of the molecule in the electron micrograph
of Fig. 5-13. The B form of fibrous DNA is stable under condi-
As is appropriate for the cell’s master blueprint, tions of high (~ 93%) humidity but at 75% humidity it
DNA in the double helix is stable. Factors contributing is converted into A-DNA in which the base pairs are
to this stability are (1) the pairs and triplets of hydrogen inclined to the helix axis by about 13° and in which the
bonds between the bases; (2) the van der Waals ribose rings are primarily C3'-endo rather than C2'-endo.

--- Page 217 ---

214 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
B-form
A-form
Z-form
Figure 5-12 (Left) Stereoscopic skeleton models of the B, A, and Z forms of double helical DNA. See Schlick.70
(Center) End views (Right) Space-filling models of the same three DNA forms: B, A, and Z. Courtesy of Tamar Schlick.

--- Page 218 ---

B. Double Helices 215
There are 10.9 base pairs per turn93,96– 98 (Fig 5-12; Table
5-3). In the A form the major groove is very deep (~ 1.35
nm) and narrower (~ 0.27 nm) than in the B form and
extensively hydrated.99 The minor groove is wider
(~ 1.1 nm) and shallower (~ 0.28 nm) than in the B form.
The crystal structure for a form intermediate between
A and B has also been reported.99a Paracrystalline
forms of DNA known as B’, C, and D have also been
observed100,101 and others have been proposed.102,103
The most interesting additional form, Z-DNA, was
discovered by X-ray studies of the alternating oligodeoxy-
ribonucleotides d(CpGp-CpGpCpG) and d(CpGpCpG).104
The helix of Z-DNA is left-handed.71,72,105–112 The repeat-
ing unit consists of two Watson–Crick base pairs, the
backbone following a zigzag pattern (Fig. 5-12). There
are 12 base pairs per turn. The cytosine groups have
the usual anti conformation but the guanosine groups
are syn. Some of the ribose rings have the C2'-endo
conformation characteristic of B-DNA but some are Figure 5-13 Electron micrograph of a DNA molecule (from
C3'-endo. The alternating CpG sequence is not essen- a bacterial virus bacteriophage T7) undergoing replication.
tial for Z-DNA formation. However, alternating syn The viral DNA is a long (~ 14 µm) duplex rod containing
about 40,000 base pairs. In this view of a replicating molecule
andanticonformations are important and purines
an internal “eye” in which DNA has been duplicated is present.
assume the syn conformation more readily than do
The DNA synthesis was initiated at a special site (origin) about
pyrimidines. The major groove of Z-DNA is shallow
17% of the total length from one end of the duplex. The DNA
(Fig. 5-12), allowing it to accomodate bulky substituents
was stained with uranyl acetate and viewed by dark field
at C8 of purines or C5 of pyrimidines. Such substituents electron microscopy. Micrograph courtesy J. Wolfson and
favor Z-DNA. D. Dressler.
Figure 5-14 (A) Stereoscopic drawing
A
showing two layers of water molecules that
form a “spine” or “ribbon” of hydration in
the minor groove of B-DNA. The inner
layer is shown as larger filled circles; water
molecules of the outer layer are depicted
with smaller dots and are numbered.
Hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed
lines. (B) Electron density map. (A) and
(B) from Tereshko et al.95 (C) Stereoscopic
representation of the superimposed electron
densities of 101 water molecules observed
to hydrate 14 guanine rings found in 14
B-DNA molecules for which high-resolution
X-ray structures were available. Positions
of 101 water molecules within 0.34 nm from
any atom of the 42 guanines are plotted.
From Schneider and Berman.94
B
C

--- Page 219 ---

216 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
The B form is the most hydrated and most stable occur in nature. Antibodies have been prepared which
form of DNA under conditions of high humidity but bind specifically to regions of DNA in the Z form and
even in solution it can be converted to A-DNA and have been used to identify many such regions.111,120
Z-DNA by a high concentration of NaCl.113 This is Genetic studies in E. coli have also provided strong
presumably because the salt dehydrates the DNA. evidence that left-handed DNA sequences are formed
Saenger and coworkers pointed out that the oxygen in vivo in that bacterium.121,122 Z-DNA-forming
atoms of successive phosphate groups in the polynu- sequences have also been found in the Halobacterium
cleotide backbone of B-DNA are at least 0.66 nm apart, genome.119 Segments of Z-DNA may occur in control
too far apart to be bridged by a water molecule.114 regions called enhancers (Chapter 28)121– 124 and Z-DNA
However, the phosphates are individually hydrated. may also form behind RNA polymerase molecules that
On the other hand, in A-DNA and Z-DNA the oxygen are moving along a gene while synthesizing mRNA.
atoms on successive phosphates are as close as 0.53 and The associated negative supercoiling of the DNA could
0.44 nm, respectively. This allows one H O molecule cause it to assume the Z form. This region of Z-DNA
2
to bridge between two phosphates, stabilizing these can, in turn, be a site for interaction with specific
forms in environments of low humidity. This may be proteins.
one factor that affects the B to A and Z transitions.115–117 In the Watson–Crick structure the two strands are
In the narrow Z-DNA helix repulsion between negative antiparallel, an essential for replication. However, stable
charges on the phospho groups of opposite strands is segments of double-stranded DNA with parallel strands
strong. By shielding these charges high salt concentra- can also be formed and may occur in specialized regions
tions also help to stabilize Z-DNA. of the genome.125– 128
Since the Z form of DNA is favored in regions rich
in G-C pairs,118,119 it is reasonable to expect that it may
3. The Conformational Flexibility of
Double Helices
TABLE 5-3
Helix Parameters for Three Types of DNAa Local variations in the sequence of
nucleotides affect the conformation of a DNA
molecule and it is clear that the helix
Form of DNA or RNA (A-form)
is not uniformly coiled throughout the entire
Parameter B A Z length.80,103,124,129–134 While most helix seg-
ments probably have a right-handed twist
Helical twist, others may be left-handed. Most DNA is
degrees 28–42 16–44 GC – 51 ± 2
probably in the B form but there are segments
mean 36 ± 4 33 ± 6 CG – 8.5 ± 1
in the A form. These may arise from formation
of hybrid duplexes with RNA, which assume
Base pairs per turn 10.0 11-12 12
the A conformation and are also favored by
(9.7–10.6)
certain base sequences. Rules for predicting
Helix rise per the DNA conformation from the nucleotide
base pair, nm 0.34 ± .04 0.29 ± .04 GC 0.35 ± .02 sequence have been proposed.116,135 In the
CG 0.41 ± .02 simplest case135 we consider each pair of
adjacent nucleotides in the double helix.
Base inclination, degrees – 2.0 ± 5 13 ± 2 8.8 ± .7
There are 16 possible pairs in one chain. These
can be designated as in the following examples:
Propeller twist, degrees 12 ± 5 15 ± 6 4.4 ± 3
(AA,TT), (CG,CG), and (AG,CT). The first
two letters within the parentheses represent
Base roll degrees – 1.0 ± 5 6 ± 5 3.4 ± 2
the sequence (from 5' to 3') in one chain while
Predominant the second pair of letters represent the sequence
conformation of C C2’-endo (again from 5' to 3') in the complementary
deoxyribose C2’-endo C3’-endo G C3’-endo chain. The rules state that (AA,TT) or (TT,AA)
repeated in a sequence will stabilize the B form
Depth of grooves (nm)
of DNA. Repetition of (CC,GG) or (GG,CC)
Major 0.85 1.35 very shallow
will favor conversion to the A form. Repeti-
Minor ~0.75 ~0.28 very deep
tions of (CG,CG) favor the Z form, especially
if an alternating sequence of purines and
Width of grooves (nm)
Major 1.1–1.2 0.27 broad pyrimidines is present throughout the (G + C)-
Minor 0.6 ~1.1 narrow rich region.
Even within the regular B structure the
a See R. E. Dickerson78,78a; based on single-crystal X-ray analysis.

--- Page 220 ---

B. Double Helices 217
torsion angles χ and δ (Fig. 5-10) are variable. Their of the twist for B-DNA is 36°, values of 28 – 42° have
changes are highly correlated.136,136a As χ ranges from been observed in structures of oligonucleotides deter-
– 140° to – 90°,ζ varies between 80° and 160°. Other pairs mined by X-ray analysis. The base tilt, which is nearly
of torsion angles are also correlated. Besides allowing zero for B-DNA, is less variable. Within each base pair
for changes between B, A, and Z conformations, this there is also a propeller twist around the long axis.146
flexibility of the DNA helix together with cooperativity It averages about 12° for B-DNA. In addition, the
with adjacent base pairs may allow transmission of whole base pair may roll, i.e., be rotated around its
conformational effects for some distances along a long axis by several degrees. These motions relieve
DNA helix.137,138 Supercoiling, discussed in Section steric interferences in the center of the helix, for example,
C,3, also affects the helical conformation. those that would arise between purines in adjacent
DNA can be stretched into yet another form or base pairs if the same helix parameters were imposed
forms. Application of a force of 65 – 70 piconewtons on each base pair.142,147 A more detailed analysis reveals
(pN) stretches B-DNA by 70%. This “overstretched the large range of motions, mostly small, which are
DNA” may also be important biologically.130,139– 141a described in Fig. 5-15.145,148 The mathematics needed
to deal with computer-based modeling of polynucleo-
Rotational and translational movements of tide structures has been developed.80,149,150 Its applica-
bases. In considering the conformational flexibility of tion showed that there is a strong correlation between
a polynucleotide it is useful to define the parameters twist and roll. Typical average values of base tilt, pro-
associated with movement of base pairs or individual peller twist, and roll are given in Table 5-3 for B-, A-,
bases. The possible movements are indicated in Fig. and Z-DNA.
5-15 and in Table 5-3. A longaxis is established for
each base pair in a structure for which X-ray data are Bends and bulges. If we overlook the ridges and
available. Making use of these axes, we can move grooves on their surfaces the DNA structures shown in
along the helix and measure the angle of twist from Figs. 5-3 and 5-12 are straight rods. However, real DNA
one base pair to the next.142– 145 While the mean value rods are crooked and may contain distinct bends. The
A Rotation B Translation
+z +z
3' +x 3' +x
+y +y
I 5' I 5'
5' II 5' II
Minor 3' Minor 3'
groove groove
Coordinate frame Tip (θ) Inclination (η) Coordinate frame y displacement (dy) x displacement (dx)
Opening (σ) Propeller twist (ω) Buckle (κ) Stagger (Sz) Stretch (Sy) Shear (Sx)
Twist (Ω) Roll (ρ) Tilt (τ) Rise (Dz) Slide (Dy) Shift (Dx)
Figure 5-15 (A) Drawing illustrating various rotational movements of bases in polynucleotides. Upper two rows: rotations of
two bases of a pair. Lower row: rotations involving two successive base pairs. (B) Translational movements. Upper two rows:
involving two bases of a pair. Lower row: two successive base pairs. From Diekmann.145

--- Page 221 ---

218 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
existence of bent DNA in nature was first discovered Mg2+. They are attracted to the negative charges on
from study of fragments enzymatically cut from kine- the polynucleotide backbone and, although they remain
toplast DNA of tropical parasites.151,152 The bent frag- mobile, they tend to occupy a restricted volume.175– 177
ments moved anomolously slowly during electrophor- Some may bind in well-defined locations as in Fig. 5-8.
esis in polyacrylamide gels of small pore size. Evidently, Because of the presence of these positive ions the inter-
the bent shape impedes movement through the pores. actions of nucleic acids with cationic groups of proteins
Since the initial discovery, regions of bent DNA have are strongly affected by the salt concentration.
been found in origins of replication152– 154 and other Organic cations compete with the simple counteri-
specialized sites. Bending of DNA because of local ons K+and Mg2+. Among these, the polyamines are
sequence variations may also be important to the predominant.178 Crystal structures have revealed that
positioning of nucleosomes (Fig. 27-3) on DNA.155 spermine binds across the deep grooves of tRNA and
Several causes for DNA bending have been identi- the major groove of B-DNA. Spermine also binds into
fied.124,138,142,156– 164 For example, a sharp 26° bend is the deep groove of A-DNA interacting by hydrogen
expected at the junction between B- and A-DNA bonding with bases in GTG sequence in both strands.179
segments.158 The presence of a thymine photodimer It binds tightly to CG-rich sequences in the minor groove
(Eq. 23-26) may cause a 30° bend.165 Some naturally of Z-DNA, where it tightens the structure and shortens
occurring bent DNAs contain repeated (A+T)-rich the helix.110 At higher concentrations of DNA, as occur
sequences. This suggested that the sequence (AA,TT), in cell nuclei, spermidine induces the conversion of the
containing adjacent thymine methyl groups, can be DNA into liquid crystalline phases.180
thought of as a wedge, consisting of both roll and tilt Heavier metal ions and metal complexes can find
components. Such a wedge repeated at intervals aver- sites on nitrogen atoms of the nucleic acid bases. Exam-
aging 10.5 bp along the helix might cause the helix to ples are the platinum complex cisplatin and the DNA-
bend.129,144 However, computer modeling experiments cleaving antibiotic neocarzinostatin (Box 5-B). Can
suggest that thymine methyl groups do not distort the metals interact with the π electrons of stacked DNA
DNA helix. The bending may be a result of the greater bases? A surprising result has been reported for inter-
tendency for AT pairs to roll and to enhance the van der calating complexes of ruthenium (Ru) and rhodium
Waals and electrostatic attractions between the 2'-O (Rh). Apparent transfer of electrons between Ru (II) and
of cytosine and the 2'-NH of guanine in the CG base Rh (III) over distances in excess of 4.0 nm, presumably
2
pairs of bent DNA.157,166 Bending can occur in both through the stacked bases, has been observed,181 as
(A+T)- and (G+C)-rich regions and is often induced has electron transfer from other ions.181a Stacked bases
by binding to proteins or protein complexes that act are apparently semiconductors.182
in replication, transcription, and recombination.167
Various errors are made during replication or
recombination of DNA. Incorporation of an incorrect C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic
nucleotide will cause a mismatched base pair in which Acids
proper hydrogen bonds cannot be formed. Most of the
mispaired bases that result from mistakes in replication
are removed by repair processes (Chapter 27). Those 1. Rings, Catenanes, and Knots
that remain can often assume alternative pairings that
distort the helix only slightly. For example, a G-T wobble While a DNA molecule may exist as a straight rod,
pair fits readily into an oligodeoxyribonucleotide double the two ends are often covalently joined. Thus, the
helix. Even a bulky G-A base pair causes little pertur- chromosomes of E. coli and of other bacteria are single
bation of the helix.168 Incorporation of an extra nucleo- closed circles. Circular DNA molecules are also found
tide into one strand of the DNA will create a bulge in in mitochondria, chloroplasts, and many viruses. Fur-
the helix.169 NMR spectroscopic studies on bulged ther complexity arises from the fact that the circles of
oligonucleotides have shown that the extra base can DNA are sometimes interlocked in chainlike fashion
be stacked into the helix causing a sharp bend.170,171 (catenated). An unusual example of this phenomenon
However, some oligonucleotides with mismatched is the presence of thousands of small catenated DNA
bases crystallize as straight helices with the extra circles in the single mitochondrion of a trypanosome
nucleotide looped out.171– 173 Mismatched base pairs (Fig. 5-16).183 Sometimes circular DNA is knotted as
tend to destabilize helices.174 in Fig. 5-17.184– 186 Knots and catenanes often appear
as intermediate forms during replication and recombi-
Interactions with ions. Because each linking nation, especially involving circular DNA.187,188
phospho group carries a negative charge (two charges Methods have been devised for synthesis of even
per base pair, Fig. 5-2) the behavior of polynucleotides very complex DNA knots.185,186 Let’s look briefly at
is strongly affected by cations of all kinds. The pre- the topology of knots. The three simple knots shown
dominant small counterions within cells are K+ and here have a chirality beyond that of the nucleotide

--- Page 222 ---

C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic Acids 219
A
B
Figure 5-17 Electron micrograph of a six-noded knot made
C
by the Tn3 resolvase which is involved in movement of the
Tn3 transposon (Chapter 27) from one location to another
within the genome. Putative six-noded knot DNA was
isolated by electroelution from an agarose gel. The knots,
which are nicked in one strand, were denatured to allow the
nicked strand to slide away and leave a ssDNA knot. This was
1µm coated with E. coli recA protein (Fig. 27-24) to greatly thicken
the strand and to permit the sign of each node (designated in
the tracing) to be seen. From Wasserman et al.184
Figure 5-16 (A) Electron micrograph of the network of
catenated DNA circles in the mitochondrion of the trypano- The node is negative if the crossing is like that in a left-
someCrithidia fasciculata. (B) and (C) The same network handed supercoil and positive if like that in a right-
after treatment with a topoisomerase from bacteriophage handed supercoil:191,192
T4 that catalyzes a decatenation to form individual covalently
closed circles (Chapter 27). Five times as much enzyme was
added in (C) as in (B). Two sizes of circles are present. Most
are “minicircles”, each containing about 2300 bp but a smaller
number of larger ~ 35-kb “maxicircles” are also present. One
of these is marked by the arrow. From Marini, Miller, and
(–) Node (+) Node
Englund.183
2. Supercoiled DNA
units.189,190 This can be expressed by indicating the
sign of each node in the knot:
Double-stranded DNA in solutions of low salt
content usually assume the B-DNA conformation with
–
10.4–10.5 base pairs per turn. If the two ends are joined
the resulting covalently closed circular DNA will be
– – + +
–
“relaxed.” However, there are topoisomerases that act
+ +
– + on this form of DNA by cutting both strands, holding
Trefoil knot (–) Figure-8 knot Trefoil knot (+) the ends, and twisting the two chains (Chapter 27).

--- Page 223 ---

220 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
The energy source for the process is provided by For relaxed B-DNA, Lk is equal to the total number
cleavage of ATP. DNA gyrase untwists relaxed circular of base pairs in the circle divided by 10.5, Wr = 0, and
dsDNA one turn at a time and reseals the cut ends. A Tw = Lk. Both Lk and Tw are positive in the right-handed
reverse gyrase from certain bacteria twists the relaxed B- and A-DNA forms, but Tw is negative for Z-DNA.
DNA more tightly. In both cases the change causes the In closed circular DNA the value of Wr is usually nega-
DNA to form superhelicalturns.67,193– 197 These may tive, the secondary structure being a fully formed
be either solenoidal or plectonemically interwound Watson–Crick helix but with right-handed interwound
(as a twisted thread; Fig. 5-18). superhelical turns or left-handed toroidal superhelical
The geometric and topological properties of turns. The helix is said to be underwound (Lk < Tw).
closed supercoiled DNA molecues may be described Some of the topological properties of double-
by three quantities: The linking number (Lk also stranded DNA can be demonstrated by twisting together
called the winding number, α), the twist(Tw), and the two pieces of flexible rubber tubing whose ends can
writhe (Wr). If a segment of double helical DNA were be joined with short rods to form a closed circle.196
laid on a flat surface and the ends were joined to form Twist the tubing in a right-handed fashion as tightly as
a relaxed circle both Lk and Tw would equal the number possible without causing supercoiling (Lk = Tw;Wr = 0).
of helical turns in the DNA. The writhe Wr would be If the ends are now joined the circle will be relaxed.
zero. The linking number is a topological property. It Now twist one turn tighter before joining the ends. A
has an integral value which is unchanged if the DNA right-handed toroidal supercoil will be formed (∆Wr = 1;
molecule is distorted. It can be changed only for DNA ∆Lk = 1 + Tw;Tw is the same as before). If twisting is
with open ends. When the ends are joined the linking continued until several supercoils appear before the
(winding) number is constant unless one or both ends are joined, two interconvertible forms result. One
chains are cleaved. However, twist and writhe are form has right-handed toroidal supercoils and the other
geometric properties, which can change according to left-handed interwound supercoils as in Fig. 5-19. If
Eq. 5-8 while the Lk remains constant. The twist is relaxed circular DNA is unwound by one turn by cutting
related to the number of helical turns while the writhe and resealing one chain, a single right-handed inter-
is related to the number of superhelical turns.27,67,198– 200 wound supercoil will be formed (∆Wr = – 1, Lk = Tw – 1).
On the other hand, if the two chains in a closed relaxed
Lk = Tw + Wr (5-8) helix are pried apart, as happens during intercalation
(Section 3), Lk must remain constant, Tw will decrease,
However, Tw and Wr do not usually have integral values. andWr will increase with appearance of left-handed
It is hard to define the relaxed state for a circular DNA. supercoiling.
For example, changing the ionic composition will alter
Tw and Wr according to equation 5-8. Both Lk and
Tw are taken as positive for a right-handed toroidal
(solenoidal) supercoil or a left-handed interwound twist.
A B
Toroidal
Plectonemically
Solenoidal Plectonemic interwound
Figure 5-18 Two forms of supercoiling of a DNA duplex: Figure 5-19 Topological equivalence of toroidal (solenoi-
(A) Solenoidal. (B) Plectonemically interwound. These are dal) and plectonemically interwound forms of a circular
both negatively supercoiled, as can be deduced from the DNA. These two forms have a constant value of the linking
arrows at the nodes, but the solenoid is left-handed and the numberLk (or α), the twist Tw, and writhing number Wr.
plectonemic form right-handed. From Wasserman and
Cozzarelli.187

--- Page 224 ---

C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic Acids 221
During replication of DNA (Chapter 27) pairing of proteins called histones around which an ~ 140 bp
some bases associated with the replication apparatus is length of DNA is coiled into two negative, left-handed
prevented. Upon release of the constraint the newly toroidal superhelical turns (Fig. 5-21).203,204 There is
replicated DNA forms base pairs and becomes super- some spacer DNA between nucleosomes. Otherwise a
coiled. nucleosome providing two superhelical turns per 200
SinceLk is constant in circularly closed DNA a bp would produce a superhelix density of – 0.1, twice
change of one turn of B-DNA (Tw = 1) into a turn of that observed. A detailed analysis of the geometric
Z-DNA (Tw = – 1) will cause the writhing number Wr properties of DNA wrapped around nucleosomes or
to change by – 2. Conversely, if the writhing number is other protein particles has been developed.199–199c
forced to change by – 2, a turn of Z-DNA may develop Nucleosome formation is thought to protect DNA and
somewhere in a suitable (G + C)-rich region of the DNA. to keep it in a more compact state than when it is fully
Some of the information about supercoiled DNA active and involved in transcription. Nucleosomes,
can be summarized as follows: discussed further in Chapter 27, are also important in
the regulation of transcription. Even though nucleo-
Relaxed circular DNA Lk = Tw,Wr = 0 somes as such are absent, bacterial DNA also has a
superhelix density of – 0.05, apparently a result of inter-
Underwound Lk < Tw;Wr is negative; right- action with other proteins such as the histonelike HU.205
circular DNA handed interwound supercoils or
Interaction with smaller molecules can also affect super-
left-handed toroidal supercoils may
coiling.206
be present. Alternatively Lk = Tw
The presence of naturally supercoiled DNA and a
and left-handed Z-DNA regions
variety of topoisomerases suggests that the control of
may appear.
DNA supercoiling is biologically important. In fact,
DNA with DNA is partially untwisted; Tw is
intercalated lowered; Wr is increased with
molecules decrease in number of negative
supercoils. As Tw approaches Lk
the DNA becomes relaxed.
Thesuperhelixdensity of a DNA molecule is often
expressed as σ = Wr/Tw≈ number of superhelical turns
per 10 bp.31,198,199a,199b,201 In most naturally occurring
circular DNA molecules σ is negative, a typical value
being– 0.05 (~ 5 negative superhelical turns per 1000
bp). The presence of superhelices in circular DNA
molecules can be recognized readily by its effect upon
the sedimentation constant of the DNA. Naturally
occurring supercoiled DNA from polyoma virus sedi-
ments rapidly but after nicking of one of the strands
of the double helix by brief exposure to a DNA-hydro-
lyzing enzyme the resulting relaxed form of the mole-
cule sediments more slowly. Supercoiling lowers the
viscosity of solutions of DNA and increases the electro-
phoretic mobility (Fig. 5-20) and may also be recognized
by electron microscopy. Figure 5-20 Electrophoresis of DNA from the SV40 virus
Naturally occurring or artificially prepared super- with varying numbers of superhelical turns. Molecules of
coiled DNA molecules can often be separated by elec- the native DNA (lane 1) move rapidly toward the anode as a
series of bands, each differing from its neighbors by one
trophoresis into about ten forms, each differing from
the other by one supercoiled turn and by ∆Lk = ± 1 superhelical turn. The average number of superhelical turns
is about 25. Incubation with a topoisomerase from human
(Fig. 5-20). The relative amounts of these topological
cells causes a stepwise removal of the superhelical turns by
isomers form an approximately Gaussian distribution.
a cutting and resealing of one DNA strand. The DNA incu-
The isomers apparently arise as a result of thermal bated with this enzyme at 0°C for periods of 1, 3, 6, 10, and
fluctuations in the degree of supercoiling at the time 30 min (lanes 2 – 6) is gradually converted to a form with an
that the circles were enzymatically closed.202 average of zero supercoils. For details see Keller.202,212
Why is DNA in cells supercoiled? One effect of Electrophoresis was carried out in an 0.5% agarose – 1.9%
supercoiling is to contract the very long, slender double polyacrylamide slab gel (17 x 18 x 0.3 cm). The bands of
DNA were visualized by staining with the fluorescent inter-
helices into more compact forms. In eukaryotic cells
calating dye ethidium bromide. Photograph courtesy of
much of the DNA exists in nucleosomes. Each bead-
Walter Keller.
like nucleosome consists of a core of eight subunits of

--- Page 225 ---

222 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
A B
Figure 5-21 Nucleosomes.
(A) Electron micrographs
of individual nucleosomes
reconstituted from 256-bp DNA
fragments and separated pro-
teins. From Hamiche et al.213
Courtesy of Ariel Prunell. (B)
Model of a nucleosome core.
The 1.75-turn (145-bp) DNA
superhelix winds around the
histone octomer which consists
of two subunits apiece of
histones H2A, H2B, H3, and
H4. In addition, two elongated
molecules of proteins HMG-14
13W 1C or HMG-17 are indicated (see
14W 12W 2C
C also Chapter 27). (C) Schematic
radial projection of the double-
helical DNA showing areas
protected from cleavage by
10W 4C 5C 6C 7C 8C hydroxyl radicals (see Fig. 5-50)
9C
by the bound proteins. The
shaded areas are those pro-
9W
8W 7W 6W 5W 4W 10C tected by HMGs. The zigzag
lines near the dyad axis indicate
9C H 1 the most prominent regions of
protection. (B) and (C) are
from Alfonso et al.214
2W 12C 1W 13C 14C
topoisomerases play essential roles in both replication cooperative processes that require that two DNA
of DNA and in transcription of genes. Supercoiling molecules interact with each other.218,219
requires energy and topoisomerases that induce super-
coiling must provide energy, e.g., by cleavage of ATP.
Conversely, supercoiled DNA can be a source of ener- 3. Intercalation
gy for biological processes. It has been estimated that
the∆H,∆S, and ∆G per mole for formation of a single Flat, aromatic, hydrophobic rings are often able
superhelical turn are 35.9 kJ, 68 J/ °K, and 14.6 kJ, to insert themselves between the base pairs of a DNA
respectively.207 A reduction in superhelix density is duplex. Such intercalation is observed for many anti-
accompanied by a decrease in Gibbs energy and can biotics, drugs, dyes, and environmental pollutants.
therefore be coupled to other processes that have Among them are proflavine, ethidium bromide, actino-
positive values of ∆G. An example is conversion of mycin (Box 28-A), hycanthone (Fig. 5-22), and dauno-
(G + C)-rich regions into the Z form of DNA, which is mycin (Fig. 5-23). Hycanthone, employed in the treat-
favored by negative supercoiling.207,208 Supercoiling ment of schistosomiasis, is one of the most widely used
affects binding of various proteins to DNA197,209,210 as drugs in the world. Since intercalating agents can be
well as intercalation (discussed in the next section) and mutagenic, such drugs are not without their hazards.
formation of cruciform structures (Section D,3). Intercalation is often used to estimate the amount
The folding of DNA into compact forms, such as of negative supercoiling of DNA molecules. Varying
that in chromosomes, is also influenced by supercoil- amounts of the intercalating agent are added, and the
ing. In the absence of nucleosomes supercoiled DNA sedimentation constant or other hydrodynamic prop-
may assume the plectonemic form (Figs. 5-18, 5-19). erty of the DNA is observed. As increasing intercala-
Segments of the resulting rods may aggregate side- tion occurs, the secondary turns of DNA are unwound
by-side in a liquid crystalline state.200,211 The relatively (the value of Tw in Eq. 5-8 decreases). Each intercalated
high cation concentration within cells favors this trans- ring causes an unwinding of the helix of ~ 26°. Since
formation.215–217 Polyamines such as spermidine are for a closed covalent duplex the value of Lk in Eq. 5-8
especially effective in promoting aggregation of DNA, is constant, the decrease in Tw caused by increased
in formation of Z-DNA,110 and possibly in facilitating intercalation leads to an increase in the value of Wr,

--- Page 226 ---

C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic Acids 223
which is usually negative for natu- O
O OH
ral DNA. When sufficient intercala-
tion has occurred to raise Wr to zero,
C
C
14
H3
H2N NH2
a minimum sedimentation rate is OH
observed. Addition of further inter- N+
calating agent causes a positive C2H5
O O OH O
supercoiling.
H3C
When the “replicative form” of
DNA of the virus φX174 (Chapter H3C O
Ethidium ion
27), a small circular molecule con- +
NH3
taining ~ 5000 bp, was treated with HO H3C CH3
proflavine,221 the binding of 0.06 mol Daunomycin (daunorubicin), an antitumor antibiotic
of proflavine per mole of nucleotides
reduced Wr to zero. From this it
H2N N+ NH2
was estimated that σ = 0.055, corre- + C2H5 H
sponding to – 27 superhelical turns O HN
(CH2)2 N H
Acridine yellow
at 25°, pH 6.8, ionic strength ~ 0.2.
C2H5
Changes in temperature, pH, and
ionic environment strongly influ-
ence supercoiling. In general σ
S H2N N+ NH2
becomes less negative by ~ 3.3 x 10– 4
per degree of temperature increase.222 CH2OH H
For example, the observed value221 Hycanthone, a widely used drug for schistosomiasis Proflavine
ofσ for φX174 DNA was – 0.059 at
15°C and – 0.040 (– 20 superhelical
turns) at 75°C at an ionic strength Figure 5-22 Structures of some substances that tend to “intercalate” into
DNA structures. See also Fig. 5-23.
of ~ 0.2.
The exact ways in which inter-
calating substances can fit between
the base pairs of nucleic acids are
being revealed by X-ray diffraction
studies of complexes with nucleo-
sides, dinucleotides, and other
oligonucleotides.220,223– 225 The
structure of a complex in which
daunomycin is intercalated between
two GC base pairs in DNA is shown
as in Fig. 5-23. Daunomycin and
other related anthracycline antibio-
tics also have an amino sugar ring
that binds into the minor groove of
the DNA, providing both electro-
static stabilization and hydrogen
bonding. Substituents on this ali-
phatic ring also hydrogen bond to
DNA bases.226
Does intercalation of flat mole-
Figure 5-23 Stereoscopic drawing showing a molecule of daunomycin
cules into nucleic acid chains have a
(Fig. 5-22) intercalated between two base pairs in a molecule of double-helical
biochemical function? Aromatic
DNA, d(CGTACG). Nitrogen and oxygen atoms are shown as dots. From
rings of amino acid side chains in Quigleyet al.220 Both daunomycin and adriamycin (doxorubicin; 14-hydroxy-
proteins designed to interact with daunomycin) are important but seriously toxic anticancer drugs.
nucleic acids may sometimes inter-
calate into nucleic acid helices serv-
ing a kind of “bookmark” function.227 Changes in
superhelix density caused by such intercalation may be
important in the orderly handling of DNA by enzymes
within cells.

--- Page 227 ---

224 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
BOX 5-B ANTITUMOR DNA DRUGS
Chemotherapy of cancer at present involves daunomycin (Figs. 5-22, 5-23), menogaril,htriostin
simultaneous use of two or more drugs. For exam- A,i and the antitrypanosomal drug berenil.j Some
ple, antifolates (Chapter 15) or nucleoside analogs of these are also alkylating agents that contain double
such as 5-fluorouridine may be used together with bonds to which such groups as the 2-NH of guanine
2
a drug that binds directly to DNA and inhibits the may add:
replication of cancer cells. In 1963, it was discov-
ered accidentally that platinum ions released from
supposedly inert platinum electrodes inhibited the
O
division of E. coli cells. This led Rosenberg and asso-
ciates to test platinum compounds against animal
N
cells.a Among many compounds tested cis-dichloro- HN Guanine
diammineplatinum(II) (cis-DDP or cisplatin) emerged in DNA
as an important anticancer drug that is especially H2N N N
effective against testicular and ovarian cancers.b– d
Thetrans isomer, however, is inactive.
H
N
H
HN Cl Cl NH
3 3
Pt Pt
HN Cl HN Cl N
3 3
R
cis-DDP trans-DDP
O
(Cisplatin) (inactive)
Tomaymycin and related antibioticsk
cis-DDP binds to adjacent deoxyguanosines within
one strand of ds or ssDNA. The stacking of adjacent Diol epoxides and cyclic imines such as mitomycin
bases is disrupted as the platinum binds to N-7 also form adducts specifically with guanine 2-NH
2
nitrogen atoms of the two guanine rings by replace- groups:l Neocarzinostatin is an antitumor protein
ment of the two chloride ions. The product has the with a nonprotein “chromophore.” After intercala-
following structure,c,e with the Pt lying in the minor tion and binding into the minor groove of bulged
groove of dsDNA: DNA, it undergoes “activation” by addition of a
thiol group. The enediyne structure undergoes
rearrangement with formation of a reactive diradical
that attacks the DNA.m A family of related antitumor
O
5’ enediynes has also been discovered.n
N N NH 2
N
H N N
3 O
O
Pt O
– O P H 3 N N O O
O O O N N O
N Ome
O
O
3’
The two guanines are no longer stacked, but the
Me O
structure is impossible for the trans isomer. The
cisplatin adducts appear to prevent proper DNA Enediyne
OH
repair and to induce programmed cell death
O
(apoptosis).f
MeHN
Since the 1950s, using a different approach, the
HO
U.S. National Cancer Institute, as well as agencies in
O
other countries, has sought to find natural anticancer
Me
compounds in plants, fungi, microorganisms, and HO
marine invertebrates.g Among these are many
Neocarzinostatin chromophore
antibiotics that intercalate into DNA helices, e.g.,

--- Page 228 ---

C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic Acids 225
BOX 5-B (continued)
O The antibiotic bleomycin, which also binds in
10a the minor groove of B-DNA with some specificity
NH2
for G-C Sites, forms an iron (II) complex. It can be
O 10
O
H2N
7
9
OMe
NH2
H NH2
O
H NH2
9a N
1 H O
6 N NH
H3C 2 N N H H CH3 H H O O
O HO N N
H2N O NH S R
O H
Mitomycin
CH3 HN
H
N
H
CH3
O
HO
H
CH3 N S
N
O
H6 H H6' HO OH O H N
O H
H5 N N H5' OH O OH
OH
N O
OH R =NH S+(CH3)2
H2N
H2 H2'
NH2
O NH2
Bleomycin A 2
+ +
H3 H3'
NH2 NH2 oxygenated to form an Fe(II)–O complex (see
Berenil 2
Chapter 16) which cleaves the DNA chain.s,t Syn-
thetic compounds that do the same thing have been
Another group of drugs occupy extended bind- made by connecting an EDTA–iron, or other iron
ing sites in the minor grooves of DNA double helices, chelate complex covalently to the DNA-binding
often with specificity for a particular base sequence. compound.n,u– x A goal is to direct drugs to selected
Examples are the antitrypanosomal drug berenil,j target sites in DNA and to induce bond cleavage at
toxicStreptomyces antibioticsnetropsin, distamycin, those sites in a manner analogous to that observed
and related synthetic compounds.o– q Netropsin lies with restriction endonucleases. Most current chemo-
within the minor groove in regions with two or therapeutic agents are very toxic. Present research
more consecutive AT pairs, displacing the spine of is designed to target these drugs more precisely to
hydration as shown in the following stereoscopic specific DNA sequences and to identify target se-
drawing. Binding depends upon both electrostatic quences peculiar to cancers. See also Designed
interactions and formation of specific hydrogen third strands in main text.
bonds involving the amide groups of the antibiotics.
+
H2N NH2
HN O
N
CH3
HN
O
N
H2N HN CH3
NH
+
H2N O
Netropsin
Netropsin lying in the minor groove of B-DNA
hydrogen-bonded to bases in the central ATAT
tetranucleotide. From Coll et al.r

--- Page 229 ---

226 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
BOX 5-B Continued
a Rosenberg, B., Van Camp, L., and Krigas, T. (1965) Nature mYang, C. F., Stassinopoulos, A., and Goldberg, I. H. (1995)
(London)205, 698–699 Biochemistry34, 2267–2275
b Zamble, D. B., and Lippard, S. J. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, n Nicolaou, K. C., Dai, W.-M., Tsay, S.-C., Estevez, V. A., and
435–439 Wrasidlo, W. (1992) Science256, 1172–1178
c Pilch, D. S., Dunham, S. U., Jamieson, E. R., Lippard, S. J., and o Goodsell, D. S., Ng, H. L., Kopka, M. L., Lown, J. W., and
Breslauer, K. J. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.296, 803–812 Dickerson, R. E. (1995) Biochemistry34, 16654–16661
d Temple, M. D., McFadyen, W. D., Holmes, R. J., Denny, W. A., p Rentzeperis, D., Marky, L. A., Dwyer, T. J., Geierstanger, B. H.,
and Murray, V. (2000) Biochemistry39, 5593–5599 Pelton, J. G., and Wemmer, D. E. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2937–
e Huang, H., Zhu, L., Reid, B. R., Drobny, G. P., and Hopkins, P. 2945
B. (1995) Science270, 1842–1845 q Tanious, F. A., Ding, D., Patrick, D. A., Tidwell, R. R., and
f Zlatanova, J., Yaneva, J., and Leuba, S. H. (1998) FASEB J.12, Wilson, W. D. (1997) Biochemistry36, 15315–15325
791– 799 r Coll, M., Aymami, J., van der Marel, G. A., van Boom, J. H.,
g Booth, W. (1987) Science237, 969–970 Rich, A., and Wang, A. H.-J. (1989) Biochemistry28, 310–320
h Chen, H., and Patel, D. J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 5901–5913 s Burger, R. M., Drlica, K., and Birdsall, B. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
i Wang, A. H.-J., Ughetto, G., Quigley, G. J., Hakoshima, T., van 269, 25978–25985
der Marel, G. A., van Boom, J. H., and Rich, A. (1984) Science t Kane, S. A., Hecht, S. M., Sun, J.-S., Garestier, T., and Hélène, C.
225, 1115–1121 (1995)Biochemistry34, 16715–16724
j Pilch, D. S., Kirolos, M. A., Liu, X., Plum, G. E., and Breslauer, u Veal, J. M., and Rill, R. L. (1988) Biochemistry27, 1822–1827
K. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 9962–9976 v Campisi, D., Morii, T., and Barton, J. K. (1994) Biochemistry33,
k Barkley, M. D., Cheatham, S., Thurston, D. E., and Hurley, L. H. 4130–4139
(1986)Biochemistry25, 3021–3031 wMack, D. P., and Dervan, P. B. (1992) Biochemistry31, 9399–9405
l Kumar, G. S., Lipman, R., Cummings, J., and Tomasz, M. (1997) x Han, H., Schepartz, A., Pellegrini, M., and Dervan, P. B. (1994)
Biochemistry36, 14128–14136 Biochemistry33, 9831–9844
H-DNA. Strands of DNA contain many homopy-
4. Polynucleotides with Three or Four Strands
rimidine“tracts” consisting of repeated sequences of
pyrimidines, e.g., d(T-C) , which may be abbreviated
Some nucleotide sequences in DNA favor the n
more simply as (TC) . In this example the comple-
formation of a regular triple-helical (triplex) structure. n
mentary strand would contain the two purines in the
This is possible when there are long stretches of adjacent
repeated sequence (GA) . At low pH, where protona-
pyrimidines having any sequence of C and T in one n
tion of the cytosine rings occurs, or in negatively super-
strand of double-helical DNA. The other strand of the
coiled DNA, the two strands of the repeating sequence
DNA will contain the correct purines for formation of
may separate, with the (TC) strand folding back to
Watson–Crick base pairs. With such a structure it is n
form a triple helix in which the base triplets have the
always possible to add a third strand of a polypyrimi-
hydrogen bonding pattern of Fig. 5-7. The resulting
dine using Hoogsteen base pairing. Triads formed in
structure, which is shown in Fig. 5-24, is known as
this way contain either two T’s and one A or two C’s
H-DNA.239– 241 A variety of related “nodule” and
and one G, as is shown in Fig. 5-7. In the latter case one
looped forms of DNA can also be formed.35,242
of the C’s must be protonated to allow formation of the
pair of hydrogen bonds.227a These triplex structures can
R-DNA. A different type of triplex DNA may be
be formed only for stretches of DNA containing all
formed during genetic recombination. A Watson–Crick
pyrimidines in one strand (a homopyrimidine strand)
duplex is brought together by one or more proteins
and all purines in the other (a homopurine strand). A
with a single strand that is, for at least a considerable
poly (AAU) triplex can also be formed, using the hydro-
distance, an exact copy of one of the strands of the
gen bond pattern of the first triplet in Fig. 5-7. Triple-
duplex. It is within such a triplex that cutting of a strand
stranded synthetic polynucleotides of these types were
of the duplex takes place to initiate recombination (see
prepared by Felsenfeld and others as early as 1957.228–230
Chapter 27 for a detailed discussion). Can a triplex
The third strand in a triplex can be either parallel or
structure containing two identical chains be formed?
antiparallel to the homopurine strand. The third strand
Possible base triplets include the following C·G*G
is either homopurine or a mixture of purine and thym-
ine. The triplets are G·C*C, A*A·T, or T*A·T and are triplet which occurs in a crystalline oligonucleotide
formed by Watson–Crick (·) and reversed Hoogsteen (*) structure.243 This triplet contains a variation on
Hoogsteen pairing and is related to the first triplet in
pairing.231 Recently, there has been a renewed interest in
Fig. 5-7. The other triplets needed for the proposed
DNA triplets because of their occurrence in natural
R-DNA recombination intermediates are G·C*C,
DNA, their possible importance in genetic recombina-
T·A*A, and A·T*T. While there is keen interest in
tion, and the potential for design of powerful inhibitors
R-DNA35,244– 247 the formation of a stable intermediate
of replication and transcription that function via triplex
triplex is still uncertain.35,247
formation.35,232– 238

--- Page 230 ---

C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic Acids 227
are synthetic phosphoramidates in which the phos-
phodiester linkage between nucleosides is replaced
by 3'-NH – PO –– O-5'. The resulting oligonucleotide is
3
resistant to digestion by phosphodiesterases present in
cells. Its geometry favors binding to A-DNA or
RNA.251 Another oligonucleotide mimic, dubbed PNA
(peptide nucleic acid), contains monomer units of the
following type252–253b and is able to form a triple helix:
N H
Base
HC O
2
CH 2 CH 2
Residue of N C
a PNA chain.
The phantom H 2 C O
green structure
shows the C
relationship to O NH
a nucleotide.
Yet another approach is to synthesize a “hairpin poly-
amide” that contains pyrrole, hydroxypyrrole, and
imidazole groups in a sequence that favors tight bind-
ing to a specific dsDNA sequence.254 Some possible
geometries for triplex DNA are illustrated in Fig. 5-25.
These are based on computer-assisted modeling.238
Tetraplex (quadruplex) structures. The ends
of linear chromosomes, the telomeres, have unusual
O
nucleotide sequences repeated hundreds or thousands
of times.255– 258 There is usually a guanine-rich strand
N
running 5' to 3' toward the end of the chromosome and
N
consisting of sequences such as TTAGGG in vertebrates,
N
G TTTTGGGG in the ciliate Oxytricha, and TG 1– 3 in Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae. The complementary strand is
H N N O 0.29 cytosine rich. The guanine-rich strand is longer than
H
0.28H 0.28 H its complement, “overhanging” by about 2 repeat units.
H N The significance for the replication of chromosomes is
O
0.28
N discussed in Chapter 27.
Watson-Crick
N C pair The thing that has attracted most attention to
N G N H 0.29 N telomeric DNA is the unusual structure of the G-rich
O N strand that was signaled by the first NMR studies.259
O O
N H 0.28 Subsequent investigation260,261 revealed the presence
H of G quartets (Fig. 5-8) which are apparently stacked
in folding patterns such as the following:255,262– 268
Designed third strands. If triplex DNA segments
can form naturally it should be possible to design oli-
gonucleotides that will bind into the major groove of a
DNA duplex to form a triplex at a specific location or
locations in the genome. Dervan and associates are
studying this approach systematically.248– 250 Such
oligonucleotides may be modified chemically to pro-
These structures are stabilized by the presence of
vide stronger binding to targeted locations and may
univalent cations, K+ being more effective than Na+,
prove to be useful therapeutic agents. Among these
5 '
3 '
Homopyrimidine segment
3'
5'
Homopurine
segment
Figure 5-24 Proposed structure of H-DNA which can be
formed when a homopyrimidine segment and its comple-
mentary homopurine segment separate as a result of pro-
tonation of the cytosine rings or of negative supercoiling
stress.239,240 The triple-helical portion contains base triplets
of the kind shown in Fig. 5-7.

--- Page 231 ---

228 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
In sequences such as d(TC ) and d(C T)
5 3
these C·CH+ pairs are intercalated as is shown
in Fig. 5-27. This intercalated DNA (I-DNA)
may provide an alternative conformation for
some telomeric sequences.281,282 An I-DNA
motif has also been identified in oligonucle-
otides from the DNA of human centromeres.283
The seemingly unusual forms of DNA de-
scribed in this section may represent only a
fraction of the naturally occurring DNA struc-
tures of biological significance.
5. Junctions
Special structural features may be found at
junctions between different types of DNA, e.g.,
between A-DNA and B-DNA.284– 286 However,
the most interesting junctions are branched.287–290
Figure 5-25 Two superposed stereoscopic diagrams illustrating
the lowest energy triple helical conformations of one pyrimidine, For example, Fig. 5-28 shows a four-way junc-
one purine, and one Hoogsteen DNA strand (in black). Super- tion in which all of the bases form Watson–
posed is an RNA purine strand in gray. See Srinivasan and Crick pairs. This junction is better known as a
Olson.238 Courtesy of Wilma K. Olson. Holliday junction because it was proposed by
Holliday in 1964 as an intermediate in genetic
recombination.291 As shown at the top of Fig.
5-28A the junction is formed from two homolo-
Li+, Rb+, or Cs+.260,269– 271 A protein isolated from Tetra- gous DNA duplexes. These are identical except for the
hymenabinds specifically to the G4-DNA regions.272 boxed and shaded base pairs. The ends of the first
The presence of 5-methylcytosine (m5c) also stabilizes duplex are marked I and II and those of the second
quadruplex structures.273 The oligoribonucleotide UG U III and IV. The Holliday junction appears to arise by
4
forms G quartets so stable that it takes days at 40°C in cleavage of one strand of each duplex with rejoining of
4
D O for the hydrogen-bonded NH protons forming the the strands as indicated by the green arrows. Rotation
2
quartet to be exchanged for 2H.274 gives the untwisted Holliday junction structure
Tetraplex structures have also been observed for
G-rich repeating sequences associated with the human
fragile X syndrome.275,276 This is the most common
H
cause of inherited mental retardation and appears to d-ribose H
N
arise as a result of the presence of an excessive number
H d-ribose
of repeats of the trinucleotide sequence (CGG) n . For N N
normal persons n = 60 or less; for healthy carriers n N C2
G3 H
may be as high as 200 but for sick individuals it may
be much higher.275 The structure in solution, as deter- H N N O
N N O
mined by NMR spectroscopy, is shown in Fig. 5-26. H
Another variant of four-stranded DNA, which arises H H
from cytosine-rich DNA, contains C·CH+ pairs such H H
H
as the following at low pH.277– 279 O N N
O N N H
H G10
d-ribose
C9 N
H N O N N
d-ribose H
H H N
5 3N + N H d-ribose
H H H
H
N N
H H 3 5
Figure 5-26 Structure of a G·C∗G·C∗ tetrad present in a
O N H
quadruplex structure formed by the oligonucleotide d(GCG-
d-ribose CTTTGCGC) in Na+-containing solution. See Kettani et al.276
HemiprHoteomnipartoetdo nda(tCedH d+(C·HC+)·C)

--- Page 232 ---

C. The Topology and Dynamics of Nucleic Acids 229
shown. The postulated three-dimen-
sional structure of the junction is
indicated in Fig. 5-28B.292– 294
An important characteristic of
Holliday junctions formed from
homologous duplexes is that they
can move by a process called branch
migration.295 Because of the twofold
symmetry of the branched structure
the hydrogen bonds of one base pair
can be broken while those of a new
base pair are formed, the branch
moving as shown in Fig. 5-28. Notice
that, in this example, the nonhomo-
logous (boxed) base pairs TA and
GC have become mispaired as TG
Figure 5-27 Stereoscopic view of a four-stranded intercalated DNA or I-DNA
and AC after branch migration. More
formed from d(C ). Two parallel duplexes with C·CH+ pairs are intercalated
significantly, the junction may be cut 4
into each other. From Chen et al.280
by a resolvase at the points marked
A 5' G C T G T C A G T A T G 3' B
I II
3' C G A C A G T C A T A C 5'
3’
5' G C T G T C A G C A T G 3'
III IV 5’
3' C G A C A G T C G T A C 5'
a
II
3' 5'
G C cut cut
T A
A T
T A
G C
A T
5' G C T G T C G A C A G C 3'
5’
I III
3' C G A C A G C T G T C G 5'
T A 3’
C G
G C
T A
A T
C G
5' 3'
IV
b Figure 5-28 (A) Abbreviated reaction sequence
Branch migration for formation of a four-way Holliday junction
between two homologous DNA duplexes. In
II
3' 5' stepa strands are cut and rejoined with movement
G C of the strands to a roughly antiparallel orientation.
T A The resulting structure is thought to resemble that
5' G C T G T C A G T A T A C T G A C A G G 3' shown below the four-stranded representation.
I III In step b branch migration takes place, separating
3' C G A C A G T C G T A C G A C T G T G G 5'
the nonhomologous base pairs TA and CG and
A T
causing mismatched pairs which will be subject
C G
to repair. (B) Proposed three-dimensional
5' 3'
structure (after drawing by Bennett and West).292
IV

--- Page 233 ---

230 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
by the green double-headed arrow. If the strand break These bound water molecules, in turn, can bond to
is then resealed, and the DNA strands are replicated, associated protein and to other atoms of the complex
the boxed base pair in duplex I–II will have been loops found in RNA molecules. The 2'-OH groups
transferred into a strand replicated from III–IV and also act as ligands for divalent metal ions in some
genetic recombination will have been accomplished. tRNAs and in some RNA catalytic sites. Transient
Branch migration can occur over much longer distances hybrid DNA–RNA double helices also exist within
than are indicated in this figure, so the alteration trans- cells and they too usually have the overall shape of
ferred may be far from the site of the initial cleavage A-DNA.55,307– 309 However, the minor groove is inter-
and whole genes or groups of genes can be transferred. mediate in width between that expected for the A and
Recombination is considered in more detail in Chapter B forms.
27.
The Holliday junctions formed during recombina-
tion are mobile, but synthetic immobile Holliday 1. RNA Loops and Turns
junctions can be synthesized by using nonhomolo-
gous base sequences or by locking the junctions.288 Like polypeptides, polynucleotide chains have
This has permitted careful physical study of these and preferred ways of bending or turning. The loops at the
other more elaborate synthetic junctions. With suitable ends of the hairpin turns of RNA molecules sometimes
choices of base sequences for the oligonucleotides from consist of a trinucleotide such as UUU,304 but are usually
which they are made, such junctions will assemble larger. In tRNA there are typically seven bases that do
spontaneously. Double-stranded DNA with immobile not participate in regular Watson–Crick pairing (see Figs.
junctions is a very suitable construction material on 5-30, 5-31). The tetranucleotide UUCGis frequently
a“nanochemical” scale. It has been assembled into present, and the sequence 5'-GGACUUCGGUCC forms
knots, rings, cubes, and more complex polyhedra.296– 297b an unusually stable hairpin.85,310 Other tetranucleotides,
such as UGAA,311 CCCG (also found in DNA loops),312
GCAA,313 and GAAA,314 occur often. The latter are
D. Ribonucleic Acids (RNA) members of a larger group of loop structures with the
consensus sequence GNRA, where N is any nucleotide
The best known forms of RNA are: (1) the long and R is a purine.315,315a These sequences are very
chains of messenger RNA (mRNA), which carry genetic common in highly folded structures of ribosomal
messages copied from DNA to the ribosomes where RNAs. Until recently high-resolution X-ray structures
proteins are made; (2) the much shorter transfer RNAs were available for only a few tRNAs and ribozymes.
(tRNAs) which participate in reading the genetic code, To help remedy this deficiency the structures of a
correctly placing each amino acid in its sequence in great variety of oligonucleotide stem/loop (hairpin)
the proteins; and (3) ribosomal RNAs (rRNA), which structures are being determined, most by NMR spectro-
provide both structural material and a catalytic center scopy.304,316,317 The sharp turns in the loops involve
for peptide bond formation. In addition there are mostly rotation about the two torsion angles around
numerous small RNAs that function in the splicing and the phosphorus atom of the third, from the 5' end, of
editing298– 300 of mRNA, processing of tRNA precursors, the seven nucleotides. Base bulges on stems (Fig. 5-9)
methylation of ribosomal RNA,301 transfer of proteins not only introduce kinks and bends in RNA stems169
across membranes, and replication of DNA.302 The but also provide well-defined hydrogen-bonded bind-
genomes of many viruses consist of RNA. There are ing sites for proteins. Numerous branched three-way
doubtless additional as yet undiscovered types of RNA. and more complex junctions provide other important
Unlike DNA, which exists largely as double helices, motifs in folded RNA.318
the single chains of RNA can fold into complex forms Among the new RNA structures are those of
containing many bulges and loops of the sort depicted RNA–antisense RNA pairs in “kissing” hairpin com-
in Fig. 5-9.300,303,304 These loops are closed by double- plexes.87,319 Another interesting complex folding pattern
strandedstems which have the A conformation. The in RNA is the pseudoknot, a structural feature that
B conformation is impossible because of the presence has been identified in many RNA sequences.85,320– 327
of the 2'-hydroxyl groups on the ribose rings in RNA. A pseudoknot can be formed if nucleotide sequences
Even one ribonucleotide in a 10-nucleotide oligomer favorable to formation of two short RNA stems are
prevents formation of the B structure.55,83 The 2'-OH overlapped as shown in Fig. 5-29. After stem 2 in this
groups not only keep the RNA in the A form but also drawing is formed (step a) additional base pairing can
engage in hydrogen-bond formation. Hydrogen lead to formation of stem 1 (step b). The base pairs of
bonds may form between the 2'-OH and the oxygen the two stems can stack coaxially to form the pseudo-
atom in the next ribose ring in the 3' → 5' direction. knot (step c).
The– OH groups also hydrogen bond to water molecules For the formation of base-paired stems the RNA
which form a network within the minor groove.305,306 must contain antiparallel sequences that allow Watson

--- Page 234 ---

D. Ribonucleic Acids (RNA) 231
G G C UUA C G G C G C C UAG C C G structure is conserved in all tRNAs. However, animal
5’ 3’ mitochondrial tRNAs often lack some of the usual
stem-loop“arms” as well as the invariant nucleotides in
C C U the dihydrouridine and TψC loops (Fig. 5-30).307,338,339
a At the bottom of the structure as shown in Figs. 5-30
G A
and 5-31 is the anticodon, a triplet of bases having
C G
G C Stem 2 the correct structures to permit pairing with the three
G C bases of the codon specifying a particular amino acid
G G C
C G
5’ (see Table 5-5), in this case phenylalanine.
UUA While tRNAs consist largely of loops and stems
b containing Watson–Crick base pairs, they also contain
3’
Hoogsteen pairs, wobble pairs, and triplets such as the
Loop 2 A Stem 2 following.
U G C C
C G G G 3’ –
C 46
C N
C G
G
5’ G C A N
Stem 1 U U Loop 1 N A
H N N
c
H
H
5’ G C A 3’ N H O
G GA C G C U G N
U C C G CG CU N A N H N U N
Pseudoknot + 23 N O – 12
–
N
+
Figure 5-29 Formation of a pseudoknot in an RNA chain.
HC
N+
After Puglisi et al.325 3 N
m7G
H
O N N
–Crick or wobble (GU) base pairing in the stems. This H H H
requires certain relationships in the sequences of the H N
O
DNA in the genes that encode these molecules as N
discussed in Section E,3. Because of the base-pairing N C
requirements, some of the bases in the stems protrude N G N H N
as bulges and fail to form pairs. Often, it is possible to + 22 N O – 13
N H
find more than one reasonable structure, each having
some bases unpaired.328 H
The first of these contains a Watson–Crick A·U
2. Transfer RNAs pair with a second A bound to form a reversed
Hoogsteen A∗A pair. The second contains a G·C
In all tRNAs the bases can be paired to form “clover- Watson–Crick pair with a Hoogsteen N-7-guanine∗G
leaf” structures with three hairpin loops and sometimes (m7G∗G) pair. Among the complex base associations
a fourth as is indicated in Fig. 5-30.329– 331 This struc- present in tRNAs are some that also involve hydrogen
ture can be folded into the L-shape shown in Fig. 5-31. bonding to the 2'-hydroxyl groups of ribose rings and
The structure of a phenylalanine-carrying tRNA of yeast, to at least one of the phosphate groups. There are over
the first tRNA whose structure was determined to atomic 100 internal hydrogen bonds, a large proportion of
resolution by X-ray diffraction, is shown.170,332– 334 An which are relatively invariant among the known tRNAs.
aspartic acid-specific tRNA from yeast,335 and an E. coli
chain-initiating tRNA, which places N-formyl-
methionine into the N-terminal position of proteins,336,337 3. Properties and Structures of Some Other
have similar structures. These molecules are irregular RNA Molecules
bodies as complex in conformation as globular pro-
teins. Numerous NMR studies show that the basic A few specialized RNA molecules are listed in

--- Page 235 ---

232 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
3’ TABLE 5-4
Amino acid
A76acceptor end Some Specialized RNA Molecules
C
C
A Kind of RNA Number of nucleotides
55''
ppGG CC
CC GG Transfer RNAs (Figs. 5-30, 5-31) 60 – 85
Amino acid
GG CC70 acceptor stem
GG UU Ribosomal RNAs
A U TψC loop
5S ~ 120
U A 60
Dihydro U loop U A C U A m1 5.8S (rat) 158
U G A C A C
h U G A m2 A m5 C U G U G G 16S (E. coli; Fig. 5-32) 1542
h U C U C G C 50 T ψ C 18S (rat) 1874
G G A G C m2 U G m7 23S (E. coli) 2904
G G A G 2 A G Ribothymidine 28S (rat) 4718
20 C G
Telomerase guide RNAa-d 159 (Tetrahymena)
C G
A U
30G C
m540
M1 RNA of Ribonuclease Pe,f 350– 410
Always a pyrimidine A ψ
Anticodon loop 377 (E. coli)
m C A
Methylation
of ribose U Y “Hypermodified” base Tetrahymena Intron ribozyme (Fig. 12-26)g 413
m G A A Anticodon
3’ C U U 5’ Strand of mRNA Viroid hammerhead ribozyme (Fig. 12-27)h ~ 55
Wobble position Codon in mRNA Signal recognition particle 7S RNAi 295 (human)
Small nuclear RNAsj,k 65– 1200
Figure 5-30 Schematic cloverleaf structure of a phenylala-
nine-specific transfer RNA (tRNAPhe) of yeast. The dots RNA-editing guide RNAl ~ 60
represent pairs or triplets of hydrogen bonds. Nucleosides
common to almost all tRNA molecules are circled. Other Thermotolerance factor (G8 RNA)m ~ 300
features common to most tRNA molecules are also marked.
The manner in which the anticodon may be matched to a Viroid RNA (Fig. 28-19) 240 – 380
codon of mRNA is indicated at the bottom.
Virus MS2 genome (Chapter 29) 3569
a Greider, C. W., and Blackburn, E. H. (1989) Nature (London)337,
331–337
Table 5-4. There are many others.302 In addition, there b Bhattacharyya, A., and Blackburn, E. H. (1994) EMBO J.13, 5721–
are thousands of different mRNAs within a cell. The 5731
c Singer, M. S., and Gottschling, D. E. (1994) Science266, 404–409
most abundant RNA molecules in cells are those of the
d Feng, J., Funk, W. D., Wang, S.-S., Weinrich, S. L., Avilion, A. A.,
ribosomes. Ribosomes consist of two elaborate RNA- Chiu, C.-P., Adams, R. R., Chang, E., Allsopp, R. C., Yu, J., Le, S.,
protein subunits, a large subunit with sedimentation West, M. D., Harley, C. B., Andrews, W. H., Greider, C. W., and
constant ~ 30S in bacteria and ~ 40S in eukaryotes. Villeponteau, B. (1995) Science269, 1236–1241
e Stark, B. C., Kole, R., Bowman, E. J., and Altman, S. (1978) Proc.
The small subunit contains 16S or 18S RNA and the
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.75, 3717–3721
large subunit 23S or 28S as well as smaller 5S and f Mattsson, J. G., Svärd, S. G., and Kirsebom, L. A. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.
5.8S RNAs (Table 5-4; Table 28-1). A proposed three- 241, 1–6
dimensional structure341,342 of a bacterial 16S ribosomal g Cech, T. R. (1987) Science236, 1532–1539
h Hertel, K. J., Herschlag, D., and Uhlenbeck, O. C. (1994) Biochemis-
RNA and the corresponding ribosomal subunit with
try33, 3374–3385
its 21 proteins are shown in Fig. 5-32. It might seem i Li, W.-Y., Reddy, R., Henning, D., Epstein, P., and Busch, H. (1982)
impossible that the folding pattern of the RNA was J. Biol. Chem.257, 5136–5142
deduced correctly before an X-ray structure was avail- j Maxwell, E. S., and Fournier, M. J. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.35,
897–934
able. However, a phylogenetic approach, the com-
k Nicoloso, M., Qu, L.-H., Michot, B., and Bachellerie, J.-P. (1996)
parison of nucleotide sequences among several J. Mol. Biol.260, 178–195
species, suggested that the stem structures of rRNAs l Kable, M. L., Seiwert, S. D., Heidmann, S., and Stuart, K. (1996)
are highly conserved (see discussion in Chapter 29). Science273, 1189–1195
mFung, P. A., Gaertig, J., Gorovsky, M. A., and Hallberg, R. L. (1995)
This fact, together with a variety of other chemical
Science268, 1036–1039

--- Page 236 ---

D. Ribonucleic Acids (RNA) 233
A B
Figure 5-31 The three-dimensional structure of a phenylalanine-specific transfer RNA of yeast. (A) Perspective diagram
of folding of polynucleotide chain. The ribose phosphate backbone is drawn as a continuous cylinder with bars to indicate
hydrogen-bonded base pairs. The positions of single bases are indicated by rods which are intentionally shortened. The TψC
arm is heavily stippled, and the anticodon arm is marked by vertical lines. Tertiary structure interactions are illustrated by
black rods. Redrawn from Quigley and Rich.340 (B) Stereoscopic view of the structure of yeast tRNAPhe as revealed by X-ray
crystallography. The acceptor stem with the protruding ACCA sequence at the 3' end is to the right. The anticodon GAA is
at the bottom right side of the drawing. The guanine ring is clearly visible at the very bottom. The middle adenine of the
anticodon is seen exactly edge-on as is the “hypermodified” base Y (see Fig. 5-33) which lies just above the anticodon. Its side
chain is visible at the back of the drawing. Preceding the anticodon on the left (5' side) are two unpaired bases (C and U).
The 2'-hydroxyl groups of the cytosine and of the guanosine in the anticodon are methylated. Moving far up the anticodon
stem one can see two groups of base triplets which utilize both Watson–Crick and Hoogsteen types of base pairing. Drawing
courtesy of Alexander Rich.
A B
Figure 5-32 (A) A three-dimensional computer graphics model proposed by Brimacombe et al.341 for the single chain of E. coli
16S ribosomal RNA. The helices are depicted as cylinders, which are all connected. The small dark squares denote the posi-
tions of artificially formed RNA–protein crosslinks, marked with the appropriate protein number. For proteins exhibiting
more than one crosslink site (e.g., S17), the sites are denoted A or B, in each case A being the site nearer to the 5' terminus of the
16S RNA. (B) Stereoscopic view of tentative atomic model of 16S RNA in the 30S ribosomal subunit. The viewing direction is
different from that in (A). From Mueller and Brimacombe.342 Courtesy of Richard Brimacombe.

--- Page 237 ---

234 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
evidence,341,343,344 allowed the prediction of the struc- a significant number of methylated bases among which
ture shown as well as many characteristics of the are 5-methylcytosine (5mC or m5C) and 6-methyl-
rRNA of the large subunit.345 Culminating decades adenine (6mA). The former is regularly present in the
of effort346– 350 (Chapter 29), complete structures of nuclear DNA of higher animals and plants. In mam-
bacterial ribosomes were established by 2000342,351– 354 mals from two to seven percent of the cytosine is
and the peptidyl transferase center was identified as a methylated. It is likely that these methylated bases
ribozyme355– 357 (discussed in Chapter 12). mark special points in the genetic blueprint. As is
discussed in Chapter 27, methylation, which is accom-
plished after the synthesis of the polynucleotide, may
4. Modified Nucleotides block the expression of certain genes.358 This appears to
happen when one of the two X-chromosomes becomes
The picture of DNA or RNA as chains of only four inactivated in cells of females. Methylation may also
kinds of nucleotides is not quite accurate. DNA contains be used to imprint certain genes, i.e. to mark them as
coming from a specific one of the two parents.359
Another function of methylation is to protect
O is replaced by S DNA from attack by enzymes (restriction endonu-
m
O in 4-thiouridine O
m Abbrev:4S m cleases) formed in response to invading viruses
D is o r u ed b u le c b ed o n in d 5 3 NH N 7 6 1 NH ( o C f h th a e p t T e - r e v 26 e ) n . s S e o ri m es e t v h i a r t u a se tt s a , c n k o E ta . b c l o y li t ( h B e o b x a 7 c - t C e ) r , i o h p a h ve age
dihydro U (hU) N O N N 3 NH2 developed their own protective devices. They contain
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (HOMeC) in place of cyto-
HO CH2 O HO CH2 O sine. The extra hydroxyl groups provided in this
m or m2
fashion often carry one or two glucose units in glyco-
sidic linkage.360 A bacteriophage attacking Bacillus
OH OH m OH OH m
subtilis substitutes hydroxymethyluracil for uracil and
Uridine Guanosine
5-dihydroxypentyluracil for thymine, and phage W14
O ofPseudomonas acidovorans substitutes the 5-methyl of
Adenosine is modified in
C OCH3 6 position as follows in thymine with – CH
2
– NH – (CH
2
)
4
– NH
3
+.360,361
HN O threonylcarbamoyladenosine (tA) The modifications carried out on RNA molecules
C HO
H OCH3 O H
CH3 a
S
r
ix
e
t
m
y
o
o
r
r
e
m
v
o
a
r
r
e
ie
m
d a
o
n
d
d
if i
m
ca
o
t
r
io
e
n
e x
r
t
e
e
a
n
c
s
t
i
i
v
o
e
n s
t h
a
a
r
n
e k
th
n
o
o
s
w
e
n
o f
f
D
or
NA.
H
O tRNA, with the number and the extent of modification
HN N COO–
H depending upon the species. Structures of some of the
N
N modified bases are indicated in Fig. 5-33. Uridine can
CH3
be methylated either on the base or on the 2'-hydroxyl
N N N NH of the sugar. Methylation at the 5 position of uridine
6
Ribose CH3 yieldsribothymidine. Cytidine can be modified in the
N
Nucleoside Y N same positions. Reduction of the 5,6 double bond of
uridine gives dihydrouridine (hU). Replacement of
OH N N the oxygen at position 4 by sulfur gives 4-thiouridine
H Ribose (4sU). Positions in the guanosine structure that can be
H H N6-(∆2-Isopentenyl)adenosine methylated are also indicated in Fig. 5-33. The symbol
OH
(Abbrev: iA) found at 3' end of anticodons m is commonly used to designate methylation in
+ ending in A (codons starting with U)
NH2
a cytokinin
nucleic acid bases; m
2
indicates dimethylation, e.g.,
O 6,6-dimethyladenine is abbreviated m 6A.
CH2 2
A remarkable transformation is that of uridine into
NH pseudouridine (ψ).
N N NH2 O
Ribose
Nucleoside Q (Queosine) HN NH
found in wobbling positions of anticodons
O
HO CH2
O
Figure 5-33 Structures of some nucleosides containing
modified bases and found in tRNA molecules. Positions
where methylation may occur are designated m. Some other OH OH
abbreviations are e (ethyl), ac (acetyl), and f (formyl).25 Pseudouridine (ψ)

--- Page 238 ---

E. The Genetic Code 235
BOX 5-C THE RNA WORLD
The discovery in the 1980s that RNA molecules simultaneously? The major metabolic cycles
often have catalytic properties and may serve as (Chapter 10) could also have developed at the same
true enzymes (ribozymes; Chapter 12) stimulated time. RNAs could not have been the first catalysts.
new thinking about evolution. Although RNA Hydrogen ions, hydroxyl ions, ammonium, cyanide,
catalysts are not as fast as the best enzymes they are and other simple ions as well as amines and peptides
able to catalyze a wide variety of different reactions. could all have played a role in prebiotic chemistry.
Could it be that in the early evolution of organisms Another speculation suggests an “iron-sulfur world”
RNA provided both the genetic material and cata- in which organic materials would be formed on
lysts? The “RNA world” would have been indepen- mineral surfaces through reactions involving
dent of both DNA and protein.a,b Later DNA could reduction of bicarbonate by iron sulfide and H S.h
2
have been developed as a more stable coding mole- If the RNA world did exist, has it left us with
cule and proteins could have evolved as more effi- any real clues? Benner et al. suggest that modern
cient catalysts. Plausible reactions by which both metabolism is a palimpsest of the RNA world, a
cytosine and uracil could have arisen in drying parchment that has been inscribed two or more
ponds on early Earth have been demonstrated.c times, with previous texts imperfectly erased and
A major objection to the RNA world is the lack therefore still partially legible.i If so, can we find a
of stability of ribose and the inability to demonstrate way to read the text of the ancient RNAs?
the nonenzymatic synthesis of ribose in significant
amounts. Even if ribose were present, it would be a Gesteland, R. F., Cech, T. R., and Atkins, J. F., eds. (1999) The
RNA World, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Lab. Press, Cold
largely in the pyranose ring forms. Initial formation
Spring Harbor, New York
of the 5-phosphate would be required to allow b Orgel, L. E. (1994) Sci. Am.271(Oct), 77– 83
formation of a nucleotide with a furanose ring. c Robertson, M. P., and Miller, S. L. (1995) Nature (London)375,
These and other obstacles to the RNA world have 772–774
d Larralde, R., Robertson, M. P., and Miller, S. L. (1995) Proc. Natl.
led to the suggestion that some other genetic material
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 8158–8160
preceded RNA and DNA.d,e One possibility is a e Böhler, C., Nielsen, P. E., and Orgel, L. E. (1995) Nature (London)
peptide-like RNA analog.e A simple coding system 376, 578– 581
could also have been used, e.g. one based on only f Sievers, D., and von Kiedrowski, G. (1994) Nature (London)369,
221–224
two bases, such as C and G, instead of four.f,g
g Piccirilli, J. A. (1995) Nature (London)376, 548– 549
Perhaps it is more probable that formation of h Maden, E. H. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 337– 341
proteins andthe present coding system evolved i Benner, S. A., Ellington, A. D., and Tauer, A. (1989) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.86, 7054– 7058
Pseudouridine is formed by enzymatic rearrangement to ribosomes. The modifications are often not abso-
of uridine in the original transcript (Eq. 28-3). It can lutely essential for function.
form a base pair with adenine in the same manner as Another source of modified bases in both DNA
does uracil. Pseudouridine is found not only in tRNA and RNA is spontaneous or “accidental” alteration.
but also in several places in both large and small ribo- Nucleic acids encounter many highly reactive and
somal RNA subunits. For example, it is present at mutagenic materials including hydroxyl radicals, formed
position 516 in the E. coli 16S RNA,364 at a specific from O , and are able to convert guanine rings into
2
position in the 23S RNA, and at many more locations 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine.362 Other reactive and carci-
in eukaryotic rRNA. nogenic compounds can form adducts with nucleic
The bases called “Y” and “Q” are highly modified acid bases.363 See Eq. 5-18 and also Chapter 27.
guanines (Fig. 5-33). Q is found at the 5' end of some
anticodons in the “wobble position” (see Fig. 5-30).
Two hypermodified adenosines are also shown in Fig. 5. RNA Aptamers
5-33. The N6-isopentenyladenosine is found at the 3'
end of the anticodons that pair with codons starting Ellington and Szostak365 synthesized a random
with U. This compound is also a plant hormone, a “pool” of ~1015 different oligodeoxyribonucleotides,
cytokinin (Chapter 30). Another highly modified each ~100 nucleotides in length. They “amplified”
purine, threonylcarbamoyladenine, occurs adjacent these using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR; Sec-
to the end of anticodons pairing with codons starting tion H,6) and prepared a mixture of the corresponding
with A. The function of these hypermodified bases is RNAs by in vitro transcription. From the ~1013 differ-
uncertain, but they appear to promote proper binding ent sequences still present they selected individual

--- Page 239 ---

236 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
oligonucleotides by affinity chromatography on col- example, in the following mRNA sequence either
umns that contained well-defined immobilized ligands codons GCA, CAG, or AGC could be selected as first.
such as organic dyes. They called the selected RNAs
aptamers. Their approach is being used to find RNA 3
sequences that bind to such ligands as ATP, FMN,366 1 Ser Val Trp Ser Arg Stop.
the bronchodilator theophylline,367 aminoglycoside 5’ GCAGCGUAUGGUCACGAUUAAU 3’
antibiotics,368 arginine,369 etc.370 Many of the selected 2 Met Val Thr Ile Asn
aptamers bind their ligands very tightly and studying
them may shed light on interactions of RNA with These codons define the three reading frames or phases
proteins and on the catalytic activities of RNA, which in which the code may be read. Here, the term frame
are discussed in Chapter 12.
TABLE 5-5
E. The Genetic Code
The Genetic Codea
The general nature of the genetic code was sug-
Total number
gested by the structure of DNA. Both DNA and pro-
Amino acid Codons of codons
teins are linear polymers. Thus, it was logical to suppose
that the sequence of the bases in DNA codes for the
Alanine GCX 4
sequence of amino acids. There are only four bases in
DNA but 20 different amino acids in proteins at the Arginine CGX, AGA, AGG 6
time of their synthesis. It is obvious that each amino Asparagine AAU, AAC 2
acid must be specified by some combination of more
Aspartic acid GAU, GAC 2
than one base. While 16 pairs of bases are possible,
Cysteine UGU, UGC 2
this is still too few to specify 20 different amino acids.
Therefore, it appeared that at least a triplet group of Glutamic acid GAA, GAG 2
three nucleotides would be required to code for one Glutamine CAA, CAG 2
amino acid.371 Sixty-four (43) such triplet codons
Glycine GGX 4
exist, as is indicated in Tables 5-5 and 5-6.
Histidine CAU, CAG 2
Simplicity argues that the genetic blueprint speci-
fying amino acid sequences in proteins should consist Isoleucine AAU, AUC, AUA 3
of consecutive, nonoverlapping triplets. This assump- Leucine UUA, UUG, CUX 6
tion turned out to be correct, as is illustrated by the
Lysine AAA, AUG 2
DNA sequence for a gene shown in Fig. 5-5. In addi-
Methionine
tion to the codons that determine the sequence of
amino acids in the protein, there are stopcodons that (also initiation codon) AUG 1
tell the ribosomal machinery when to terminate the Phenylalanine UUU, UUC 2
polypeptide chain. One methionine codon serves as
Proline CCX 4
aninitiationcodon that marks the beginning of a
Serine UCX, AGU, AGC 6
polypeptide sequence. One of the valine codons
sometimes functions in the same way. Threonine ACX 4
How does a cell read the code? This question is Tryptophan UGG 1
dealt with in detail in Chapters 28 and 29. A key step
Tyrosine UAU, UAC 2
is the positioning of each amino acid on the ribosome
Valine
in proper sequence. This is accomplished by the pair-
ing of codons of messenger RNA with the anticodons (GUG is sometimes
of the appropriate transfer RNA molecules as is indi- an initiation codon) GUX 4
cated at the bottom of Fig. 5-30. Each tRNA carries the
Termination UAA (ochre)
appropriate “activated” amino acid at its 3' end ready
UAG (amber)
to be inserted into the growing peptide.
UGA 3
Total 64
1. The “Reading Frames”
a The codons for each amino acid are given in terms of the sequence
It is immediately obvious that there are three ways
of bases in messenger RNA. From left to right, the sequence is
of reading the genetic code in mRNA depending upon from the 5' end to the 3' end. The symbol X stands for any one of
which nucleotide is used to start each codon. For the four RNA bases. Thus, each codon symbol containing X
represents a group of four codons.

--- Page 240 ---

E. The Genetic Code 237
does not designate a single codon, although frame three reading frames is open. Another complexity in
does designate a single exposure in a motion picture the reading of genetic messages arises because splicing
film. Reading frame designates which of the three of RNA may sometimes cause a shift in the reading
possible sets of codons we are using. In the foregoing frame. For example, a mRNA being transcribed from
sequence the codons in reading frames 2 and 3 are the sequence in reading frame 2 in the foregoing exam-
labeled. Reading frame 2 contains the initiation codon ple may skip over a nucleotide part of the time to form
AUG (shaded) which could mark the beginning of an an RNA in which the first part is encoded by reading
encoded protein sequence. Reading frame 3 contains a frame 2 and the second by reading frame 3 (a + 1 frame-
termination (stop) codon which, when the mRNA tran- shift). Alternatively, a nucleotide could be read twice
script is read by ribosomes, will terminate polypeptide with a – 1 frameshift with the sequence of reading
synthesis. It may be in the position shown but not frame 1 for the latter part of the mRNA. Frameshifts
have any real function. However, it could represent can also occur during protein synthesis as the mRNA
the end of the coding sequence that is marked if genes is being read.
for the two proteins overlap a little at the ends, a situa- In the present example we have examined the
tion that actually occurs in nature. sequence in mRNA. In the DNA there are two strands.
A reading frame in a specified part of a DNA One is the coding strand (also called the nontranscrib-
sequence is said to be “open” if there is an initiation ing or nontranscribed strand), which has a sequence
codon preceded by suitable regulatory signals (an that corresponds to that in the mRNA and the one that
operator region). This means that it couldencode a is given in Fig. 5-4. The second antiparallel and com-
protein. The reading frame of a sequence is open until plementary strand can be called the template strand
the next termination codon. Recently another usage or the noncoding, transcribing,or transcribed strand.372
has appeared. Many writers refer to an openreading The mRNA that is formed is sometimes referred to as a
frame as a segment of DNA in which any one of the sense strand. The complementary mRNA, which
corresponds in sequence to the noncoding strand of
TABLE 5-6 DNA, is usually called antisense RNA.
The Sixty-Four Codons of the Genetic Code
2. Variations
5’–OH Middle base 3’–OH
Terminal Terminal
Is the genetic code “universal” or does it vary
base U(T) C A G base
from one organism to another? Studies with bacteria,
viruses, and higher organisms including humans have
U(T) Phe Ser Tyr Cys U(T)
convinced us that the code is basically the same for all
Phe Ser Tyr Cys C
Leu Ser Termc Termd A oganisms. However, there are some variations. For
Leu Ser Term Trp G example, in mitochondria of both humans and yeast
the codon TGA is not a termination codon but repre-
C Leu Pro His Arg U(T) sents tryptophan. In mammalian mitochondria CTA
Leu Pro His Arg C represents threonine rather than leucine, and ATA
Leua Pro Gln Arg A
encodes methionine instead of isoleucine. These differ-
Leu Pro Gln Arg G
ences in the code are related to the fact that mitochon-
dria contain their own piece of DNA. It encodes not
A Ile Thr Asn Ser U(T)
only several proteins but also tRNA molecules whose
Ile Thr Asn Ser C
Ile Thr Lys Arg A anticodon structures are altered to accommodate the
Metb Thr Lys Arg G changed meanings of the codons of the mitochondrial
DNA and mRNA.373,374
G Val Ala Asp Gly U(T) Variations in the code for cytoplasmic proteins
Val Ala Asp Gly C have been found. In Tetrahymena and other ciliates the
Val Ala Glu Gly A
codon TAA represents glutamine rather than being a
Valb Ala Glu Gly G
termination codon.375 A few proteins, including some
in the human body, contain selenocysteine, the sele-
a The codon CUA (CTA) encodes threonine and the codon AUA
nium-containing analog of cysteine. Selenocysteine is
(ATA) methionine in mammalian mitochondria.
b Initiation codons. The methionine codon AUG is the most com- encoded by termination codon TGA. See Chapter 29
mon starting point for translation of a genetic message but GUG for details. However, even though TGA is occasionally
can also serve. In such cases it codes for methionine rather than used in this way, it serves as a termination codon for
valine.
most proteins within the same cells.376 Thus, the
c The“termination codon” UAA (TAA) encodes glutamine in
Tetrahymena. context in which the codon TGA occurs determines
d The termination codon UGA (TGA) encodes tryptophan in how it is read by the ribosomal machinery.
mitochondria and selenocysteine in some contexts in nuclear genes.

--- Page 241 ---

238 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
loop of the other to form a triplex base structure. A
3. Palindromes and Other Hidden Messages
related triplex structure may be formed when inverted
repeat sequences occur within a homopyrimidine tract
The sentence “Madam, I’m Adam” reads the same
in one chain of DNA (Fig. 5-34B).378 These have been
either forward or backward. Such sentences, known
calledmirror-repeats or H-palindromes to distin-
aspalindromes,377 are infrequent in the English lan-
guish them from true palindromes.237,379 Each base
guage. However, most DNA contains many palin-
triplex structure contains one set of Watson–Crick
dromes, sequences of base pairs that read the same in
hydrogen bonds and one set of Hoogsteen hydrogen
forward and reverse directions. Consider, for example,
bonds. The triplexes of H-DNA are all either TAT or
the gene that specifies the sequence of nucleotides for
CGC+, where one C is protonated (see also Fig. 5-24).
the tRNA molecules of Fig. 5-30. It
is a double-stranded DNA segment
in which one strand has a sequence
identical to that of Fig. 5-30 except
Forward
for the substitution of T for U and A 5’ T GG T GCGAA T T C T G T GGA T CGAACACAGGAC 3’
forψ (pseudouridine) and for the
3’ AC CACGC T T AAGACAC C T AGC T T G T G T C C T G 5’
lack of methylation and other base CψT Reverse
modifications. The second strand is TψC loop
the exact complement. Figure 5-34
shows the part of this gene (residues C
T G
49– 76) that corresponds to the 3' A A
G A
end of the tRNA molecule. This G C
DNA segment could exist in a sec- T A
ond conformation having a loop on G C
T A
each side of the molecule (Fig. 5-34).
C G
The stems of the two loops in this 5’ T GG T GCGAA T T GAC 3’
3’ AC CACGC T T AA C T G 5’
cruciform conformation are iden- G C
tical and symmetrically disposed A T
around the center of the molecule. C G
A T
If we overlook the seven nucleotides
C G
in the center of the loop, the message C T
T T
in the stems reads the same in both
A C
G
directions, as is indicated by the
green arrows.
Palindromes are often imperfect
B
as is the one shown in Fig. 5-34. Here
Inverted repeats
the two stems in the cruciform struc-
ture are related by an exact twofold 5’ GA T C C T T C C C T C T T C C C C C T A T AC C C C C T T C T C C C T T GAA 3’
rotational symmetry but the loops 3’ C T AGG AAGGG AG AAGGGGG AT AT GGGGG AAG AGGG AAC T T
at the ends of the stems are not.
Unpaired bases may bulge at various
points in double-stranded stems of Triple helix
longer palindromes. These imper- 5’ GA T C C T T C C C T C T T C C C C C T
A
fect palindromes in the DNA are 3’ C T AGGAAGGG AG AAGGGGG AT
responsible for much of the tertiary T T C C C T C T T C C C C C T T
structure of the various kinds of GC A A T
AT A G
RNA. The tertiary structure, in G GG AGAAGGG G
A T
turn, often determines the interac- T A
tion of the RNA with enzymes and T A H-DNA
other proteins. 3’5’ One of two isomeric forms
Special properties may be ob-
served for palindromes containing
Figure 5-34 (A) Two conformations of a segment of the yeast phenylalanine
homopurine tracts in one strand, and
tRNA gene. The segment shown codes for the 3' end of the tRNA molecule
therefore homopyrimidine tracts in shown in Fig. 5-30, including the TψC loop. (B) Formation of H-DNA (Fig.
the other. If two identical palindromes 5-24) proposed for a sequence in plasmid pGG32. The major element of the
of this type occur close together it is structure is the triplex, which is formed from the Watson–Crick duplex (·)
possible that the pyrimidine-containing associated with the homopyrimidine loop through Hoogsteen base pairing
strand of one can join with a hairpin (°, +). One of the two possible “isomeric” forms is shown. See Mirkin et al.378

--- Page 242 ---

F. Interaction of Nucleic Acids with Proteins 239
Segments of H-DNA might block transcription, and double-stranded DNA of bacteria.205,392 Sperm cells
proteins that bind to the triplex H-DNA may be in- “package” a large amount of DNA into a small space
volved in transcriptional regulation.379 with the help of small arginine-rich proteins called
Until rather recently there had been little to indi- protamines.393 Cells always have some single-stranded
cate that DNA actually assumes cruciform conforma- DNA segments as well as single-stranded DNA bind-
tions in cells. However, strong experimental evidence ing (SSB) proteins. Among the latter are proteins
suggests that some cruciform structures do form natu- from E. coli394,395 and from viruses.396– 399 Specialized
rally.380 Their formation from palindromic DNA [like proteins bind to DNA sequences in telomeres38,272 and
the formation of Z-DNA from (G + C)-rich sequences] centromeres.400 A large number of proteins interact
is a way of relieving torsional strain induced by super- with RNA in ribosomes, spliceosomes, and other
coiling. Whether or not cruciform structures occur complexes.
frequently within cells, there is no doubt that palin- A host of enzymes, which are described elsewhere
dromic sequences are of great importance in the inter- in the book, act on DNA and RNA. They include hydro-
action of nucleic acids with symmetric dimeric and lytic nucleases, methyltransferases, polymerases,
tetrameric protein molecules such as the gene repressor topoisomerases, and enzymes involved in repair of
protein shown in Fig. 5-35.381– 383 damaged DNA and in modifications of either DNA
DNA contains numerous other protein binding or RNA. While most of these enzymes are apparently
sites which are not palindromes but whose sequences proteins, a surprising number are ribozymes, which
represent additional encoded information. The RNA consist of RNA or are RNA–protein complexes in
transcripts likewise contain sequences that direct the which the RNA has catalytic activity.
catalytic machinery involved in splicing, that bind to
ribosomal proteins, that control rates of transcription,
and that cause termination of transcription. 1. The Helix–Turn–Helix Motif
Much current interest in DNA–protein interactions
4. The Base Composition of DNA and RNA is focused on regulatory processes. In prokaryotes the
initiation of transcription of a large fraction of the genes
The nucleotide composition of DNA is surprisingly is blocked by the binding of proteins known as repres-
variable. The sum of the percentage cytosine plus the sors. While their structures are varied, one large group
percentage guanine (C + G) for bacteria varies from 22 of repressors have DNA-binding domains with a
to 74%. That for E. coli is 51.7%. Among eukaryotic similar helix–turn–helix architectural motif. They
organisms, the range is somewhat narrower (28 to bind with high affinity to specific control regions
58%; for humans, 39.7%). The fact that bacterial DNA which contain palindromic DNA sequences such as
molecules are more varied than those of higher organ- the following one, which defines a binding site for the
isms is not surprising. The prokaryotes have evolved E. coli trp(tryptophan)repressor:
for just as many more million of years as have we.
Perhaps because of their simpler structure and rapid
rate of division, nature has done more experimentation 5’ T G T A C T A G T T A A C T A G T A C 3’
with genetic changes in bacteria than in people. 3’ C A T G A T C A A T T G A T C A T G T 5’
Comparisons of the C + G content of organisms
have been used as a basis for establishing genetic
relatedness.384 However, since thymine is especially These repressor proteins form dimers joined through a
susceptible to photochemical alteration by ultraviolet rigid central domain with a pair of arms, each contain-
light, bacteria with a high (C + G) content may have ing two helices that form the helix–turn–helix motif.
evolved in environments subject to strong sunlight or One helix of each pair fits into the major groove of the
high temperatures, whereas those with a low (C + G) DNA helix and forms a “reading head” that carries a
content have developed in more protected locations.385,386 specific arrangement of amino acid side chains able to
locate the symmetric nucleotide sequences flanking
the twofold axis of the palindrome. In the case of the
F. Interaction of Nucleic Acids with Proteins trp repressor, these are the ACTAGT hexanucleotides
(marked by the arrows in the preceding structure).
Most functions of DNA and RNA are dependent The interaction is depicted in Fig. 5-35.401– 405 The
on proteins. Cells contain a vast array of polypeptides repressor has a high affinity for the DNA only if one
that bind to nucleic acids in many specific ways.387– 390 molecule of L-tryptophan is bound to each subunit at
We have seen (Fig. 5-21) that the histones hold super- a specific site near the DNA helix. Binding of the
coiled DNA in the form of nucleosomes391 in eukaryotic tryptophan causes a conformational change, which
nuclei and similar proteins bind to and protect the is pictured in Fig. 5-35. If tryptophan is absent the

--- Page 243 ---

240 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
repressor binds to the palindromic DNA only weakly operons. It also binds to the trp repressor, but with the
and transcription of genes needed for tryptophan indole ring flipped over by 180° so that its carboxylate
biosynthesis occurs freely. However, if tryptophan group contacts the phosphate groups of the DNA
accumulates within the cell it binds to the repressor repelling them through both electrostatic and steric
molecules causing them to bind firmly to DNA and effects.406,407 The picture in Fig. 5-35 is an oversimplifi-
prevent transcription. There are at least three of these cation. In fact, at some binding sites (operator sites)
palindromic sequences in E. coli, each one regulating more than one dimeric repressor binds in a tandem
a set of genes (operons) involved in tryptophan syn- fashion.405
thesis. In contrast to the effect of tryptophan, the The helix–turn–helix motif is also found in many
tryptophan analog indole-3-propionate, which lacks other proteins. One of these is the bacterial lac (lactose)
the amino group of tryptophan, derepresses the same repressor which controls the lac operon and for which
A
B
Figure 5-35 Stereoscopic
drawings illustrating the
binding of a dimeric molecule
of the Trp repressor protein
to a palindromic sequence in
DNA. (A) Schematic view
showing structures of the
aporepressor (partly shaded
gray) and the holorepressor
with bound tryptophan
(unshaded) are superimposed.
Cylinders represent the α
helices in (B). From Zhang
et al.402 (B) MolScript ribbon
diagram with a few side chains
that interact with the DNA
shown. Two tandemly bound
dimeric repressor molecules
are shown. Two bound mole-
cules of tryptophan are visible
in each dimer. The DNA is
drawn as a double helix with
lines representing the base
pairs. From Lawson and
Carey.405

--- Page 244 ---

F. Interaction of Nucleic Acids with Proteins 241
the terms operator, promoter, repressor, and operon activators c-Jun and c-Fos418 and of the yeast transcrip-
were first introduced (Chapter 28).408– 410 Some bacteri- tion factor GCN4.419,420 The latter is a dimeric protein
al viruses, such as phage lambda ((cid:3)) of E. coli, encode in which the C-terminal halves of the two monomers
repressors that allow the virus to reside in the bacteria form the helices of the leucine zipper. The helices,
without immediately destroying them. The λ repressor which are continuous for over 60 residues, fan out to
and other closely related proteins also utilize the helix interact with the DNA double helix as in Fig. 2-21. A
–turn–helix motif411 – 415 as do some proteins that 19-residue basic domain of each protein helix crosses
activate transcription (see Chapter 28). the major groove of the DNA with side chain groups
interacting with the DNA as is illustrated in Fig. 5-36.
2. Other DNA-Binding Motifs Zinc fingers. Another large group of transcrip-
tion factors contain a bound zinc ion in a “finger”
Nobody knows how many different DNA-binding motif. The Zn2+ is held by two cysteine – S– groups
structures may be discovered. However, most of those present on a loop of β structure and by two imidazole
that are designed to recognize specific DNA sequences groups present on an α helix (Fig. 5-37).421– 424 Amino
have some part that fits into the major groove of B- acid sequences found in many proteins that regulate
DNA.416 Usually the DNA structure must be in a transcription tend to form zinc fingers and to interact
specific form: B-, A- or Z-, but it may sometimes be with DNA. These were recognized first in the transcrip-
bent or distorted. The DNA recognition motifs in the tion factor TFIIIA from Xenopus laevis in 1985.421,425,426
proteins may consist of helices, β strands, or loops. This protein contains a zinc finger motif repeated nine
times. X-ray structures, one of which is shown in Fig.
Leucine zipper proteins. Several transcription 5-38, are known for proteins with three423 and five427
factors have the leucine zipper structure, which has zinc fingers. (See Chapter 28.)
been described in Chapter 2 and was illustrated there
by the structure of transcription factor Max (Fig. 2-21).417 Beta ribbons. An antiparallel double-stranded β
Related structures include those of the transcription ribbon can fit into the major groove of DNA and form
A
Figure 5-36 Stereoscopic
diagrams showing some of
the interactions between an
N-terminal helical domain of
the yeast transcription factor
GCN4-bZIP, a leucine zipper
protein, and a specific palin-
dromic DNA binding site:
–5 –1 1 5
5’ –AT G A C G T C A T
(The bases are numbered
outward from the central C
and G.) The small solid B
spheres are water molecules.
Notice the water mediated
interactions of the basic
arginine and lysine side
chains with the nucleic acid
bases and also the interaction
of R240 and R243 (in B) with
a backbone phosphate. The
overall structure of the protein
is similar to that of another
leucine zipper shown in Fig.
2-21. From Keller et al.419
Drawings courtesy of Timothy
J. Richmond.

--- Page 245 ---

242 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
2 Tyr 11 Leu
Phe
17
O
H Figure 5-37 Three-dimensional structure of a zinc finger.
H
N His This is formed by the binding of Zn2+ to the following se-
4
Cys 20 quence in a protein:
N
S φ X C X C X X X F X L X X H X H
S Zn 2–4 5 3,4
turn turn
N β β α helix
7 Cys His
N 24 Here φ is a hydrophobic amino acid and X may be any
amino acid. After Krizek et al.428
H
A B
Figure 5-38 (A) Sketch of a complex of a
C five-zinc finger protein bound to a high-
affinity site in DNA. This protein is a
human oncogene called GL1. Its gene is
amplified in many tumors, but it is similar
to many other transcription factors. The
cylinders and ribbons highlight the α
helices and β sheets. Cobalt ions, which
replaced the Zn2+ in the crystals, are
shown as spheres. (B) Stereoscopic view
of the complex in a similar orientation.
(C) Stereoscopic view emphasizing the
contacts of side chains from fingers 5 and 6
with the DNA. The view is similar to that
in (A) and (B) but the structure has been
tilted back. Drawings courtesy of Nikola
Pavletich.427

--- Page 246 ---

F. Interaction of Nucleic Acids with Proteins 243
A
Figure 5-39 (A) Stereoscopic
ribbon representation of the E. coli
methionine repressor–operator
B
complex. Two subunits form a
dimer with a double-stranded
antiparallelβ ribbon that fits into
the major groove of the DNA in
the B form. One strand is shaded
more darkly than the other.
(B) View of the β ribbon and its
interactions with the DNA.
Notice the direct hydrogen bonds
from amino acid side chains of
lysine and threonine residues to
bases in the specific palindromic
sequence AGACGTCT. From
Somers and Phillips.429 Drawings
courtesy of S. E. V. Phillips.
hydrogen bonds and other interactions with the DNA.
This is the basis for specific recognition of the operator
sequence for the E. coli met (methionine) repressor as
is illustrated in Fig. 5-39.429 The same binding motif is
employed by some other repressors430,431 and also by
the abundant bacterial DNA-binding protein HU.432
It has also been utilized in designing the previously
mentioned hairpin polyamide DNA-binding com-
pounds.
The winged helix family. A group of large pro-
tein transcription factors contain an N-terminal DNA-
binding domain with the striking winged helix motif
shown in Fig. 5-40.433– 436 It occurs in proteins from a
wide range of organisms from yeast to human.
3. RNA-Binding Proteins
Figure 5-40 Structure of a protein known as transcription Among the many proteins that bind to RNA mole-
factor NF-κB bound to its DNA target. Each subunit of the cules437– 439 are the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, a
dimeric protein contains two β barrel domains. The loops at variety of other well known enzymes,440 the ribosomal
the ends of the barrels interact with the DNA in the center.
proteins discussed in Chapter 29, and various proteins
From Mülleret al.433 Courtesy of Stephen C. Harrison.
with dual functions of catalysis and regulation of

--- Page 247 ---

244 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
translation. A widely found RNA-binding containing virus 25 nm in diameter, is only three times
ribonucleoprotein domain (RNP domain), occurs as thick as the thinnest cell membrane. Its DNA contains
in hundreds of proteins including many of the RNA just 5386 nucleotides.450– 452 The similar bacteriophage
processing proteins considered in Chapter 28.437,441,442 G4 contains 5577.453,454
This 70 – 90 residue αβ module binds an RNA strand It is remarkable that such tiny viruses are able to
against a β sheet surface. Another ~ 70-residue protein seize control of the metabolic machinery of the cell and
motif binds ds RNA.443 turn it all in the direction of synthesis of more virus
particles. There are only 11 known proteins encoded
by the genes of φX or G4. Three genes encode the
G. Viruses and Plasmids three kinds of protein subunits of the virus coat. Sixty
copies of each are needed, as are 12 copies of a “pilot”
Attacking every living thing from the smallest protein.451 Eight of the genes are spaced closely together,
mycoplasma to human beings the nucleoprotein particles occupying most of the DNA. The other three genes
known as viruses have no metabolism of their own. are embedded within some of the first eight but in
However, they “come alive” when the nucleic acid different reading frames. In one short region of the G4
that they contain enters a living cell. Viruses are sig- chromosome the same nucleotides are part of three
nificant to us not only because of the serious disease different genes, using all three possible reading frames.
problems that result from their activities but also as In addition to their own genes, these small viruses make
tools in the study of molecular biology. A mature use of many components of the cell that they infect. A
virus particle or virion consists of one or more nucleic large group of animal viruses, the parvoviruses, are
acid molecules in a protein coat or capsid, usually of similar in size and architecture to bacteriophage φX174.
helical or icosahedral form. The capsid is made up of Canine parvovirus, first identified in 1978, is now
morphological subunits called capsomers. They can endemic.455,456 Childhood fifth disease is also caused
sometimes be seen clearly with the electron microscope. by a parvovirus.456,457 When these single-stranded
The capsomers in turn are usually composed of a DNA viruses infect cells a double-stranded replicative
number of smaller protein subunits. Some of the larger form of DNA arises by synthesis of the complementary
viruses are surrounded by membranous envelopes. negativestrand alongside the original positive DNA
Others, such as the T-even bacteriophage which attack strand. Many copies of the replicative form are then
E. coli, have extraordinarily complex structures (Box 7-C). synthesized. The negative strands of the replicative
Most viruses contain a genome of either double- forms serve as templates for synthesis of numerous
stranded DNA or single-stranded RNA, but some new positive strands that are incorporated into the
small viruses have single-stranded DNA and others progeny viruses. The whole process may take only 20
have double-stranded RNA. The number of nucleo- minutes. Some parvoviruses are unable to reproduce
tides in a virus genome may vary from a few thousand unless the cell is also infected by a larger adenovirus.
to several hundred thousand and the number of genes While most plant viruses contain dsRNA, the
from 3 to over 200. Sometimes the nucleic acid mole- geminiviruses,458 which cause a number of plant
cules within the virion are circular, but in other cases diseases, contain single-stranded DNA. The virus
they are linear. Table 5-7 lists a few of the known types particle consists of a fused pair of incomplete icosahedra,
of viruses as well as some individual viruses.72,444 The evidently containing a single ~ 2500-bp DNA strand.
size of the genome, in kilobases (kb), or kilobase pairs Replication may require coinfection with two virus
(kbp) is indicated. The number of genes in a virus is particles of differing sequence.
often somewhat more than one per kbp of DNA. A
vast amount of information is available about these
infectious particles. Only a few reference sources are 2. Viruses with Double-Stranded DNA
cited here.72,444– 446 The architectures of some helical
and icosahedral protein coats that surround genomic One of the smallest viruses containing double-
DNA or RNA are described further in Chapter 7. stranded DNA is the 3180-nucleotide human hepatitis
B virus. It infects millions of people throughout the
world causing chronic hepatitis and often liver can-
1. Viruses with Single-Stranded DNA cer.459– 461 The circular DNA is surrounded by an
envelope consisting of proteins, carbohydrate, and a
The very small helical bacteriophages of the Ff lipid bilayer. Many icosahedral viruses also contain
family, such as fd, f1, and M13 (see Fig. 7-7) resemble dsDNA. Among them are the papovaviruses, some
thin bacterial pili but each virus particle contains a mole- of which cause warts and others malignant tumors.
cule of single-stranded circular ~ 6400 nucleotide DNA Much studied by biochemists is the 5386-nucleotide
ofM ~ 2 x 106which encodes only ten proteins.447– 449 simian virus 40 (SV40), a monkey virus capable of
r
BacteriophageφX174 (Fig. 5-41), an icosahedral DNA- inducing tumors in other species.462,463 Closely related

--- Page 248 ---

G. Viruses and Plasmids 245
TABLE 5-7
Characteristics of Some Individual Viruses and Groups of Viruses
Masses in daltons x 10–6 Thousands of
Type of genomea and group
Shapeb Diameterc(nm) bases or base pairs
or individual virus name
Total DNA or RNA (kilobases)
DNA, single-stranded
Bacteriophagesfd,f1,M13 H ~6 x ~880 (length) 17.6 2.1 6.4
Bacteriophagesφ174, G4 I 25 6.2 1.8 5.4–5.6
Parvoviruses I 18–25 1.8 5.5
Geminiviruses I (fused pairs)
DNA, double-stranded
Hepatitis B virus I (enveloped) 2.1 3.18
Papoviruses I 45–55
SV40 (monkey) I 17.6 3.5 5.22
Polyoma (mouse) I 45 23.6 3.3 4.96
BK virus (human) I 3.4 4.96
Papilloma (human wart) I 56 5.3 8.0
Bacteriophageφ29 T 12 19.3
Adenoviruses I 70 20–30 30–45
Bacteriophage Mu 25 38
Bacteriophage T7 T(short) 39.9
Bacteriophage P22 T 28.5 43.2
Bacteriophageλ T 32 48.6
T-even bacteriophage T 100 x 80 (head) 215 130 166
Baculoviruses of insects I 70–130
Herpesviruses I 100
core 78 ~1000 80–120 80–140
envelope 150–200
Pox viruses, e.g.,
Smallpox, vaccinia (cowpox) C 160 x 250 ~4000 150–240 240–300
Cauliflower mosaic virus I 8.0
RNA, single-stranded
Unsheathed
Potato spindle tuber viroid 0.116 0.30
Hepatitis delta virus 1.7
Sheathed,plus-strand
Tobacco necrosis satellite I 18 1.7 0.4 1.20
Small bacteriophages
R17, MS2, Qβ I 23–26 3.6–4.0 1.2–1.5 3.5–4.5
Picornaviruses I 8.4 2.6 7.9
Polioviruses I 27 6.4 2 6.1
Rhinoviruses I 27–30 7–8 2.2–2.8 6.7–8.5
Turnip yellow mosaic virus I 28 5.0–6.0 2.0 6.1
Tobacco mosaic virus H 18 x 300 40 2.2 6.7
Togaviruses I 20–40 4 11
Negative-strandviruses
Influenza virus I 80–100 200 2.0 6.1
Bullet-shaped viruses
Rhabdoviruses C 20 x 130
Retroviruses I 80–100 7–10 20–30
RNA, double-stranded
Reoviruses I 55–60 11–12 16–18
Mobillivirus I (enveloped) 38
Rotavirus Wheel-shaped 70
Leishmania RNA virus 5.28
a Complete nucleotide sequences are known for most of these viruses.
b Shapes are indicated as I, icosahedral; H, helical; T, a tailed phage; C, complex.
c The second dimension given for some helical and complex viruses is the length (nm).

--- Page 249 ---

246 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
A
B E
C
D
Figure 5-41 Electron micrographs of some viruses:
(A) Bacteriophage Lφ7, which resembles φX174. See also
Fig. 7-28. Courtesy of A. S. Tikhonenko. (B) Adenovirus.
(C) Cytomegalovirus particles being released from a
fibroblast. (B) and (C) courtesy of T. Moninger. (D)
Tobacco mosaic virus. © Omikron, Photo Researchers.
(E) A tailed bacteriophage. Courtesy of A. S. Tikhonenko.

--- Page 250 ---

G. Viruses and Plasmids 247
is the polyomavirus of the mouse464 and the BKvirus Sixty copies of the latter are assembled around the
of humans,465 also suspected of causing cancer. The RNA in an icosahedral array (Fig. 7-14) to form the
papillomaviruses cause warts and perhaps cancer466 virion. The structure of the similar satellite tobacco
and the larger (70 nm diameter) adenoviruses (Fig. 5- mosaic virus has also been described in detail.486,487
41),467,468 cause respiratory infections. Some 32 types RNAs of the small bacteriophages f2, R17, MS2
infect humans. Many of the details of eukaryotic and Qβ contain 3500 – 4500 nucleotides and are
transcription were first studied using the adenovirus.469 enclosed in icosahedral shells made up of 90 identical
The very large herpesviruses are enveloped by a subunits.488– 490 Initially only three genes were evident
lipid-containing membrane.470– 472 Among them are but a fourth small gene in a different reading frame
herpes simplex viruses, which infect human mucous has since been found in at least one of them.491 The
membranes and varicella-zoster virus, which causes RNA molecules in these and other positive-strand
chicken pox and shingles. Other herpesviruses include viruses serve as mRNA within the host cells. Another
cytomegaloviruses (Fig. 5-41), another common human group of small RNA viruses are the picornaviruses
pathogen, and the Epstein–Barr virus, which causes (picoRNA, meaning very little RNA). Many of these
mononucleosis and is suspected of causing cancer.473 icosahedral viruses of 15 – 30 nm diameter attack hu-
Another herpesvirus has been associated with multiple mans. Among them are the enteroviruses including
sclerosis.474 The very large icosahedral baculoviruses thepolioviruses,492,493 the hepatitis A virus,494 the
cause polyhedroses in insects. One that infects the fly coxsackieviruses, and some of the echoviruses. A
Tipula measures 130 nm in diameter. Poxviruses are second class of picornaviruses include rhinoviruses
also large and complex.475 The tailed bacteriophages which cause the common cold. More than 100 types
(Box 7-D) range in size from the small ~ 29-kDa phage are known.495– 497 The foot–and–mouth disease
P22 to the very complex T-even phage. Some plant virus,498– 500 which attacks the cloven-footed animals,
viruses also contain dsDNA. One of these, the cauli- and the Mengo virus,501 which can cause a fatal
flower mosaic virus,476,477 is transmitted by aphids. encephalitis in mice, are also picornaviruses. The
It has proved useful as a gene-transfer vehicle for three-dimensional structures of polio virus, human
genetic engineering. rhinoviruses, Mengo virus, and many other eicosahedral
viruses are known. Their architecture is discussed in
Chapter 7.
3. Viruses Containing RNA Thetogaviruses, which are a little larger than the
picornaviruses, have an icosahedral core surrounded
Several plant diseases including the potato spindle by a lipid membrane. Yellow fever and rubella (Ger-
tuber disease are caused by viroids, molecules of man measles) are both caused by togaviruses. Other
single-stranded RNA only 240 – 380 nucleotides in togaviruses, such as Sindbis virus502 and Semliki
length with a folded structure.478– 481 Such an RNA Forest virus,503 have become important in biological
could code for a protein containing only about 100 research.
amino acids. However, the known 359-nucleotide A large number of icosahedral RNA viruses of
sequence of the potato spindle tuber virus contains no diameter 28 – 30 nm (Fig. 7-14) attack plants, causing
AUG initiation codon. It seems impossible that the diseases such as tomato bushy stunt,504 southern bean
virus carries any gene for a protein. Conserved features mosaic,505 or turnip yellow mosaic. Best known of the
of viroid sequences suggest a close relationship to the helical RNA viruses is the tobacco mosaic virus (Figs.
intervening DNA sequences known as type I introns 5-41, 7-8).506-507a Its genome contains 6395 nucleotides
(see Fig 28-19). Whatever its genetic message, a plant as linear ssRNA. Many strains are known. Related
viroid causes the plant cell to replicate many copies of viruses cause cucumber green mottle508 and other
the viroid molecule, which may then be transmitted to plant diseases.
other plants by aphids, or on the surface of tools, by Large viruses of 80 – 100 nm diameter bearing 8–10
humans. A larger 1678-nucleotide viroid-like RNA spikes at the vertices of the icosahedra cause influen-
(hepatitis delta virus) has been identified in human za,509,510 mumps, measles, and related diseases. The
patients with severe chronic hepatitis and who were internal structure must be complex. Only 1% of the
also infected with hepatitis B virus. The ssRNA in this virus is RNA, and that consists of several relatively
virus does encode at least one protein.482– 484 small pieces. These are negative strand viruses
One of the smallest of the encapsulated RNA- whose RNA is of the opposite polarity to the mRNA.
containing viruses is the satellitetobacconecrosis The latter must be formed by transcription from the
virus. It replicates only when the plant is also infected negative strand. The viruses carry their own RNA
with the larger tobacco necrosis virus. The satellite polymerase for this purpose. Of even more complex
virus, whose three-dimensional structure is known from structure are the bullet-shaped rhabdoviruses which
X-ray diffraction studies,485 contains a 1200-nucleotide cause rabies and vesicular stomatitis.511 The diameter
strand of RNA which encodes a 195-residue protein. of these viruses is 65 – 90 nm and the length 120 – 500

--- Page 251 ---

248 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
nm. The internal structure includes a helical arrange- induce the formation of 100 – 200 new bacteriophage
ment of nucleoprotein. They also are negative strand particles. One of the bacteriophage genes encodes a
viruses. protein that is also synthesized by the host and which
Among the retroviruses512– 514 are types B and C induces lysis of the cell membrane and destruction of
oncoviruses which induce malignant tumors in mam- the cell. Many animal viruses destroy cells in a similar
mals and birds515 and the human immunodeficiency fashion.
virus (HIV), the apparent causative agent of AIDS. Temperate bacteriophage, the best known being
Their RNA functions in a surprising way. Each virion phageλ, have a very different life cycle. Their DNA
contains a reverse transcriptase, an enzyme that usually becomes integrated at a specific point into the
transcribes copies of circular dsDNA copies from the genome of the bacterium (Chapter 27). Only rarely is
one or two mRNA-like molecules that make up the an infected cell lysed. The retroviruses that attack
virus genome. Following action of the reverse trans- mammals and birds have a similar characteristic.
criptase, one of the transcribed DNA circles becomes Their DNA is also integrated into the host genome.
covalently spliced into the host’s own cellular DNA. Some viruses that usually produce lysis of cells, e.g.,
There it remains permanently as a provirus. RNA SV40, adenoviruses, herpes viruses, and hepatitis B
molecules transcribed from the provirus serve as virus, can occasionally be integrated into the DNA of
mRNA for virus-encoded proteins and also as the the host. If such integration occurs in the middle of a
genomes for new virus particles. gene, that gene will be mutated. This is one way in
Double-stranded RNA is unusual in nature but which such viruses may induce cancers.
constitutes the genome of the reoviruses.516 The RNA One of the most important results of integration of
of these viruses fragments into segments upon infec- viral DNA into the host genome is that the integrated
tion. One member of the group is thought to be the genes are replicated as part of the genome and are
cause of acute diarrhea of infants.517 transmitted from one generation to the next. Among
these are the cancer-causing viral oncogenes (v-onc),
which are discussed in Box 11-D and in Chapter 11,
4. Viruses without Nucleic Acid? Section H. While viruses are important causes of
cancer in some animals, relatively few human cancers
The cause of the slow, fatal neurological disease of are thought to result directly from the action of viruses.
sheep known as scrapie has been a mystery for many However, the Epstein–Barr virus, which causes mono-
years. Similar human diseases include kuru and nucleosis, can sometimes be integrated into epithelial
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.518– 520 Scrapie can be trans- cells of nasal regions and can evidently cause cancer. The
mitted by injection and this has permitted isolation of same virus appears to be responsible for Burkitt’s lym-
the apparent infective agent, a 27- to 30-kDa hydro- phoma, a common cancer in certain areas in Africa.525
phobic protein particle521 which is devoid of DNA or
RNA. Prusiner521 suggested the name prion (protein-
aceous infectious particle) for the scrapie agent. How- 6. Plasmids and Transposable Genetic
ever, mRNA for the prion is present in normal as well Elements
as infected brains, and protein produced in mouse
cells from cloned prion genes did not cause scrapie In addition to their chromosomal DNA, bacteria
infections. Therefore, there was doubt about the caus- often carry extra small pieces of DNA as permanent
ative agent for the disease. The prion concept is now parts of their genome. These plasmids (sometimes
generally accepted and is considered further in Chapter calledepisomes), which are about the size of the DNA
29. There are still some who are looking for a nucleic of viruses, replicate independently of the host chromo-
acid component.519,522– 524 somes. Each bacterial cell usually contains more than
a single copy of the plasmid. For example, the “colici-
nogenic” plasmid ColE1, that infects E. coli is a circular
5. Life Cycles piece of DNA of molecular mass 4.2 x 106 Da. Over 20
copies are normally found per cell but in the presence
Viruses have many modes of life. They enter cells of a suitable concentration of the drug chloramphenicol
in various ways. Some enter through coated pits from the number may rise to 1000–2000.
which they are taken into lysosomes via endocytosis. Plasmids carry a variety of genes which are often
Others are literally injected into the cells (See Box 7-C). useful to bacteria. Some proteins encoded by plasmid
Within cells some viruses are assembled in the nucleus, genes confer drug resistance to a bacterium. Some are
some in the cytoplasm, and some in membranes. The antibiotics. For example, a protein encoded by a gene
typical life cycle of a virus leads to rapid formation of in plasmid ColE1 is toxic to other strains of E. coli.
large numbers of progeny. Within 20 minutes after Some plasmids carry genes for enzymes needed for
entrance into a bacterial cell, a bacteriophage can the oxidation of hydrocarbons. Some plasmids contain

--- Page 252 ---

H. Methods of Study 249
genes for the restriction endonucleases which have shearing of the very long, narrow strands of DNA.
become essential to present-day molecular biology and Even rapid pipetting of solutions will cause such
genetic engineering (Section H, 2). breakage.
As with some viruses, the DNA of many plasmids Extracted RNA molecules may be separated from
can become integrated into the genome of the host. each other by centrifugation in a sucrose gradient
An example is provided by the large 62-kDa plasmids (Chapter 3).528 Fragments of DNA are purified in the
known as sex factors. They contain genes encoding same way or by equilibrium centrifugation in CsCl
the protein subunits of the sex pili (Chapter 7) and gradients.37 Concentration gradients in the dense salt
can become integrated into the bacterial chromosome. solution are stable, and the sharpness of banding of
Bacteria containing integrated sex factors are “male” particles is ensured by use of a high centrifugal field.
and are able to transfer genes not only of the sex factor Single-stranded DNA may be separated from double-
but also of virtually the entire bacterial genome into stranded DNA, and DNAs of differing G + C content
other susceptible bacterial cells. This provides bacteria can be separated. The latter separation is based on
with the means for sexual reproduction. The transfer differences in buoyant densities ρ in CsCl which are
of DNA between the bacteria may occur via the sex approximately shown in Eq. 5-9.
pili (see Chapter 26). In this respect the sex factors are
similar to viruses such as M13 that also appear to gain ρ = 1.660 + 0.098 (mole fraction C + G) (5-9)
entrance to bacteria via sex pili.72
Integrated viruses are also related to transposable One of the most important methods for separating
genetic elements (transposons). These are segments either RNA or DNA mixtures is zone electrophoresis
of DNA that allow genes to move from place to place through polyacrylamide or agarose gels. The separat-
within the chromosomes (Chapter 27). ed bands may be visualized by scanning in ultraviolet
light or by fluorescence of intercalated dyes such as
ethidium bromide (Figs. 5-20, 5-22). This method is
H. Methods of Study being displaced to some extent by HPLC using DEAE
type ion exchange columns530,531 for small lengths of
Many of the methods discussed in Chapter 3 are DNA including plasmids. The procedure called pulsed
directly applicable to nucleic acids. A few additional field electrophoresis makes it possible to isolate very
methods will be considered in this section.525a large pieces of DNA, up to several million base pairs
in length.532– 534 The separation is carried out in agarose
gels, through which the long DNA rods must move in
1. Isolation and Separation of Nucleic Acids a snakelike fashion.534 The current is delivered in a
pulse and then, after a period of a second to several
RNA is often extracted from lysed cells or tissues, minutes, a second pulse in a different direction, usually
separated ribosomes, mitochondria, plastids, or nuclei at 90° to the first. The procedure is repeated many
by warming with aqueous phenol and a detergent times. The size of the DNA seems to affect the time
such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Proteins are required to reorient the molecules and to start moving
denatured by this treatment and are dissolved by the in the second direction. Intact DNA from small chro-
phenol, while RNA remains in the lighter aqueous mosomes can be separated (Fig. 5-42). To prevent
layer. Depending on the conditions DNA may either breakage of the DNA by shearing, intact cells are
remain in the aqueous layer or be removed.526– 528 suspended in liquid agarose and allowed to gel into a
Various precipitation and extraction procedures may block about 2 x 5 x 10 mm in size. The block is treated
be used to separate the RNA in the aqueous layer from with enzymes and detergents to lyse the cells and to
polysaccharides, from DNA (if present), and from their remove all protein and RNA.534 The block, containing
components.526,528,529 DNA may be extracted from cells the residual DNA molecules, is then embedded in the
or nuclei as a nucleic acid–protein complex using 1 M electrophoresis gel. Other methods of DNA separation
NaCl. The protein can then be denatured with an include chromatography on hydroxyl-apatite and gel
organic solvent, by detergents, or by phenol. It is filtration.
desirable to digest proteins away with a nonspecific
protein-hydrolyzing enzyme such as proteinase K.528
After removal of proteins DNA is often precipitated 2. Hydrolysis and Analysis
with cold ethanol.
During isolation of RNA, bentonite (a type of clay) Both DNA and RNA are easily broken down by
or other inhibitors of ribonuclease are often added. acid-catalyzed hydrolysis. Thus, heating at 100°C for
For the same reason, chelating agents that complex one hour in 12 M HClO is sufficient to hydrolyze
4
metal ions needed for the action of deoxyribonucleases nucleic acids to their constituent bases. However, for
are used to protect DNA. Care is necessary to avoid analysis of RNA it is better to heat in 1 N HCl for 1 h at

--- Page 253 ---

250 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
100°C. The products are adenine, guanine, cytidine-5'-
phosphate, and uridine-5'-phosphate.535 As is suggested
by this distribution of products, the glycosylamine
linkages to purines are more labile than those to pyri-
midines. The linkages are also less stable in DNA than
in RNA. A procedure based on these differences and
useful in sequencing by the Maxam-Gilbert method, is
to leave DNA overnight in the cold at pH 2 to cleave
off all of the purine bases. The resulting polymer is
known as an apurinic acid.
In alkaline solutions RNA is hydrolyzed to a mix-
ture of 2'- and 3'-nucleotides.
HOH2C Base HOH2C Base
O O
+
3' 2'
O OH HO O
–O3P PO3 –
The mechanism involves participation of the free Figure 5-42 Intact DNA from the chromosomes of three
2'-OH of the ribose groups and formation of cyclic 2', strains of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, ranging
3'-phosphates and is similar to that of pancreatic ribo- from 750 Kb to 5 Mb, separated by pulsed-field gel electro-
nuclease (Chapter 12). Because deoxyribose lacks the phoresis. Courtesy of C. Smith and T. E. Wellems. Repro-
duced by permission of Amersham Pharmacia Biotech Inc.
free 2'-OH, the phosphodiester linkages in DNA are
quite stable in base.
Hydrolytic cleavages of nucleic acids by the en-
zymes known as nucleases are of great practical value. The cuts in the two strands are made at the points
Pancreatic ribonuclease, an endonuclease, cuts a chain indicated by the arrows. This one endonuclease will
adjacent to a pyrimidine in nearly random fashion, cut almost any DNA into long pieces averaging about
leaving phospho groups attached to the 3' position in 5000 base pairs each. These pieces can in turn be
the nucleotide products (Fig. 5-43). Exonucleases cleaved by other restriction endonucleases to form
cleave from the ends of chains. For example, the phos- smaller fragments. Since there are about 2400 of these
phodiesterase of snake venom cleaves from the 3' end, enzymes known, with 188 different specificities,536 it
which must have a free 3'-OH group, to give 5'-nucleo- is possible to cut any piece of DNA down to a size of
tides. On the other hand, the phosphodiesterase from 100–500 base pairs, ideal for sequencing.537– 539 Each
spleen has the opposite polarity, cleaving chains from fragment has known sequences at the two ends. Some
the 5' end to give 3'-nucleotides. Similar variations in restriction enzymes cleave outside their specific recog-
specificity are found among enzymes that cleave DNA. nition sequence (see Table 26-2). Some recognize 16-
For example, pancreatic DNAase I, which cleaves nucleotide palindromes and cut at rare sites.
preferentially between adjacent purines and pyrimidines, It is sometimes desirable to cut a large DNA mole-
yields 5' mononucleotides whereas DNAase II gives cule at only a few points. One approach is to protect
3'-mononucleotides. Various hydrolytic cleavage reac- most sites of a restriction enzyme’s action by methyl-
tions of polynucleotides are summarized in Fig. 5-43. ating them (see Chapter 26) while protecting the desired
The most striking specificity in DNA hydrolysis is cleavage site, for example by a repressor protein540 or by
displayed by the restriction endonucleases which a PNA molecule (p. 227) of specific sequence designed to
are discussed further in Chapter 26. These fussy cata- “clamp” the site chosen for protection.541 Ribozymes
lysts cleave only at points within or close to a defined (Chapter 12) have been engineered to be as specific or
sequence of several nucleotides in double-stranded more specific than endonucleases.542,543 Other new
DNA. For example, the enzyme EcoR I cuts only at approaches are being developed.544
the following palindromic sequence: The base composition of either RNA or DNA can
be determined after hydrolysis catalyzed by 98% formic
acid at 175°C for 30 min or by 12 M perchloric acid at
5’ – GAAT T C – 3’ 100°C for 1 h.545 The bases can then be separated by
ion exchange chromatography on a sulfonated poly-
3’ – C T T AAG– 5’ styrene resin. RNA can be hydrolyzed to a mixture of
nucleoside 2’- and 3’-phosphates by 0.3 M NaOH at
→
→

--- Page 254 ---

H. Methods of Study 251
The free 2' –OH in RNA and other ribonucleotides can
participate in b-type cleavage by nucleophilic attack
on the phosphorus (see Fig 12-25 )
Cleavage here by weak acids (pH 2) yields an “apurinic acid”
H H H H
B Pu Py B
O O O O
O O O O
5'-End 3'-End
O O O O
P P P P
– HO3P O O
O –
O O
O –
O O
O –
O O
O –
O
a
b Pancreatic ribonuclease b cleavage
is to the right of pyrimidines
A. Cleavage at point a is catalyzed
1. Throughout the molecule by endonucleases
Pancreatic deoxyribonuclease I
2. Only at the 3' end by exonucleases
Venom diesterase, nonspecific, attacks DNA and RNA. A free 3'-OH is essential
B. Cleavage at point b is catalyzed
1. Randomly throughout the molecule by endonucleases and by bases (nonenzymatically)
Pancreatic ribonuclease cleaves only to the right of a pyrimidine-containing nucleotide
Ribonuclease T1 of Aspergillus oryzae cleaves to the right of a guanine-containing residue (3'-guanylate) in ssRNA
Ribonuclease T2 of Aspergillus oryzae cleaves to the right of an adenine-containing residue (3'-adenylate) in ssRNA
Pancreatic deoxyribonuclease (DNase) II
Micrococcal DNase
2. Only at the 5' end by exonucleases
Bovine spleen phosphodiesterase hydrolyzes both polyribo- and polydeoxyribonucleotides
Figure 5-43 Some hydrolytic cleavage reactions of polynucleotides. Reactions of both RNA and DNA are included.
37°C for 16 h and DNA can be hydrolyzed to nucleotides
3. Characteristic Reactions of the Bases and
enzymatically. The negatively charged nucleotides can
Backbone
then be separated by ion exchange chromatography on
a quaternary base-type resin (Chapter 3). Periodate
Reactions of nucleophiles. A number of nucleo-
cleavage (Eq. 4-12) and reduction of the resulting dialde-
philic reagents add reversibly at the 6 position of pyrim-
hydes by [3H]NaBH to trialcohols allows introduction of
4 idines. Thus, bisulfite adds to uridine (Eq. 5-10).528
a radioactive label (Fig. 5-44). Alternatively, the dialde-
Hydroxylamine (HONH ) adds in a similar fashion to
hydes can be reductively alkylated by an amine plus 2
give a compound with – HNOH in the 6 positions.528
NaCNBH .546
3 Sodium borohydride (NaBH ), which can be viewed
The total content of RNA + DNA in tissues may 4
as a donor of a hydride ion (H –), reduces uridine to
be estimated from the phosphorus content or by color
the 5,6-dihydro derivative. This presumably occurs
reactions of the sugars.37,545 These reactions depend
by attack of the hydride ion at position 6 in a manner
upon dehydration to furfural or deoxyfurfural by
analogous to the reaction of bisulfite in Eq. 5-10.
concentrated sulfuric acid or HCl (Eq. 4-4). Furfural
Cytidine reacts in the same way, but the bisulfite
formed from RNA reacts with orcinol (3,5-dihydroxy-
addition compound is unstable. These C5–C6 adducts
toluene) and ferric chloride to produce a green color
of cytidine all have a greatly enhanced reactivity at C4,
useful in colorimetric estimation of RNA. A similar
reaction of DNA with diphenylamine yields a blue color.
O
Quantitative determination of over 90 free nucleotide
compounds found within cells can be accomplished H
5
by thin layer chromatographic procedures on as few H N
as 106 bacterial cells (~ 2 µg) labeled by growth in a Uridine + HSO3 – 6 H H
32P-containing medium.547 –
i O N SO3
Ribose (5-10)

--- Page 255 ---

252 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
presumably because of the lessened aromatic character salts and by bisulfite and hydroxylamine. Catalysis
of the ring. Cytidine is slowly deaminated by base, probably occurs, at least in part, as a result of addition
presumably as a result of attack by hydroxyl ion on the of these nucleophiles at the 6 position to form com-
electrophilic center at C4 and subsequent elimination pounds with increased nucleophilic reactivity at C4.548
of NH (Eq. 5-11). The reaction is catalyzed by buffer Hydroxylamine and methoxyamine (NH OCH ) par-
3 2 3
ticipate in reactions parallel to that of the hydroxyl ion
H+ in Eq. 5-11. Products contain –NHOH or –NH–OCH
3
in place of – NH but tautomerize to the more stable
NH2 H2N
OH forms shown in E
2
q. 5-12. Similar substitution reactions
–
OH occur with other amines.33 The C6 adduct with hydra-
+
H N H N zine can undergo ring cleavage (Eq. 5-13). The initial
product then undergoes β elimination, leaving ribo-
sylurea or deoxyribosylurea. The same reaction can
O N O N
be carried out on intact strands of DNA and is widely
R R used in determination of nucleotide sequences.
Adduct The conversion of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine to the
NH3
OH (–OCH3) OH (–OCH3)
O H N N
H N N HN
O N O N O N
R (5-11) R R (5-12)
A B
Figure 5-44 Fluorographs of 2’3'-[3H] nucleoside trialcohols from Bacillus subtilis grown in the absence (A) and presence (B)
of 5-fluorouracil. About 2.3 nmol of nucleosides from each sample was chromatographed and exposed to X-ray film for 90 h.
at– 80 °C. Or (origin) B , B , and B contain unidentified material present in a reaction mixture lacking RNA. Abbreviations
1 2 3
used: FU, 5-fluorouridine; FC, 5-fluorocytidine; U, uridine; C, cytidine; G, guanosine; A, adenosine; I, inosine; m’G, 1-meth-
ylguanosine; m7G, 7-methylguanosine; m’A, 1-methyladenosine; m6A, 6-methyladenosine; m6 A, 6,6-dimethyladenosine; t6A,
6
N pr - o [9 d - u (β ct - D o - f r i ψ b ; o m fu 5 r U an , 5 o - s m yl e ) t p h u y r lu in r - i 6 d - i y n l e c ( a r r ib b o am sy o lt y h l y ] m th i r n e e o ) n ; i m ne o ; 5 H U, 5 6 5 U -m , 5 e , t 6 h -d ox ih y y u d ri r d o i u n r e id ; N in ’ e , ; a ψ n , u p c s l e e u o d si o d u e r i t d ri i a n l e co ; ψ ho D , l d o e b c t o a m in p ed o s b it y i o r n educ-
tion of a nucleoside dialdehyde with [3H]NaBH ; FU-5 and FU-20 samples correspond to tRNAs from cells grown at that final
4
concentration of 5-fluorouracil in µg / ml. Courtesy of Ivan Kaiser.

--- Page 256 ---

H. Methods of Study 253
H+
O O NH2 H H
N
CH2OH
H
H + C O
H N
H
NH2
H2N
H NH H
NH
O N H O N N
H
H2CO
H
R R HOH2C CH2OH
O N
β elimination
H (5-15)
N
N H2N
These are reversible reactions. A more nearly irrevers-
H
ible crosslinking can occur by elimination of water
O NH
between one of these products and a nucleophilic
R group in another base. A dicarbonyl reagent that is
Ribosylurea (5-13) widely used because of its specificity toward guanine
iskethoxal (Eq. 5-16).
5-methylenesulfonate (5-CH SO –) by reaction with
2 3
bisulfite should also be mentioned.549 This is a nucleo- O
philic displacement on the electron-deficient methylene
H
N
group of this base. C= O HN
+
Reactions with electrophilic reagents. Reactions H3C C= O
C H2N N N
of nucleic acids with the simplest electrophile, the proton,
have been considered in Section A2. Somewhat similar H OC2H5 R
are the reactions by which metal ions bind at many sites high pH pH 7
on both the bases and the phosphate groups of the back-
O
bone.550 HO H
An important reaction is the deamination of amines
by dilute nitrous acid. This reagent, by a complex HO C N N
mechanism, converts the amino groups of cytidine, H3C C
C
adenosine, and guanosine to hydroxyl groups; hydroxy N N N
H H
compounds tautomerize to the corresponding amides O
R
(Eq. 5-14). C2H5
(5-16)
NH2 O
Formation of the cyclic product is a consequence of the
presence of the adjacent amino and NH groups in the
HNO2
N HN guanine ring.
Pyrimidines undergo halogenation at position 5
(5-14)
(Eq. 5-17), while guanine reacts at position 8. Adenine
is quite unreactive. Elemental halogens or a variety of
Cytidine reacts more rapidly than does adenosine other halogenating reagents may be used. Of special
which in turn reacts more rapidly than guanosine. The
reaction converts cytosine into uracil and adenine into Br + cytidine → 5-Br-cytidine + H+ + Br–
2
hypoxanthine. The changes are mutagenic because (5-17)
during replication the modified bases of the DNA pair
differently than do the original bases. Guanine is con- value is iodination with 131I or 125I, by which a high
verted to xanthine but this is not likely to be highly level of radioactivity may be introduced into nucleic
mutagenic. Nitrous acid can also convert uridine to acids.
5-nitrouridine. Alkylation reactions are not only of use in struc-
The amino groups of the bases react reversibly tural studies but also provide the basis for the action
with aldehydes but to a lesser extent than do the more of a large class of mutagenic compounds.528 Treatment
strongly basic amino groups of the amino acids. Form- of a nucleoside, nucleotide, or nucleic acid with an
aldehyde forms adducts containing either one or two alkyl iodide or a dialkylsulfate converts residues of
molecules of the aldehyde (Eq. 5-15). guanosine to an N7-alkyl-guanosine (Eq. 5-18).

--- Page 257 ---

254 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
O H R'
R
7 N O
R– I I – + N +
HN
Guanosine
R N N
N H
H2N N
Ribose O N
(5-18)
Reaction occurs at other nitrogen atoms as well as the
oxygen atom of the base and of the ribose ring to a There are many other alkylating agents which often
lesser extent. Adenine is alkylated preferentially at display widely varying reactivity and specificity toward
N-1 and cytosine and thymine at the corresponding particular nucleic acid bases and particular nucleotide
position (N-3) almost exclusively. Uridine and thymi- sequences.
dine react very slowly. Adenine is also alkylated at A striking effect of alkylation of guanine in nucleic
N-3, N-7 and at the exocyclic N-6. acids is the labilization of the N-glycosyl linkage to the
Other alkylating reagents include the powerful ribose or deoxyribose. This effect can be understood
mutagens dialkylnitrosamines and alkylnitrosoureas. in terms of the induction by resonance of a partial
positive charge on the nitrogen of the glycosyl linkage.
R
O = N N
R O
CH3
Dialkylnitrosamines
+
N
NH
Epoxides alkylate by a nucleophilic displacement
HO
reaction that opens the ring (Eq. 5-19).
CH2
O
N N NH2
Y–
H H H H
R C C R' R C C Y HO
O HO R' CH3 O
H+
(5-19)
N
NH
The nitrogen and sulfur mustards undergo internal
ring closure to an iminium ion (Eq. 5-20) which can HO CH2 O N+ N NH2
then open by attack of a nucleophilic atom of the
nucleic acid.
OH
R
Cl CH2CH2 N CH2CH2 Cl A nitrogen mustard gas
As is indicated by the small arrows on the right-hand
structure, the positive charge assists in an elimination
–
Cl
reaction that produces an oxycarbocation. The latter
R can then react with a hydroxyl ion from water.
+
Cl CH2CH2 N CH2
Reactions causing cleavage of the sugar-
CH2
phosphate backbone. Treatment of DNA with 16 – 18
Y– (5-20)
M hydrazine (Eq. 5-13) leads to the destruction of the
pyrimidine rings. The reaction can be made some-
Other alkylating agents react through nucleophilic what specific for cytosine by carrying it out in the
addition to a carbon–carbon double bond. Thus, presence of a high concentration of chloride.551 The
acrylonitrile reacts with the nitrogen or oxygen atoms remaining polymer, an apyrimidinic acid, contains
of nucleic acids in the same manner as does the SH residues of ribosylurea. These undergo an amino-
group in Eq. 3-25. The water-soluble carbodiimides catalyzed displacement and a β elimination sequence
react as in the first step of Eq. 3-10 to form adducts of that cleaves the polynucleotide chain (Eq. 5-21).
the following type: Hydration of the aldehyde (Eq. 13-1) and several

--- Page 258 ---

H. Methods of Study 255
–
NH2
4. Melting, Hybridization, and Polynucleotide
R PO2
H C Probes
O CH2 N O
O
Like proteins, nucleic acids can undergo denatur-
N
ation. The strands of the double helix of DNA are
O H Piperidine, often used separated and the double-stranded regions of RNA
R' PO2 – as the displacing base molecules“melt.” Denaturation can be accomplished
a by addition of acids, bases, and alcohols or by removal
of stabilizing counter ions such as Mg2+. The product
–
R PO2
H
+
is a random coil and denaturation can be described as
O CH2 a helix → coil transition. Denaturation of nucleic acids
H
O
by heat, like that of proteins, is cooperative (Chapter 7,
N Section A,3) and can be described by a characteristic
melting temperature.
O H
R' PO2 – A plot of the optical absorbance at 260 nm (the
b wavelength of maximum light absorption by nucleic
acids) versus temperature is known as a melting
–
R PO2
H
curve (Fig. 5-45). The absorbance is lower, by up to
O CH2 40%, for native than for denatured nucleic acids. This
O H
+ hypochromiceffect (Chapter 23) is a result of the
C N
interaction between the closely stacked bases in the
Schiff base helices of the native molecules. The melting tempera-
O H
ture T is taken as the midpoint of the increase in
R' PO2 –
H
+
absorb
m
ance (Fig. 5-45). As the percentage of G + C
c O increases, the nucleic acid becomes more stable toward
R' P O– denaturation because of the three hydrogen bonds in
–
R PO2
OH
each GC pair. T
m
increases almost linearly with in-
O CH2 creases in the G + C content. In the “standard” citrate
OH H
+ buffer (0.15 M NaCl + 0.015 M sodium citrate, pH 7.0)
C N
Eq. 5-22 holds. The exact numerical relationship depends
H
strongly upon the ionic composition and pH of the
medium.37,72,552,553
Two d O
steps H 2 O R P OH O– % (G + C) = 2.44 (T m – 69.3); T m in °C (5-22)
CH2 H The curves in Fig. 5-45 appear simple, but using newer
HO C O + HN apparatus and plotting the first derivative of the melt-
ing curve yields a complex pattern that depends on
Hydration, the sequence of bases.555
e
tautomerization Complete denaturation of DNA leads to separation
of the two complementary strands. If a solution of
CH3 O
OH
denatured DNA is cooled quickly, the denatured strands
O C remain separated. However, if the temperature is
(5-21) held for some time just below T (a process known as
m
annealing), the native double-stranded structure can
be reformed. An important tool for studying DNA
tautomerization steps are involved in step e of this
has been the measurement of the kinetics of reasso-
equation. This reaction is very useful in sequence
ciation of separated strands of relatively short DNA
determination (Section 6). Notice that “tracts” of
fragments.72,556,557
purine nucleotides remain intact after this treatment.
Because it depends upon the concentration of two
A similar base-catalyzed reaction sequence can be
separated strands, reassociation obeys second-order
used to displace N7-methylguanine and to cleave the
kinetics (Chapter 9) and Eq. 5-23, which is readily
polynucleotide. Ethylnitrosourea, in its reaction with
derived by integrating Eq. 9-8 for [A] = [B] = C from
purines, is useful as a structural probe of RNA.
time 0 to t:
C / C 0 = 1/ (1 + k C 0 t) (5-23)

--- Page 259 ---

256 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
drastically different between two species do not (Fig.
5-46). One way to do such an experiment is to immo-
bilize the long-chain denatured DNA from the one
organism by embedding it in an agar gel558 or by
absorbing it onto a nitrocellulose filter.559,560 The DNA
fragments from the second organism are passed through
a column containing “beads” of the DNA-containing
agar or through the filter with adsorbed DNA. Pairing
of fragments with complementary sequences occurs
Initial state
Half-reaction
Final state
Concentration× time (Ct)
0
The initial concentration of denatured DNA, C , is
0
related in this way to the concentration C of DNA
remaining dissociated at time t. A plot of the fraction
of molecules remaining single-stranded versus the
logarithm of C t (Fig. 5-46A) is a convenient way of 0
displaying data. As indicated in Fig. 5-46B, the value
of C t increases in direct proportion to the length of 0
the DNA chain in the genome, but it is very much
decreased if the sequence of bases is highly repetitive
[poly(T) and poly(A)]. The slope of the plot at the
midpoint gives an indication of the heterogeneity of
the DNA fragments in a solution.
Denatured DNA fragments can sometimes reasso-
ciate with DNA from a different source to form hybrid
duplexes. Such double helices, in which one strand
comes from one strain of an organism and the other
strand from a genetic variant of the same organism or Figure 5-46 Reassociation curves for DNA from Britten
from a different species, are known as heteroduplex. and Kohne.556,561 (A) Time course of an ideal, second-order
Some mutations consist of deletions or additions of reaction to illustrate the features of the log C 0 t plot. The
equation represents the fraction of DNA which remains
one or a substantial number of bases to a DNA chain.
single-stranded at any time after the initiation of the reaction.
Heteroduplexes prepared from DNA of such mutants
For this example, k is taken to be 1.0, and the fraction remain-
hybridized with that from a nonmutant strain have
ing single-stranded is plotted against the product of total con-
normal hydrogen-bonded Watson–Crick base pairs for
centration and time on a logarithmic scale. (B) Reassociation
the most part. However, they may have single-stranded of double-stranded nucleic acids from various sources. The
loops in regions where long deletions or additions genome size is indicated by the arrows near the upper nomo-
prevent complementary base pairing. graphic scale. Over a factor of 109, this value is proportional
Hybridization measurements have been used in to the C trequired for half-reaction. The DNA was sheared,
0
many studies of homology of nucleic acids from differ- and the other nucleic acids are reported to have approximately
the same fragment size (about 400 nucleotides, single-stranded).
ent species. A nucleic acid is cut (e.g., by sonic oscilla-
Correction has been made to give the rate that would be
tion) into pieces of moderate length (~ 1000 nucleotides)
observed at 0.18 M sodium-ion concentration. The tempera-
and is denatured. The denatured DNA fragments are ture in each case was optimal, i.e., ~ 30°C below the melting
mixed with denatured DNA of another species. Nu-
temperature T . The extent of reassociation was established
m
cleotide sequences that are closely similar between by measuring optical rotation (calf thymus DNA), ribonu-
species tend to hybridize, whereas sequences that are clease resistance (MS-2), or hypochromicity.
gniniamer
noitcarF
dednarts-elgnis
1.0
C 1
= C 1 + kCt
0 0
0.5
0
0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Nucleotide pairs
1.0
0.5
0.0
10–6 10–4 10–2 0.1 1 10 100 10,000
Ct(mol× s/l) 0
gniniamer
noitcarF
dednarts-elgnis
1.48
1.44
1.40
1.36
1.32
1.28
1.24
1.20
1.16
1.12
1.08
1.04
1.00
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
Temperature (°C)
1 10 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 1010
Poly(U) + T4
poly(A) Calf
(nonrepetitive
fraction)
E. coli
Mouse
satellite MS-2
mn
062
ta
ecnabrosba
evitaleR
Pneumococcus
Serratia
A
Figure 5-45 A melting curve for DNA molecules from two
different sources. From Davidson.554
B

--- Page 260 ---

H. Methods of Study 257
and such paired fragments are retained while strands Nick
that do not pair pass on through the column (or filter).
5’ 3’
Both DNA hybrids and DNA–RNA hybrid du-
3’ 5’
plexes are very important to present day genetic
research.560,562 Molecules of mRNA that represent DNA polymerase I
transcripts of a particular gene will hybridize only
5’ 3’
with one of the two separated strands of DNA for that
3’ 5’
gene.
A major use of hybridization is to locate a gene or
other DNA or RNA sequence by means of a synthetic
5’ 5’ 3’
probe.563 This is a small piece of DNA or RNA which
3’ 5’
is labeled in some way, e.g., with a radioisotope such
as3H,32P, or 125I. Alternatively, the probe may carry a Denaturation
highly fluorescent dye or a “tag” that can be recognized
5’
by a specific antibody.564,565 An example of the latter is Radiolabeled probe (5-24)
the use of the vitamin biotin and the specific binding
protein avidin (see Box 14-B).566 Related procedures
employ labeling with digoxigeninand often employ Probes may also consist of DNA copied from
chemiluminescent detection.567– 569 Several methods mRNA. This is known as cDNA and is also widely
for preparation of probes are in use. Some are enzy- used to determine indirectly the sequences of mRNA
matic but the direct chemical synthesis of oligonucleo- molecules. Messenger RNA may be isolated from the
tide probes is probably used the most. total cellular RNA by affinity chromatography on
One of the first methods devised for making a bound poly (dT) or poly (U). These materials selec-
highly radioactive DNA probe is called nicktransla- tively hold RNA with the poly (A) tails characteristic
tion.570 A piece of dsDNA, e.g., a “restriction” frag- of most eukaryotic mRNA (see Chapter 28). Another
ment cut from a larger piece of DNA by restriction source of mRNA is polyribosomes (polysomes), which
endonucleases, is selected. A small amount of pancre- are “reading” mRNA and actively making proteins.
atic DNase I is added. It creates “nicks” in which one An antibody to the protein for which mRNA is desired
strand has been cut and some nucleotides have been will often bind to the protein chains being synthesized
removed leaving a gap. Now the DNA is incubated and precipitate the polysomes. The mRNA can be
with DNA polymerase I (pol I) and a mixture of the recovered and used as a template for cDNA.
four mononucleotide triphosphates, the precursors of Synthesis of cDNA, usually in radiolabeled form is
biological synthesis of DNA (Chapter 27). Usually a accomplished with reversetranscriptase, the enzyme
32P or 35S label with high radioactivity is present in from retroviruses that synthesize a DNA–RNA hybrid
one of the nucleotide triphosphates as indicated in from ssRNA.570– 572 A short oligo (dT) primer is usually
the following structure. The polymerase fills the gap, hybridized to the 3' poly (A) tail to initiate synthesis.
adding nucleotides to the exposed 3' end of the nicked Reverse transcriptase also has ribonuclease (RNase H)
chain. E. coli pol I has a second enzymatic activity activity and will digest away the RNA. If desired,
which allows it to digest a polynucleotide chain from synthesis of the second strand can be carried out by
a DNA polymerase to give a complete DNA duplex.
Many gene sequences have been deduced from cDNA
35S copies.
Often the most practical approach to obtaining a
O – – O O 32P DNA probe is synthesis of a mixture of short oligonu-
O P O α P Thymine cleotides, often in radioactive form as described in the
γ β
Cytosine
P O next section. The “redundancy” in the genetic code,
HO O CH2 Guanine or
– O O O Adenine i.e., the existence of two or more codons for most
H H amino acids, presents a problem in designing an oligo-
nucleotide probe based on amino acid sequence infor-
HO H
mation. Examination of Table 5-5 suggests part of the
The four nucleotide triphosphate precursors of DNA
solution. Whereas only Met and Trp have single un-
ambiguous codons nine amino acids have only two
codons each. We should try to find an amino sequence
the 5' end. Thus, as synthesis proceeds at the 3' side that contains Met and Trp and as many of the nine
the nick is “translated” as shown in (Eq. 5-24). others as possible. We should avoid sequences that
contain Ser, Leu, or Arg because each has six codons.
We can then make a mixture of oligonucleotides, using

--- Page 261 ---

258 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
the various coding possibilities. Mixtures of as many
Thyminyl
as 1024 (210) oligonucleotides have been used. One of N-4-Benzoylcytosinyl
these may bind tightly and specifically to the desired DMT O CH2 N-6-Benzyladeninyl
O
DNA segment. Instead of such a complex mixture it N-2-Isobutyrylguaninyl
H H
may be more useful to incorporate a modified base at
the most ambiguous positions. For example, inosine, H
H3C O
which occurs in the wobble position in anticodons CH
(Fig. 5-30), can pair with A, C, or T.573 Substitution H3C P
of 2-aminoadenosine can cause a probe to bind more H3C
N O CH2CH2CN
tightly because a third hydrogen bond will be present C
H
in each AT pair.574 H3C Activated monomeric
nucleotides for synthesis
Another important procedure is labeling ends of of polynucleotides
polynucleotides. Most often the 5' end is labeled with
a radioisotope or by covalent attachment of a fluores-
cent dye. For example, a polynucleotidekinase can from the phosphorus atoms by β elimination and all of
be used to transfer a radioactive γ-phospho group from the other blocking groups removed by treatment with
ATP to the 5' end of a polynucleotide that has a free concentrated NH . The whole procedure has been
3
5'-OH group. automated.580– 582
If a large piece of DNA is needed several oligonu-
cleotides can be joined end to end enzymatically (Eq.
5. Synthesis of Oligonucleotides
and Polynucleotides
O
Efficient solid-phase methods of syn- Si O CH2 C CH2
thesis analogous to those for polypeptides
Si O Si CH2 CH2 N
H
CH2 COOH DMT O CH2
O
Base 1
Si O
(Fig. 3-15) have been devised. The pioneer- Dicyclohexyl-
Silica
carbodiimide
ing work was done by H. G. Khorana, who support a OH
made the first synthetic gene575 and later First
synthesized a gene for the visual pigment DMT O CH2 BBaassee 11 monomer
O
rhodopsin (Chapter 23). Several synthetic
approaches have been developed.576 Cur-
rently the most popular method involves Silica C O
the use of phosphite esters. Most nucleo- O
ZnBr
philic groups of the monomers are deriva- DMT O CH2 BBaassee 22 b Butan 2 ol extraction
O H
tized with removable blocking groups. Second
For example, N-4 of cytosine and N-6 of monomer
O CH2
O
BBaassee 11
adenosine may carry benzoyl groups. The C3H7 O
N P
5'–OH of each nucleotide is blocked by a
C3H7 O Silica C O
d
di
i
m
-p
e
-a
th
n
o
is
x
y
y
l
t
p
ri
h
ty
en
l,
y
D
lp
M
h
T
e
O
ny
)
l
g
m
ro
e
u
th
p
y
.
l
T
(
h
al
e
s o
3' –
ca
O
l
H
led
NC
CH2
CH2 O
A
su
d
c
d
ce
it
s
i
s
o
i
n
v e
of
nucleotides
is converted to one of a number of activated
units
derivatives such as the following N,N- DMT O CH2 BBaassee 12 c
diisopropylamino phosphines.575,577– 579 O
Solid-phase synthesis is usually done
on a silica support with a covalently at- O
tached succinamide as shown in Eq. 5-25. NC CH2 CH2 O P DMT O CH2 O BBaassee 22
The first nucleotide at the 3' end of the O CH2 BBaassee 11
O
chain to be synthesized is attached by an d
O
ester linkage to the bound succinamide
(stepa, Eq. 5-25). The 5'-protecting group Silica C O I 2 , H 2 O O P
O CH2 BBaassee 11
is removed in step b and the 5'-OH reacts O O
with the activated phosphine of the second
nucleotide (step c, Eq. 5-25). Steps b and c
O
Silica C
are then repeated as often as necessary to
complete the chain. The finished polynu- Conc. NH 3 O
cleotide can be removed from the solid e
Removal of all protecting
(5-25)
support, the cyanoethyl groups removed groups and release from silica

--- Page 262 ---

H. Methods of Study 259
BOX 5-D DNA FINGERPRINTING
Jeffreys et al.a– c digested human DNA to comple- The technique has come into widespread use in
tion with Hinf I and Sau3A restriction endonucleases. forensic analysis, with DNA typing being possible
Certain fragments, which originated from “mini- from a single hair.g In a famous early case it was
satellite” bands of repetitive DNA showed a very used to allow an immigrant child to be reunited
high degree of polymorphism among the population. with his motherh and it is being used regularly to
Many different fragments sharing these repeated protect innocent persons accused of rape or murder.i
sequences were formed in the restriction digest. If a It is also widely used to provide evidence of guilt.
suitable labeled probe was used, it hybridized with However, the very small chance of a close match
as many as 80 different bands.a,d– f The resulting between unrelated persons prevents the use of DNA
pattern appeared, like a fingerprint, to be different typing alone as proof of guilt. Because DNA samples
for every individual, as is shown in the accompany- are often “amplified” by PCR (Section H,6), there is
ing photo. Unlike a fingerprint the DNA pattern also a possibility of contamination and forensic use
also contains information that often allows deduc- of DNA typing is still controversial.i– m
tions about parentage. However, DNA typing continues to be improvedf,n,o
and to be applied in a great variety of ways. For
example, the skeletal remains of a murder victim
were identified by DNA fingerprints after being
buried for eight years.p DNA typing is also used to
study mating habits of birds,q the genetic variability
of populations of whales sampled by biopsy,r etc.
a Jeffreys, A. J., Wilson, V., and Thein, S. L. (1985) Nature (London)
314, 67–73
b Lewin, R. (1986) Science233, 521–522
c Jeffreys, A. J., Wilson, V., and Thein, S. L. (1985) Nature (London)
316, 76–79
d Vassart, G., Georges, M., Monsieur, R., Brocas, H., Lequarre, A.
S., and Christophe, D. (1987) Science235, 683–684
e Huang, L.-S., and Breslow, J. L. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 8952–
8955
f Kirby, L. T. (1990) DNA Fingerprinting, Stockton Press, New
York
g Higuchi, R., von Beroldingen, C. H., Sensabaugh, G. F., and
Erlich, H. A. (1988) Nature (London)332, 543–546
h Jeffreys, A. J., Brookfield, J. F. Y., and Semeonoff, R. (1985)
Nature (London)317, 818 –819
i Balding, D. J., and Donnelly, P. (1994) Nature (London)368,
285–286
j Neufeld, P. J., and Colman, N. (1990) Sci. Am.262(May), 46–53
k Lewontin, R. C., and Hartl, D. L. (1991) Science254, 1745–1750
l Lander, E. S., and Budowle, B. (1994) Nature (London)371,
735–738
DNA “fingerprints” made from one or two drops of blood mLewontin, R. C. (1994) Nature (London)372, 398
n Uitterlinden, A. G., Slagboom, P. E., Knook, D. L., and Vijg, J.
from ten different individuals. DNA was isolated, digested
(1989)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.86, 2742–2746
to completion with restriction endonuclease Hinf I, and
o Jeffreys, A. J., MacLeod, A., Tamaki, K., Neil, D. L., and
subjected to electrophoresis in a 20-cm-long agarose gel
Monckton, D. G. (1991) Nature (London)354, 204–209
until all DNA fragments smaller than 1.5 kb in length had pHagelberg, E., Gray, I. C., and Jeffreys, A. J. (1991) Nature
passed off the gel. The DNA was then transferred to a (London)352, 427 – 429
nitrocellulose filter by Southern’s method and hybridized qBurke, T., and Bruford, M. W. (1987) Nature (London)327,
with a 32P-labeled single-stranded DNA probe prepared 149–152
from cloned human minisatellite DNA. The probe used rHoelzel, A. R., and Amos, W. (1988) Nature (London)333, 305
had the “consensus” composition (AGAGGTGGGCAG-
GTGG). Within the 29 tandem repeats in this 0.46-kb
probe there are various sequences close to the one shown.
Filters were then autoradiographed for four days. Two
duplicate samples (marked D) were taken from the same
individual and two others (marked S) from two sisters.
A number of bands in common are evident. From Jeffreys
et al.c

--- Page 263 ---

260 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
27-5). For example, a functional 17-bp gene for the 53- probes.605 A large sample of a few pg of DNA can be
residue human epidermal growth factor was synthe- amplified in 20 cycles to micrograms. By placing
sized by joining ten oligonucleotides of lengths 11 – 59 sequencing primers within the amplified segments,
bp.575 DNA is often synthesized enzymatically using it is possible to generate DNA that can be sequenced
methods described in Chapter 26. Cloned sequences directly using the dideoxy sequencing technique
of synthetic DNA can also be transcribed to produce (Chapter 5) without cloning.606 The PCR technique
polyribonucleotides of any desired sequence.583 has also been used to amplify cDNA molecules formed
New nonenzymatic methods for RNA synthesis have from RNA transcripts present in very low abundance.
also been devised.583– 587 One of the problems with the PCR is that priming may
occur by DNA fragments other than the added primers.
Contamination must be scrupulously avoided. Another
6. The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) problem is that errors are introduced into DNA during
amplification by PCR. Perhaps 1 in 200 of the copies
This important technique was first described in will contain an incorrect base.607 If such a molecule is
1971–1974 by Khorana and associates588,589 but was not cloned the error will be perpetuated. Good practice
used until it was rediscovered in 1983 by Mullis.590– 593 requires that more than one clone is selected and
It was quickly developed591,592,594– 596 and has played a sequenced to allow such errors to be avoided.
major role in biochemistry ever since. It continues to
be applied in numerous ways.589,597– 599a
The PCR technique provides a way of “amplifying” 7. Sequence Determination
a small number of DNA molecules, i.e., to produce
many copies. This is often done by cloning but PCR Satisfactory (but slow) methods for determining
offers a quick and easy way to obtain millions of copies sequences of RNA molecules have been known for
of a desired relatively short segment of DNA. Standard over 30 years. The procedures are somewhat parallel
PCR can be used for up to about 5000-nucleotide to those used in sequencing proteins. However, no
pieces. More recently modified procedures have similar method could be devised for DNA. Little
allowed 35-kb segments to be amplified.600 progress was made until rather recently when new
The basic PCR procedure is initiated by hybridiz- approaches led to extremely rapid procedures for
ing two oligonucleotide primers onto opposite strands sequencing DNA. As a consequence, it is now much
of denatured DNA, one at each end of the section chosen easier to learn the sequences of genes than it is to
for amplification (Fig. 5-47). A DNA polymerase is then sequence the proteins which they encode!
used to convert each of the separated strands into a
duplex. The mixture of products is then heated to Preparing the DNA. The first step is to obtain a
denature the two new duplexes. After cooling, the sample of enough identical DNA molecules to permit
primers, which are present in great excess, hybridize sequence analysis. This in itself may be a complex
to all four strands. In a second cycle of polymerase undertaking. Perhaps we want to know the sequence
action these are all converted to duplexes, etc. After 20 of one particular gene in the 3,500,000 kilobase pairs
cycles millions of copies will be made. At first, copies of DNA present in a single human cell. How can this
with tails extending beyond the limits specified by the gene be found and the DNA be obtained for analysis?
oligonucleotide primers will be formed. However, it is Three techniques have been essential: cutting the DNA
easy to see that after a few cycles, most molecules will with restriction endonucleases, hybridization, and
be of just the desired length. A heat-stable polymerase cloning. More recently PCR and related methods608
from Thermus aquaticus (Taq polymerase) is used so that have simplified the sample preparation. DNA can often
the enzyme is not denatured by the repeated cycles of be amplified using primers that contain sequences that
heating and cooling, which are conducted automatically will later serve as sequencing primers.
by a simple apparatus.
The polymerase chain reaction is being used to Restriction maps and Southern blots. Although
speed up prenatal diagnosis of genetic diseases, to it doesn’t require the synthesis of a primer, the Maxam
detect viral infections, for tissue typing needed for –Gilbert procedure usually demands that a “restriction
organ transplantation, in forensic procedures, and in map” of the DNA be prepared to help keep track of
the study of the DNA of ancient tissues such as those the fragments being sequenced.609 See also Chapter 26.
of frozen wooly mammoths.601– 603 If suitable restriction Figure 5-48610– 612 shows the restriction map of the mito-
enzyme sites are present in the primers, the amplified chondrial DNA gene, oxi3 from yeast. This gene, which
DNA can be cloned readily.604 The 3.3 x 10–9 fmol of a encodes one of the subunits of cytochrome oxidase
DNA sequence found in a diploid chromosome pair in (Chapter 18), consists of 9979 base pairs. It was cloned
a single cell can be amplified in 50 cycles to 5–500 fmol, in a suitable plasmid after which the restriction map
enough to study by hybridization with radioactive (Fig. 5-48) was prepared by cutting with 18 different

--- Page 264 ---

H. Methods of Study 261
restriction enzymes.611 The protein subunit contains incorporated32P is flowed repeatedly across the nitro-
510 residues and therefore requires a coding capacity cellulose sheet under conditions that favor formation
in the DNA of 1530 base pairs. This is only 16% of the of hybrids. Only the DNA complementary to the
total length of the gene, the majority of whose DNA is cDNA probe will retain the label. This DNA can then
found in the three large introns. be located with the help of a autoradiogram. It is
One way to select a desired segment of DNA from important that single-stranded DNA be used. If double-
a digest of chromosomal DNA is to sort out the “restric- stranded restriction fragments are separated on the
tion fragments” by gel electrophoresis.613 The DNA electropherogram they must be denatured while in
from the gel can be transferred to a nitrocellulose sheet place in the gel before hybridization is attempted.
while retaining the separation pattern using a method Once the desired piece of DNA has been identified
devised by Southern.560,614,615 In this Southernblot it is usually necessary to increase its amount. The
technique, solvent flows from a pool beneath the gel conventional approach is to incorporate the DNA
up through the gel and the nitrocellulose sheet into fragment into a plasmid and clone by the methods
paper towels. The DNA is trapped on the nitrocellu- described in Chapter 26. The selected DNA can usually
lose in the same pattern observed in the electrophero- be cut cleanly from the plasmid used for cloning with
gram. A suitably labeled probe such as cDNA with the same restriction endonuclease originally used in
Genomic
5’ dsDNA or
3’ cDNA
a Denature (heat)
and b anneal primers (cool)
5’ 5’ 3’ 3’
3’ 3’ 5’ 5’
Cycle 1
c Primer extension with taq
polymerase and nucleotide
5’ triphosphate mixture
3’
3’ 5’
+ Long templates Figure 5-47 Amplification of DNA
5’ 3’ using the polymerase chain reaction
3’ (PCR). Double-stranded DNA is dena-
a 5’ tured by heating to 90 – 99° C (step a)
b Repeat steps a, b, c in cycle 2
c and oligonucleotide primers complemen-
tary to short 12 – 18 nucleotide sequences
at the two ends of the piece of DNA to
+
be amplified are annealed to the separated
Cycle 2 strands by cooling to 40 – 75° C (step b).
+ The two DNA strands serve as templates
for synthesis of new complementary
strands using a heat-stable DNA polymer-
+
Intermediate- ase and a mixture of the four nucleotide
length templates triphosphates. Nucleotide units are
a added to the 3' ends of the primers, with
b Repeat steps a, b, c in cycle 3 the new chains growing in the 5' → 3'
c direction (step c). Steps a,b, and c are
then repeated as many as 30 times using
+ a thermal cycler device that periodically
raises and lowers the temperature with
Cycle 3 a cycle time of a few minutes. The poly-
+ merase is unharmed by the heating and
2X
is reused in each cycle. An excess of the
primer and of the nucleotide triphos-
+
2X phates sufficient for all of the cycles is
present initially. In the early cycles new
+ long and intermediate length templates
2X
are created. However, the number of
a Short templates short templates increases exponentially
Cycle 4 b Cycles 4 to 25 and the final product consists predomi-
c nately of the short selected DNA segment
At least 105-fold increase in DNA (short templates).

--- Page 265 ---

262 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
fragmenting the DNA. An alternative procedure is to in 200 times on the average. However, in the various
clone a mixture of DNA fragments and then sort colo- growing DNA chains they are incorporated at different
nies of bacteria containing the cloned fragments using points ranging from the very first nucleotide to the
DNA–RNA hybridization.616 Bacteria from the selected last. Since the incorporated dideoxy monomer lacks
colonies are then propagated to produce large amounts the 3-hydroxyl group needed for polymer formation,
of the plasmid DNA. Alternatively, PCR can be used chain growth is terminated abruptly. Synthesized
directly on the selected DNA fragment. This is more polynucleotides are denatured and subjected to electro-
often the preferred choice.604,606 phoresis in four adjacent lanes. The resulting patterns
contain bands corresponding to all of the successive
The Sanger dideoxy method. The rapid sequencing oligonucleotides but not all in the same lane. A given
methods all depend upon the fact that single-stranded lane will contain only the bands of the oligonucleotides
DNA fragments under denaturing conditions migrate terminated by the particular inhibitor used. The other
on electrophoresis in polyacrylamide gels strictly bands will be found in the other three lanes. Each
according to their length. Thus, if a mixture contains band will have been terminated by the inhibitor em-
all lengths of radiolabeled polynucleotides from very ployed in that lane. The nucleotide sequence can be
short oligonucleotides to fragments containing 200 or read directly from the banding pattern as is shown in
300 bases, the polynucleotides will all appear, one above Fig. 5-49. Arabinosyl nucleotide triphosphates have
the other, as a series of bands that can be visualized by also been used as chain-terminating inhibitors. A
radioautography. The first of these methods was pub- sequence determined by the Sanger method is usually
lished by Sanger and Coulson617 in 1975 and was followed checked by also sequencing the complementary strand.
in 1977 by the method which is now used.618– 621
A sample of double-stranded DNA is denatured.
One of the resulting single strands is used as a template
to direct the synthesis of a complementary strand of
radioactive DNA using a suitable DNA polymerase.
The“Klenow fragment” of E. coli, DNA polymerase I,
reverse transcriptase from a retrovirus, bacteriophage
T7 DNA polymerase, Taq polymerase, and specially
engineered enzymes produced from cloned genes
have all been used.
Before the sequencing begins it is necessary to
prepare a short primer that is complementary to a
sequence at one end of the DNA strand to be sequenced.
This may be prepared enzymatically,622,623 or by non-
enzymatic synthesis. The short primer is annealed to
the end of the DNA and the resulting molecule is incu-
bated with a DNA polymerase and a mixture of the four
mononucleotide triphosphates, one of which is radio-
labeled in this position. Four reaction mixtures are
prepared. Each mixture contains all four nucleoside
triphosphates and also one of four different chain-
terminating inhibitors, the most popular of which
are the 2', 3' – dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates:
Figure 5-48 A physical map of the oxi3 locus of yeast
mitochondrial DNA. The restriction fragments used for
O – O O – DNA sequencing are indicated by the arrows. The extent to
which the sequences were read is represented by the lengths
O P O P Thymine of the arrows. The map units are shown in the inner circle.
Cytosine
HO P O O CH2 Guanine or The following symbols, together with the names of the
– O O O Adenine restriction enzymes (Chapter 26), are used for the restriction
H H sites:
Hinf I Alu I Hha I
H H
Hpa II Pvu II Rsa I
2',3'-Dideoxyribonucleotide triphosphates Hae III Hinc II Hph I
Taq I Hind III Blg II
These inhibitors are added in a ratio of about 100:1 Mbo I Eco RI Bam HI
Mbo II Eco RII Hpa I
with the natural substrates. In this ratio they are
incorporated into the growing DNA chain about once From Bonitz et al.611

--- Page 266 ---

H. Methods of Study 263
A major factor in the success of the dideoxy sequenc-
ing method has been the development of cloning
techniques that provide ssDNA in a form ready for
use. In any cloning procedure the DNA that is to be
sequenced has been covalently ligated to the end of a
DNA strand of the cloning vehicle, a modified plas-
mid or virus (Chapter 26). Sequencing is often done
on DNA cloned in a modified ssDNA bacterial virus
such as M13. Although dsDNA is ligated to the ds
replicating form of viral DNA, the virus particles
produced when the virus is propagated in E. coli cells
are single stranded. Cleavage of the viral DNA with
its incorporated “passenger DNA” with an appropriate
restriction endonuclease releases the passenger DNA
(to be sequenced) with a short piece of DNA from
the cloning vehicle attached at the 3' end. Since the
sequence of this small piece of the cloning vehicle is
known, a suitable primer of length ~12–18 nucleotides
can be synthesized (or purchased) and annealed to
the DNA. This serves as the primer and allows the
sequence to be read from the 5' end to the 3' end of the
synthesized complementary strand. Double-stranded
DNA attached to vehicles such as the pUC plasmids
can also be sequenced directly if the DNA is denatured
by alkali treatment. After neutralization and precipita-
tion an appropriate primer is annealed to one or the
other of the two strands.624
Since its introduction, many modifications and
improvements have been developed. The sequencing
gels have been improved. The use of 35S labeling has
given sharper autoradiographs.625 Alternatively, a
silver stain can be used with unlabeled primers.626
GC-rich DNA sequences are often difficult to sequence,
probably because even in the denaturing polyacrylamide
gels used for sequencing they tend to form hairpin
loops, perhaps as a result of formation of Hoogsteen
base pairs (Fig. 5-7). Formation of these loops results
in uneven spacing between the adjacent bands in the
sequencing gel, so-called “compression artifacts.” Use
of a 7-deaza-dGTP in place of dGTP in the sequencing
reaction ameliorates this problem.627 Sensitivity can be
improved by use of “cycle sequencing” in which a heat-
stable polymerase such as Taq polymerase is used, and
a
to
ft
g
er
iv
h
e
e
a
at
h
in
ig
g
h
t
e
h
r
e
y
s
i
a
e
m
ld
e
o
te
f
m
la
p
b
l
e
a
l
t
e
e
d
D
fr
N
a
A
gm
is
e
u
n
s
ts
e
.
d
62
r
8,
e
6
p
29
eatedly CTATGATAC
About 200 – 400 bases can be successfully sequenced A G C T A C G T
manually in a single run. By prolonging the time of
electrophoresis in a second run, the sequence can be
Figure 5-49 A DNA sequencing gel obtained using a
extended considerably. By using the just obtained segment of DNA from salmon sperm selected by suitable
sequence information, it is possible to select a new oligonucleotide primers, amplified by PCR, and sequenced
start point 200 or more nucleotides further along the with a 35S label in the primer. Four samples were used, one
template chain and to synthesize an oligonucleotide with each of the four dideoxy chain terminators (A, G, C, T,
primer to anneal to the template at this point. In this A, C, G, T from left to right). After electrophoresis the shorter
fragments are at the lower end of the gel. The sequence of
way it is possible to “walk” along the template adding
the strand complementary to the template strand whose
additional sequences at each step. Another procedure
sequence is being determined is read from the bottom of the
is to delete by mutation various segments of the cloned
gel. Here it starts CTATGATAC. Reproduced by permission
DNA above the sequence that binds the primer. This
of Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Limited.

--- Page 267 ---

264 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
permits analysis of the whole cloned fragment via an procedure is to cleave chemically the DNA at random
overlapping set of sequences from the deletion mu- locations using reagents that have some specificity for
tants.630,631 particular bases. The cleavage process involves three
Many DNA sequences continue to be determined distinct steps: (1) chemical modification, as specific as
manually by the well-developed long gel procedures is possible for the chosen base; (2) displacement of the
as illustrated in Fig. 5-49. However, sequencing whole modified base from the sugar; and (3) elimination and
genomes has depended upon the development of high- chain cleavage using amine catalysis (Eq. 5-21). Two
speed automated procedures.632 Instead of radiolabel- consecutive steps can often be combined. There are
ing, fluorescent dyes may be joined to the primer to several versions of the method; one involves dimethyl
allow detection of the chain fragments produced during sulfate as the specific reagent for guanine. It forms
sequencing. Automatic sequencers use four dyes that N7-methylguanosine (see Eq. 5-18) which upon heating
fluoresce with different colors.633,634 A different dye is with the strong base piperidine at 90°C undergoes
used for each of the reaction mixtures. Then the four addition of hydroxyl ion with ring opening and dis-
samples are mixed together and the DNA fragments placement of the modified base according to Eq. 5-26.
are subjected to electrophoresis in a single lane. A laser The product, a glycosylamine of piperidine, is in
beam excites the fluorescence, scanning several lanes equilibrium with a Schiff base which can undergo
with different samples as the electrophoresis progresses. chain cleavage as in Eq. 5-21.
A photomultiplier tube records the fluorescence inten- A second sample of DNA is treated with a piperidine-
sity of each band through a series of four filters in a formate buffer of pH 2 in the cold. This promotes the
rotating wheel. This allows automatic recognition of acid depurination of both guanine and adenosine.
the four different colors of fluorescence and therefore A third sample is treated with hydrazine, with both
of the nucleic acid base present in each position in the cytidine and thymidine being cleaved to ribosylurea
sequence. Improved strategies for “primer walking”635 according to Eq. 5-13. Again, this is followed by dis-
and for “shotgun sequencing”19,632,636 have been devised. placement and β elimination (Eq. 5-21) catalyzed by
In the shotgun strategy, whole bacterial genomes have piperidine. The fourth sample is also treated with
been cut by restriction enzymes into large numbers of hydrazine but in the presence of a high concentration
overlapping fragments which have been separated and of NaCl which inhibits the reaction with thymidine,
sequenced.637 A computer program is used to analyze by lowering the pK of the thymine, and allows the
a
and assemble the sequences into a complete genomic cleavage to be more nearly specific for cytidine. Each
sequence. An example is provided by the genome of of the reactions is conducted in such a way that on the
theMethanococcus jannaschii. Its large circular chromo- average only one cleavage event occurs per molecule
some contains 1,664,976 bp and there are two additional of DNA. Since the cleavages occur at many different
pieces to the genome, one containing 58,407 bp and the points, a family of nested radioactively labeled oligo-
other 16,550 bp. The sequences were deduced from nucleotides, one from each original molecule, is pro-
36,718 individual sequencing runs on high-speed auto- duced. When these are sorted by polyacrylamide gel
matic sequencers. For each run, on average, 481 bp electrophoresis, the pattern of the oligonucleotides
could be read.636 To sequence the human genome faster in the four adjacent channels allows the nucleotide
methods are needed.638 Capillary electrophoresis with sequence to be read directly from the autoradiogram.
a single laser beam scanning the output of 24 capillaries The Maxam–Gilbert method doesn’t require
has been demonstrated.639,640 Extremely rapid sequenc- synthesis of a primer and it sometimes works well for
ing of oligonucleotides up to 100 bp in length can be sequences that are difficult to obtain with the Sanger–
accomplished by mass spectrometry.641 This may be Coulson procedure. The two methods may both be
an important technique for diagnosis of genetic defects used to provide additional certainty about a sequence.
(Chapter 26). The Maxam–Gilbert method is very convenient for
sequencing small oligonucleotides which often react
The method of Maxam and Gilbert. The nonen- poorly with the polymerase used for the chain termi-
zymatic method devised by Maxam and Gilbert642– 644 nation method. The method usually requires that a
can be used to sequence either ss or dsDNA. Before restriction map be prepared.
the sequencing is begun, a radioactive label is incor-
porated, usually at the 5' end. This is often done by Sequencing RNA. The first known RNA sequence,
cleaving off any phosphate groups present on the 5' that of an alanine tRNA, was determined by Holley
end with alkaline phosphatase and then transferring and associates in 1965. The RNA was subjected to
a new radioactive phospho group with the assistance partial hydrolysis with pancreatic ribonuclease and
of the enzyme polynucleotide kinase and radioactive ribonuclease T (Fig. 5-43). The small oligonucleotide
1
γ-32p-labeled ATP. If dsDNA is used the strands are fragments were separated by ion exchange chromato-
separated so that each has a label only at one end. graphy under denaturing conditions (7 M urea) and
The key step in sequencing by the Maxam–Gilbert were then characterized individually.645 The availability

--- Page 268 ---

H. Methods of Study 265
of additional enzymes such as ribonuclease U , the B nucleotide in the DNA.72,653 Measurement of the
2
cereus ribonuclease and ribonuclease Phy M of Physarum radioactivity in each of the 3' nucleotides of thymine,
(Fig. 5-43) and the use of radiolabeling and of two- cytosine, adenine, and guanine gives the frequencies
dimensional fingerprinting of digests have made the of the adjacent pairs, TA, CA, AA, and GA. Using the
procedures more versatile.646 A valine tRNA was se- other radioactive nucleoside triphosphates one at a
quenced independently by Bayev647 and Campbell.648 time in separate experiments, all of the nearest neighbor
Since the development of the rapid methods for frequencies can be obtained. From such an experiment
sequencing DNA, many mRNA sequences have been it was possible to deduce that the strands in the double
determined by using reverse transcriptase to make a helix were oriented in an antiparallel fashion, as pre-
cDNA strand complementary to the RNA. The cDNA dicted by Watson and Crick. If the strands had been
is then sequenced.649 Rapid sequencing methods parallel parallel, different nearest neighbor frequencies would
to those used for DNA have also been devised.650– 652 have been observed.
Nearest neighbor analysis. A technique developed Understanding sequences. Sequences of over 20
by Kornberg and associates before the availability of million nucleotides from hundreds of organisms had
sequencing methods is the nearest neighbor sequence been determined by 1988 and the number is doubling
analysis. Using a single radioactive 32P-containing each 2 – 3 years.654 Sequencing the human genome has
nucleoside triphosphate together with the three other required rates of millions of bases per day. With the
unlabeled nucleoside triphosphates, a primer chain massive amount of data already available it has become
of DNA is elongated from the 3' end along a ssDNA of great interest to compare sequences of genes, whether
template chain using a DNA polymerase. The incor- they encode similar or dissimilar proteins, to make
poration of 32P from the α position of the nucleotide comparisons between species, and to search for
triphosphate occurs in the bridge phosphates that sequences that bind specific proteins or that encode
connect the nucleotide originally carrying the 32P to particular regulatory signals. Relationships of common
the 3' position of the neighboring nucleotide. Cleavage evolutionary origin or homology as well as other
of the 32P-containing product of the reaction with a sequence similarities are often sought.
mixture of micrococcal DNase and spleen phospho- To handle the mass of existing data, powerful
diesterase, which catalyze b-type cleavage (Fig. 5-43), computer programs have been developed and various
gives fragments in which the 32P will now be attached graphical procedures have also been developed to
to what was the 5’ nearest neighbor to the radioactive help the human mind comprehend the results.654,655
One important problem is to define and locate what
are called consensus sequences. The problem is best
CH3 O illustrated by examples.654 The cleavage site for the
EcoRI restriction endonuclease is GAATTC. There
H
HO – N N is no ambiguity. In a DNA of random sequence this
O would be expected to occur by chance in about (1/ 4)6
CH2
O
N+ N NH2 n
st
u
ri
c
c
l
t
e
i
o
o
t
n
id
e
e
n
s
d
(
o
4
n
k
u
b
c
)
l
.
e a
O
s
n
e c
th
le
e
a
o
v
t
e
h
s
e
w
r
i
h
t
a
h
n
in
d ,
t h
th
e
e
c o
H
n
in
se
II
n
r
s
e
u
-
s
sequenceGTYRAC where Y = C or T and R = A or G.
a It would be expected to occur by chance in about 1/45
CH3 O
nucleotides. Many binding sites for RNA polymerase,
O
H N H the so called promoters (Chapter 28) contain the
P C N
consensus sequence TAtAaT, at position -10, ahead of
O O the 5' end of the sequence that is transcribed into mRNA.
CH2 N N NH2 The lower case t and a used here imply that other
O nucleotides may often replace T or A at these positions.
There are many promoters and over 70% of those
N
b
described have this consensus sequence. All have the
Base
O displacement less restricted sequence TAxxxT, where x may be any
O Piperidine
CH2
P
nucleotide. Our definition of consensus sequence is some-
O what arbitrary. Now consider the problem of locating
a– 35 site whose consensus sequence is TTGACA
N
but which may, for different genes, be shifted back-
ward or forward by a nucleotide or two. This is a
O
consensus sequence. Therefore, in many cases one
P
(5-26) or more substitutions in the sequence will have been
made. The result is that the sequence of nucleotides in

--- Page 269 ---

266 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
which the consensus sequence is to be found is likely form suitable for X-ray diffraction. Study of the other
to appear entirely random. Sophisticated computer tRNAs by NMR techniques has established that all
programs are helpful in locating it.654 of the tRNAs have a similar architecture and that the
structures observed in the crystals are preserved in
solution.668 Figure 5-51 shows the low-field end of the
8. Protein–DNA Interactions NMR spectrum of a valine-specific tRNA from E. coli.
The spectrum is run in H O rather than D O so that
2 2
The most detailed information about interactions exchangeable hydrogens in the hydrogen bonds of
of proteins with DNA is coming from X-ray crystallo- the Watson–Crick base pairs can be observed.669 The
graphic studies. Examples are seen in Figs. 5-35 to 5-40. protons giving rise to the downfield resonances are
Several other methods have also been very useful. primarily those attached to nitrogen atoms of the rings
Much has been learned from the effects of mutations and in hydrogen-bonded positions. These protons are
in DNA-binding proteins or in regions of DNA to which shielded by adjacent electron-donating groups and by
a protein binds. Binding of proteins to DNA can also their attachment to the semiaromatic rings of the bases.
be recognized by its effects on the mobility of DNA The NMR signals are further shifted downfield to
during gel electrophoresis.656,657 Chemical658 or laser- varying degrees depending upon whether or not the
induced crosslinking can show that within a complex proton being observed is attached to a base that is
a specific residue in a protein is adjacent to a certain stacked with other bases. The size of the shift also
sequence in the DNA. depends upon which neighboring bases are present.
The technique of protectionmapping or “foot- The proton on N-3 of AU base pairs is deshielded
printing” is widely used to determine which nucleo- more than the proton on the N-1 of GC base pairs.
tides in a sequence are covered by a bound protein.659 Therefore, the AU protons appear further downfield
A reagent which attacks and cleaves DNA nearly than the GC protons. The stronger ring current in A
randomly is used. DNase I was first introduced for than in C enhances this separation.
this purpose659 and has been used widely. An impor- All of the resonances in Fig. 5-51 have been
tant finding is that certain sites that are readily cleaved assigned to particular bases. This was done in part by
(hypersensitivesites) are frequently located in chro- varying the temperature, changing the magnesium
matin undergoing transcription. Footprinting has also ion concentration, and predicting shifts caused by
been accomplished with other nucleases, with dimeth- ring currents in adjacent bases making use of the X-ray
ylsulfate (which acts on A and C), with carbodiimides crystal structures. NMR spectra of hairpin helical frag-
(which act on U and G), and with the Maxam–Gilbert ments also provided essential information. From inte-
guanine-specific cleavage (Eq. 5-26). One of the most gration of the areas under the peaks it was concluded
popular methods employs cleavage by hydroxyl radi- that the 20 resonances seen below – 11 ppm represent
cals.660– 663 Photofootprinting depends upon decreased 27 protons. Twenty of these are in Watson-Crick base
or increased sensitivity to ultraviolet light at sites pairs and correspond to those expected from the X-ray
bound by proteins.214,662,664 In footprinting experiments structure. Six more belong to protons involved in
the DNA to be studied is radioactively labeled at one tertiary interactions, such as base pair triplets or non-
end of one strand. In the absence of the protecting Watson–Crick pairs. One of these, labeled “G” in the
protein, denaturation and electrophoresis of the cleaved figure, is in the dihydrouridine stem and involves the
fragments yields a nearly random “ladder” of DNA ring proton of N-1 of m7G46 which is hydrogen bond-
fragments. In the presence of the binding protein some ed to N-7 of G22 in the major groove of the RNA. G22
cleavage products will be missing from the ladder. The is located at the beginning of the “extra loop.”
bound protein leaves a “footprint” (Fig. 5-50A,C). Measurements of the NOE of nearby protons in
Related methods are being applied to the determi- both small RNA molecules668,669 and DNA oligonu-
nation of the secondary structure of RNA molecules665,666 cleotides670,671 provided much additional information.
and to the study of interactions with proteins. For Figures 5-51B and C show NOESY spectra of the
example, treatment with dimethyl sulfate under appro- tRNAVal and the way in which weak cross-peaks
priate conditions methylates bases that are not paired, between the H-bonded imino protons in adjacent base
giving largely 1-methyladenosine and 3-methyl- pairs (Fig. 5-51B) can be used to establish connec-
cytidine.667 tivities.669 Beginning with resonance B, it is possible
to establish the sequence of the NH groups giving rise
to these resonances as OBUGJNT. Using other data as
9. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance well, it was concluded that these represent the seven
base pairs of the acceptor stem (see Fig. 5-30), with
Much of the initial effort to study polynucleotides resonance C representing the first GC pair, resonance
by NMR spectroscopy was directed toward transfer B the second, etc. Resonance A was identified as
RNAs, only a few of which have been crystallized in a coming from the base triplet containing a Hoogsteen

--- Page 270 ---

H. Methods of Study 267
A Figure 5-50 (A) Hydroxyl radical footprints of phage
λ repressor on both strands of the 120-bp restriction
fragment of E. coli DNA carrying the O1 operator
R
sequence. “Bottom” and “top” refer to the DNA
strands as drawn in (C), and as diagrammed in (B).
Labeling of the 5' end of the Bgl II restriction fragment
afforded data for the bottom strand and labeling of
the 3' BglII end afforded data for the top strand. Lanes
1 and 12, untreated DNA, labeled on the bottom and
top strands, respectively; lanes 2 and 10, products of
DNase I digestion of DNA labeled on the bottom and
top strands, respectively, with no repressor present;
lanes 3 and 11, products of DNase I digestion of DNA
labeled on the bottom and top strands, respectively,
complexed with λ repressor (675 nM); lanes 4 and 9,
products of Maxam–Gilbert guanine-specific sequenc-
ing reactions performed on DNA labeled on the bottom
and top strands, respectively; lanes 5 and 6, products
of hydroxyl radical cutting of DNA labeled on the
bottom strand, complexed with λ repressor. Lane 5,
90-nMλ repressor and lane 6, 675-nM λ repressor.
Lanes 7 and 8, products of hydroxyl radical cutting
of DNA labeled on the top strand, complexed with λ
repressor. Lane 7, 675 nM λ repressor. Lane 8, 90 nM
λ repressor. The labels a, b, c, a’, b’, and c’ mark the
hydroxyl radical footprints. Courtesy of Thomas
Tullius.661
B
C
base pair of 4-thiouracil at position 8 with A14 (see Fig. Similar techniques are being used for the study of
5-7). Its connectivity to the sequence KCEO is also DNA.672 The presence of a second hydrogen in the 2'
outlined in Fig. 5-51B. However, it could not be estab- position of the deoxyribose rings of DNA adds several
lished without additional data which also helped to H-H distances (Fig. 5-52) that can be measured in addi-
identify the sequence O-K as residues 10 – 13 of the tion to those seen in RNAs. Characteristic differences
dihydrouracil stem. Peak O is a multiproton peak are seen in the NOESY plots of A, B, and Z forms of
representing not only GC 10 but also UA 7. In general, DNA.670,671,673,674 Although detailed structural infor-
the GC protons are at the higher field side of the spec- mation has been obtained for short segments of DNA,
trum and the AU protons at the lower side. However, spectra of larger oligonucleotides are impossible to
AU 7 is shifted to an anomolously high position. analyze with two-dimensional methods because of
Cross-peaks between imino protons of uracil and the extensive overlap of resonances.665 The difficulty is
nearby C2 protons of adenine in Watson–Crick AU base already apparent in the 17 base pair DNA segment for
pairs or C8 protons of Hoogsteen AU pairs can be ob- which a one-dimensional spectrum as well as COSY
served in the 6.5 – 9 ppm region as shown in Fig. 5-35B. and NOESY spectra are shown in Fig. 5-53.
This region also contains information about other Some help with the complexity can be obtained
protons bound to the nuclei acid bases. by incorporation of 13C-enriched methyl groups into

--- Page 271 ---

268 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
O
A K
E
F
N
D J L PQ T V
B C GH M S U X
A R W
I
C 7.0
B
8.0
10
9.0
F 11 10.0
V
D L 12 11.0
Q
P
12.0
T
J 13 o
K N
G
13.0
g
E C O 14 d
c 14.0
O U b
K a
R 15 15.0
15 14 13 12 11 10 ppm 15.0 14.0 13.0 12.0 11.0 10.0 9.0 8.0 7.0
Figure 5-51 (A) The low-field region of the one-dimensional 1H NMR spectrum of E. coli tRNA Val at 27°C in HO. Resonances
1 2
are identified by letters A – X. (B) NOESY spectrum of the same tRNA under similar conditions showing the imino-imino NOEs.
In the lower right sector the connectivity traces of the acceptor helix and dihydrouridine helix are shown as solid and dotted
lines, respectively. In the NOESY sample the two protons in peak EF are partially resolved whereas the two protons in peak
T have coalesced. (C) NOESY spectrum of E. coli tRNA Val at 32°C showing the imino and aromatic proton regions. AU-type
1
imino protons have been connected horizontally by a dotted line to the cross-peak of their proximal C2-H or C8-H in the 7 to 9
ppm region, which has been labeled with the corresponding lower-case letter. From Hare et al.669 Courtesy of Brian Reid.
HH2’
A
HAH8
H2’’H
T H
H2’
H
TMe TH5
H
H
H2’’
A
H2’
H
H
AH8
Figure 5-52 Segment of a DNA chain in the B conformation illustrating
some intrachain NOEs that may be observed. The close juxtaposition of
proton pairs is provided by the H2'-endo (2E) conformation of the sugar
rings with anti base conformation (Fig. 5-11). After Cohen.675

--- Page 272 ---

H. Methods of Study 269
A
OR3
1 5 10 15 17
T A T C A C C G C A A G G G A T A
A T A G T G G C G T T C C C T A T CH 3
34 30 25 20 18
C5’,5”H
C2H
C3’H
C6H C4’H
C8H
C1’H
C2’,2”H
C5H
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 ppm
1.0
B OR3
a
c
2.0
b 3.0
4.0
ppm
5.0
d
6.0
e
g 7.0
8.0
f
8.0 7.0 6.0 5.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0
ppm
Figure 5-53 (A) 1H NMR spectrum of a 17 base-pair DNA segment from the operator sequence OR3 from bacteriophage λ in
D O at 37°C. (B) Combined COSY above the diagonal and NOESY (below the diagonal) spectra. C5H and C6H J coupling is
2
established from cross-peaks in box d for cytosines and in box a for thymines. Two unresolved cross-peaks give rise to the more
intense spots marked by arrows. Box b contains cross-peaks from scalar coupling of the two H2' protons to the H1' protons
of the deoxyribose rings. Most of the aromatic proton resonances could be assigned using the NOE cross-peaks in box f. For
further details see Wemmer et al.676 See also Bax and Lerner.672 Courtesy of B. Reid.

--- Page 273 ---

270 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
polynucleotides. One way to do this is to grow yeast A few recent NMR investigations of polynucle-
on a medium containing methionine with 13C in its otides include studies of triple-helical DNA,689 Holli-
methyl group. The most intense peaks in 13C NMR day junctions,290 double-stranded oligonucleotides
spectra of tRNA molecules from this yeast will represent containing adducts of carcinogens,690,691 of hairpin
methyl groups in modified bases in the tRNA. Incor- loops with sheared A·A and G·G pairs,692 and of
porated13C also permits study of internal motion with- proton exchange in both imino and amino groups.693
in tRNA or other oligonucleotides by NMR methods.677
However, as with protein NMR spectroscopy the major
recent advances have come from systematic incorpora-
A 17
tion of both 13C and 15N into nucleic acids and the 47
34 67 4
development of three- and four-dimensional NMR 12 8
methods.678–684b Also important are methods for replac- 33 7 54 29
64
ing some hydrogen atoms with deuterium to simplify 55 59
spectra.685,686
The very sensitive 19F nucleus can be introduced
into tRNAs by incorporation of 5-fluorouracil in place
of uracil687 (Fig. 5-54A,B). Phosphorus 31 NMR spectra E F G
B
(Fig. 5-54C) can provide information about conforma-
A B/C/D
tions of the chain.688
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 ppm
Figure 5-54 (A) An 19F NMR spectrum of the 76-residue
E. coli tRNAVal containing 5-fluorouracil in 14 positions. G6.G8.T1
C
Recorded at 47°C. The numbers above the resonances
indicate the position in the sequence. (The sequence is not
identical to that for the yeast tRNA shown in Fig. 5-30.)
Modified from Chu et al.694 Courtesy of Jack Horowitz.
T3.T13
(B) A similar spectrum for a 35-residue “minihelix” that contains
the acceptor stem of the tRNAVal and seven fluorouracils. T10.A12
The broad peaks B, D, and E are shifted far upfield by reac- C7
G4 A5
tion with bisulfite (Eq. 5-11) suggesting that they are not
hydrogen bonded and are present in the loop of the stem– C9
loop structure. Peaks A, E, F, and G correspond to resonances C11 A2
64, 7, 67, and 4, respectively, in (A) and represent fluorouracil
in the stem structure. From Chu et al.694 Courtesy of Jack
Horowitz. (C) A 31P NMR spectrum of a synthetic 14 base-
pair DNA segment related to the E. colilac operator. The
palindromic sequence is TCTGAGCGCTCAGA. The numbers
refer to the positions from the 5' end. From Schroeder et al.688 – 3.4 – 3.6 – 3.8 – 4.0 – 4.2 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.8 – 5.0 ppm
References
1. Portugal, F. H., and Cohen, J. S. (1977) A 7. Olby, R. (1974) The Path to the Double Helix, 12. Tucker, P. W., Liu, C.-P., Mushinski, J. F., and
Century of DNA: A History of the Discovery of Macmillan, London Blattner, F. R. (1980) Science209, 1353–1360
the Structure and Function of the Genetic Sub- 8. Wilson, H. R. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 13. Yamada, Y., Mudryj, M., Sullivan, M., and de
stance, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 275–278 Crombrugghe, B. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258,
2. Levene, P. A., and Tipson, R. S. (1935) J. Biol. 9. Chambers, D. A., Reid, K. B. M., and Cohen, 2758–2761
Chem.109, 623–630 R. L. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1219–1226 14. Tsuzuki, T., Obaru, K., Setoyama, C., and
3. Schlenk, F. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 67–69 9a. Piper, A. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.23, 151–154 Shimada, K. (1987) J. Mol. Biol.198, 21–31
4. Watson, J. D., and Crick, F. H. C. (1953) Nature 10. Arnott, S., and Hukins, D. W. L. (1973) J. Mol. 15. Ratner, L., and 18 other authors (1985) Nature
(London)171, 737–738 Biol.81, 93–105 (London)313, 277–284
5. Watson, J. D. (1968) The Double Helix, Atheneum, 11. Proudfoot, N. J., Shander, M. H. M., Manley, J. 16. Dunn, J. J., and Studier, F. W. (1983) J. Mol.
New York L., Gefter, M. L., and Maniatis, T. (1980) Science Biol.166, 477– 535
6. Crick, F. (1988) What a Mad Pursuit: A Personal 209, 1329–1336 17. Peden, K. W. C. (1983) Gene22, 277–280
View of Scientific Discovery, Basic Books, New
York

--- Page 274 ---

271
References
18. Anderson, S., Bankier, A. T., Barrell, B. G., 44. Borer, P. N., Dengler, B., Tinoco, I., Jr., and 78. Dickerson, R. E. (1983) Sci. Am.249(Dec), 94–
deBruijn, M. H. L., Coulson, A. R., Drouin, J., Uhlenbeck, O. C. (1974) J. Mol. Biol.86, 843– 111
Eperon, I. C., Nierlich, D. P., Roe, B. A., 853 78a. Dickerson, R. E. (1997) in International Tables
Sanger, F., Schreier, P. H., Smith, A. J. H., 45. Freier, S. M., Kierzek, R., Jaeger, J. A., for Macromolecular Crystallography (Rossmann,
Staden, R., and Young, I. G. (1981) Nature Sugimoto, N., Caruthers, M. H., Neilson, T., M. G., and Arnold, E., eds), (Chapter 23, Part c)
(London)290, 457–470 and Turner, D. H. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 79. Shui, X., McFail-Isom, L., Hu, G. G., and
19. Fraser, C. M., and 28 other authors (1995) U.S.A.83, 9373–9377 Williams, L. D. (1998) Biochemistry37, 8341–
Science270, 397–403 46. Sarai, A., Mazur, J., Nussinov, R., and Jernigan, 8355
20. Fleischmann, R. D., and 39 other authors R. L. (1988) Biochemistry27, 8498–8502 80. Gorin, A. A., Zhurkin, V. B., and Olson, W. K.
(1995)Science269, 496–512 47. Hunter, C. A. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.230, 1025–1054 (1995)J. Mol. Biol.247, 34–48
20a. Doolittle, R. F. (1998) Nature (London)392, 48. Friedman, R. A., and Honig, B. (1995) Biophys. 81. Tereshko, V., Minasov, G., and Egli, M. (1999)
339–342 J.69, 1528–1535 J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 470–471
21. Nowak, R. (1995) Science267, 172–174 49. DePrisco Albergo, D., Marky, L. A., Breslauer, 82. Yuan, H., Quintana, J., and Dickerson, R. E.
22. Dujon, B., and 107 other authors (1994) Nature K. J., and Turner, D. H. (1981) Biochemistry20, (1992)Biochemistry31, 8009–8021
(London)369, 371–378 1409–1413 83. Ban, C., Ramakrishnan, B., and Sundara-
23. Johnston, M., and 34 other authors (1994) 50. Privalov, P. L., and Filimonov, V. V. (1978) lingam, M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.236, 275–285
Science265, 2077–2082 J. Mol. Biol.122, 447–464 83a. Kielkopf, C. L., Ding, S., Kuhn, P., and Rees,
24. Goffeau, A., Barrell, B. G., Bussey, H., Davis, 51. Privalov, P. L., and Filimonov, V. V. (1978) D. C. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.296, 787–801
R. W., Dujon, B., Feldmann, H., Galibert, F., J. Mol. Biol.122, 465–470 84. Johansson, E., Parkinson, G., and Neidle, S.
Hoheisel, J. D., Jacq, C., Johnston, M., Louis, 52. Petersen, S. B., and Led, J. J. (1981) J. Am. (2000)J. Mol. Biol.300, 551–561
E. J., Mewes, H. W., Murakami, Y., Philippsen, Chem. Soc.103, 5308–5313 85. Shen, L. X., Cai, Z., and Tinoco, I., Jr. (1995)
P., Tettelin, H., and Oliver, S. G. (1996) Science 53. Petruska, J., and Goodman, M. F. (1995) J. Biol. FASEB J.9, 1023–1033
274, 546–557 Chem.270, 746–750 86. Rosenberg, J. M., Seeman, N. C., Day, R. O.,
24a. Macilwain, C. (2000) Nature (London)405, 54. SantaLucia, J., Jr., Allawi, H. T., and Seneviratne, and Rich, A. (1976) J. Mol. Biol.104, 145–167
983– 984 P. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 3555–3562 87. Marino, J. P., Gregorian, R. S., Jr.,
25. Liébecq, C., ed. (1992) Biochemical Nomencla- 55. Egli, M., Usman, N., and Rich, A. (1993) Csankovszki, G., and Crothers, D. M. (1995)
ture, Portland Press, London and Chapel Hill, Biochemistry32, 3221–3237 Science268, 1448–1454
North Carolina (for the International Union of 56. Watson, J. D., and Crick, F. H. C. (1953) Nature 88. Iwamoto, S., and Hsu, M.-T. (1983) Nature
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) (London)171, 964–967 (London)305, 70–72
26. Shabarova, Z., and Bogdanov, A. (1994) 57. Topal, M. D., and Fresco, J. R. (1976) Nature 89. Morel, G., ed. (1995) Visualization of Nucleic
Advanced Organic Chemistry of Nucleic Acids, (London)263, 285–289 Acids, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
VCH Publ., Weinheim 58. Tinoco, I., Jr., Borer, P. N., Dengler, B., Levine, 90. Arscott, P. G., Lee, G., Bloomfield, V. A., and
27. Saenger, W. (1984) Principles of Nucleic Acid M. D., Uhlenbeck, O. C., Crothers, D. M., and Evans, D. F. (1989) Nature (London)339,
Structure, Springer, New York Gralla, J. (1973) Nature New Biol.246, 40–41 484–486
28. Hurst, D. T. (1980) An Introduction to the 59. Fazakerley, G. V., Gdaniec, Z., and Sowers, L. 91. Jares-Erijman, E. A., and Jovin, T. M. (1996)
Chemistry and Biochemistry of Pyrimidines, C. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.230, 6–10 J. Mol. Biol.257, 597–617
Purines and Pteridines, Wiley, New York 60. Florián, J., Hrouda, V., and Hobza, P. (1994) 92. Duan, Y., Wilkosz, P., Crowley, M., and
29. Markowski, V., Sullivan, G. R., and Roberts, J. J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 1457–1460 Rosenberg, J. M. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.272, 553–
D. (1977) J. Am. Chem. Soc.99, 714–718 61. Douhal, A., Kim, S. K., and Zewail, A. H. 572
30. Katritzky, A. R., and Karelson, M. (1991) J. (1995)Nature (London)378, 260–263 93. Auffinger, P., and Westhof, E. (2000) J. Mol.
Am. Chem. Soc.113, 1561–1566 62. Gabb, H. A., and Harvey, S. C. (1993) J. Am. Biol.300, 1113–1131
31. Szczesniak, M., Leszczynski, J., and Person, Chem. Soc.115, 4218–4227 93a. Soler-López, M., Malinina, L., Liu, J., Huynh-
W. B. (1992) J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 2731–2733 63. Ellervik, U., and Magnusson, G. (1994) J. Am. Dinh, T., and Subirana, J. A. (1999) J. Biol.
32. Scanlan, M. J., and Hillier, I. H. (1984) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 2340–2347 Chem.274, 23683–23686
Chem. Soc.106, 3737–3745 64. Thibaudeau, C., Plavec, J., and 94. Schneider, B., and Berman, H. M. (1995)
33. Brown, D. M. (1974) in Basic Principles in Chattopadhyaya, J. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc. Biophys. J.69, 2661–2669
Nucleic Acid Chemistry, Vol. II (Tso, P. O. P., 116, 8033–8037 95. Tereshko, V., Minasov, G., and Egli, M. (1999)
ed), pp. 2–90, Academic Press, New York 65. Santos, R. A., Tang, P., and Harbison, G. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 3590–3595
34. Hoogsteen, K. (1963) Acta Crystallogr.16, 907– (1989)Biochemistry28, 9372–9378 96. Franklin, R. E., and Gosling, R. G. (1953)
916 66. Sundaralingam, M. (1969) Biopolymers7, 821– Nature (London)172, 156–157
35. Frank-Kamenetskii, M. D., and Mirkin, S. M. 860 97. Ramakrishnan, B., and Sundaralingam, M.
(1995)Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, 65–95 67. Vologodskii, A. (1992) Topology and Physics of (1995)Biophys. J.69, 553–558
36. Portugal, J. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 127– Circular DNA, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 98. Ramakrishnan, B., and Sundaralingam, M.
130 68. Baikalov, I., Grzeskowiak, K., Yanagi, K., (1993)J. Mol. Biol.231, 431–444
37. Adams, R. L. P., Knowler, J. T., and Leader, D. Quintana, J., and Dickerson, R. E. (1993) J. Mol. 99. Eisenstein, M., and Shakked, Z. (1995) J. Mol.
P. (1992) The Biochemistry of the Nucleic Acids, Biol.231, 768–784 Biol.248, 662–678
11th ed., Chapman & Hall, London 69. Lipanov, A., Kopka, M. L., Kaczor-Grzeskowiak, 99a. Ng, H.-L., Kopka, M. L., and Dickerson, R. E.
37a. Saenger, W. (1973) Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. M., Quintana, J., and Dickerson, R. E. (1993) (2000)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 2035–
12, 591–601 Biochemistry32, 1373–1389 2039
38. Fang, G., and Cech, T. R. (1993) Biochemistry 70. Schlick, T., Hingerty, B. E., Peskin, C. S., Overton, 100. Selsing, E., Wells, R. D., Alden, C. J., and
32, 11646–11657 M. L., and Broyde, S. (1991) Theoretical Arnott, S. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 5417–5422
39. Gellert, M., Lipsett, M. N., and Davies, D. R. Biochemistry and Molecular Physics, Vol. 1 101. Mahendrasingam, A., Forsyth, V. T., Hussain,
(1962)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.48, 2013– (Beveridge, D. L. and Lavery, R., eds), pp. R., Greenall, R. J., Pigram, W. J., and Fuller, W.
2018 39–58, Adenine Press, Guilderland, New York (1986)Science233, 195–197
40. Kennell, D. E. (1971) Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. 71. Wang, A. H.-J., Quigley, G. J., Kolpak, F. J., 102. Hopkins, R. C. (1981) Science211, 289–291
Mol. Biol.11, 259–301 Crawford, J. L., van Boom, J. H., van der 103. Gupta, G., Bansal, M., and Sasisekharan, V.
40a. Stofer, E., Chipot, C., and Lavery, R. (1999) Marel, G., and Rich, A. (1979) Nature (London) (1980)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 6486–6490
J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 9503–9508 282, 680–686 104. Arnott, S., Chandrasekaran, R., Birdsall, D. L.,
40b. Peyret, N., Seneviratne, P. A., Allawi, H. T., 72. Kornberg, A., and Baker, T. A. (1992) DNA Leslie, A. G. W., and Ratliff, R. L. (1980)
and SantaLucia, J., Jr. (1999) Biochemistry38, Replication, 2nd ed., Freeman, New York Nature (London)283, 743–745
3468–3477 73. Kaufmann, W. K., and Paules, R. S. (1996) 105. Herbert, A., and Rich, A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.
41. Pranata, J., Wierschke, S. G., and Jorgensen, FASEB J.10, 238–247 271, 11595–11598
W. L. (1991) J. Am. Chem. Soc.113, 2810–2819 74. Lindahl, T. (1993) Nature (London)362, 709–715 106. Gessner, R. V., Frederick, C. A., Quigley, G. J.,
42. Dang, L. X., and Kollman, P. A. (1990) J. Am. 75. Rodley, G. A., and Bates, R. H. T. (1980) Trends Rich, A., and Wang, A. H.-J. (1989) J. Biol.
Chem. Soc.112, 503–507 Biochem. Sci.5, 231–233 Chem.264, 7921–7935
43. Newcomb, L. F., and Gellman, S. H. (1994) 76. Kennard, O., and Salisbury, S. A. (1993) J. Biol. 107. Zhou, G., and Ho, P. S. (1990) Biochemistry29,
J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 4993–4994 Chem.268, 10701–10704 7229–7236
77. Drew, H. R., and Dickerson, R. E. (1981) J. Mol.
Biol.151, 535–556

--- Page 275 ---

272 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
References
108. Parkinson, G. N., Arvanitis, G. M., Lessinger, 141. Strick, T. R., Allemand, J. F., Bensimon, D., 176. Mascotti, D. P., and Lohman, T. M. (1990)
L., Ginell, S. L., Jones, R., Gaffney, B., and Bensimon, A., and Croquette, V. (1996) Science Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.87, 3142–3146
Berman, H. M. (1995) Biochemistry34, 15487– 271, 1835–1837 177. Li, A. Z., Huang, H., Re, X., Qi, L. J., and
15495 141a.Allemand, J. F., Bensimon, D., Lavery, R., and Marx, K. A. (1998) Biophys. J.74, 964–973
109. Sadasivan, C., and Gautham, N. (1995) J. Mol. Croquette, V. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 178. Frydman, L., Rossomando, P. C., Frydman, V.,
Biol.248, 918– 930 U.S.A.95, 14152–14157 Fernandez, C. O., Frydman, B., and Samejima,
110. Bancroft, D., Williams, L. D., Rich, A., and 142. Dickerson, R. E. (1983) J. Mol. Biol.166, 419– K. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89,
Egli, M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 1073–1086 441 9186–9190
111. Rich, A., Nordheim, A., and Wang, A. H.-J. 143. Tung, C.-S., and Harvey, S. C. (1986) J. Biol. 179. Jain, S., Zon, G., and Sundaralingam, M.
(1984)Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 791–846 Chem.261, 3700–3709 (1989)Biochemistry28, 2360–2364
112. Moore, M. H., Van Meervelt, L., Salisbury, S. 144. Ulanovsky, L. E., and Trifonov, E. N. (1987) 180. Pelta, J., Durand, D., Doucet, J., and Livolant,
A., Lin, P. K. T., and Brown, D. M. (1995) J. Nature (London)326, 720–722 F. (1996) Biophys. J.71, 48–63
Mol. Biol.251, 665–673 145. Diekmann, S. (1989) EMBO J.8, 1–4 181. Rajski, S. R., Kumar, S., Roberts, R. J., and
113. Wang, Y., Thomas, G. A., and Peticolas, W. L. 146. El Hassan, M. A., and Calladine, C. R. (1996) Barton, J. K. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121,
(1987)Biochemistry26, 5178–5186 J. Mol. Biol.259, 95–103 5615–5616
114. Saenger, W., Hunter, W. N., and Kennard, O. 147. Calladine, C. R. (1982) J. Mol. Biol.161, 343–352 181a.Aich, P., Labiuk, S. L., Tari, L. W., Dalbaere, L.
(1986)Nature (London)324, 385–388 148. Hunter, C. A., and Lu, X.-J. (1997) J. Mol. Biol. J. T., Roesler, W. J., Falk, K. J., Steer, R. P., and
115. Frank-Kamenetskii, M. (1986) Nature (London) 265, 603–619 Lee, J. S. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.294, 477–485
324, 305 149. Babcock, M. S., Pednault, E. P. D., and Olson, 182. Fink, H.-W., and Schönenberger, C. (1999)
116. Basham, B., Schroth, G. P., and Ho, P. S. (1995) W. K. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.273, 125–156 Nature (London)398, 407–410
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 6464–6468 150. Lu, X.-J., El Hassan, M. A., and Hunter, C. A. 183. Marini, J. C., Miller, K. G., and Englund, P. T.
117. Misra, V. K., and Honig, B. (1996) Biochemistry (1997)J. Mol. Biol.273, 668–680 (1980)J. Biol. Chem.255, 4976–4979
35, 1115–1124 151. Kitchin, P. A., Klein, V. A., Ryan, K. A., Gann, 184. Wasserman, S. A., Dungan, J. M., and
118. McLean, M. J., Blaho, J. A., Kilpatrick, M. W., K. L., Rauch, C. A., Kang, D. S., Wells, R. D., Cozzarelli, N. R. (1985) Science229, 171–174
and Wells, R. D. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. and England, P. T. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 185. Du, S. M., Wang, H., Tse-Dinh, Y.-C., and
U.S.A.83, 5884–5888 11302–11309 Seeman, N. C. (1995) Biochemistry34, 673–682
119. Kim, J.-m, and DasSarma, S. (1996) J. Biol. 152. Koo, H.-S., Wu, H.-M., and Crothers, D. M. 186. Du, S. M., Stollar, B. D., and Seeman, N. C.
Chem.271, 19724–19731 (1986)Nature (London)320, 501–506 (1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 1194–1200
120. Nordheim, A., Pardue, M. L., Lafer, E. M., 153. Zahn, K., and Blattner, F. B. (1987) Science236, 187. Wasserman, S. A., and Cozzarelli, N. R. (1986)
Möller, A., Stollar, B. D., and Rich, A. (1981) 416–422 Science232, 951–960
Nature (London)294, 417–422 154. Snyder, M., Buchman, A. R., and Davis, R. W. 188. White, J. H., and Cozzarelli, N. R. (1984) Proc.
121. Jaworski, A., Hsieh, W.-T., Blaho, J. A., (1986)Nature (London)324, 87–89 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.81, 3322–3326
Larson, J. E., and Wells, R. D. (1987) Science 155. Travers, A. A. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 189. Cipra, B. (1992) Science255, 403
238, 773–777 108–112 190. Adams, C. C. (1994) The Knot Book, Freeman,
122. Zacharias, W., O’Conner, T. R., and Larson, J. 156. Grzeskowiak, K., Goodsell, D. S., Kaczor- New York
E. (1988) Biochemistry27, 2970–2978 Grzeskowiak, M., Cascio, D., and Dickerson, 191. Krasnow, M. A., Stasiak, A., Spengler, S. J.,
123. Nordheim, A., and Rich, A. (1983) Nature R. E. (1993) Biochemistry32, 8923–8931 Dean, F., Koller, T., and Cozzarelli, N. R.
(London)303, 674–679 157. Allewell, N. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, (1983)Nature (London)304, 559–560
124. Wells, R. D. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 1095–1098 193–195 192. Du, S. M., and Seeman, N. C. (1992) J. Am.
125. Rentzeperis, D., Kupke, D. W., and Marky, L. 158. Haran, T. E., Kahn, J. D., and Crothers, D. M. Chem. Soc.114, 9652–9655
A. (1994) Biochemistry33, 9588–9591 (1994)J. Mol. Biol.244, 135–143 193. Wang, J. C. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5,
126. Liu, K., Miles, H. T., Frazier, J., and Sasisekha- 159. Strauss, J. K., and Maher, L. J., III. (1994) 219–221
ran, V. (1993) Biochemistry32, 11802–11809 Science266, 1829–1834 194. Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R. (1980)
127. Zhou, N., Germann, M. W., van de Sande, J. 160. Olson, W. K., Marky, N. L., Jernigan, R. L., Biophysical Chemistry, Part 3, Freeman, San
H., Pattabiraman, N., and Vogel, H. J. (1993) and Zhurkin, V. B. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.232, Francisco, California (pp. 1265–1290)
Biochemistry32, 646–656 530–554 195. Lebowitz, J. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15,
128. Otto, C., Thomas, G. A., Rippe, K., Jovin, T. 161. Price, M. A., and Tullius, T. D. (1993) 202–207
M., and Peticolas, W. L. (1991) Biochemistry30, Biochemistry32, 127–136 196. Bates, A. D., and Maxwell, A. (1993) DNA
3062–3069 162. DiGabriele, A. D., and Steitz, T. A. (1993) J. Topology, Oxford Univ. Press, London
129. Trifonov, E. N. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, Mol. Biol.231, 1024–1039 197. Yang, Y., Westcott, T. P., Pedersen, S. C.,
467–470 163. Chuprina, V. P., Fedoroff, O. Y., and Reid, B. Tobias, I., and Olson, W. K. (1995) Trends
130. Rich, A. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, R. (1991) Biochemistry30, 561–568 Biochem. Sci.20, 313–319
13999–14000 164. Crothers, D. M. (1994) Science266, 1819–1820 198. Vinograd, J., Lebowitz, J., and Watson, R.
131. Hageman, P. J. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biophys. 165. Husain, I., Griffith, J., and Sancar, A. (1988) (1968)J. Mol. Biol.33, 173–197
Biophys. Chem.17, 265–286 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 2558–2562 199. White, J. H., Cozzarelli, N. R., and Bauer, W.
132. Poncin, M., Hartmann, B., and Lavery, R. 166. Srinivasan, A. R., Torres, R., Clark, W., and R. (1988) Science241, 323–327
(1992)J. Mol. Biol.226, 775–794 Olson, W. K. (1987) J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn.5, 199a.Vologodskii, A. V., and Cozzarelli, N. R.
133. MacKerell, A. D., Jr., Wiórkiewicz-Kuczera, J., 459–496 (1994)Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23,
and Karplus, M. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 167. Lutter, L. C., Halvorson, H. R., and Calladine, 609–643
11946–11975 C. R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.261, 620–633 199b.Cozzarelli, N. R., Boles, T. C., and White, J. H.
134. Kosikov, K. M., Gorin, A. A., Zhurkin, V. B., 168. Privé, G. G., Heinemann, V., Chandrasegaran, (1990) in DNA Topology and its Biological
and Olson, W. K. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.289, S., Kan, L.-S., Kopka, M. L., and Dickerson, R. Effects, pp. 139–184, Cold Spring Harbor Lab.
1301–1326 E. (1987) Science238, 498–504 Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
135. Peticolas, W. L., Wang, Y., and Thomas, G. A. 169. Lilley, D. M. J. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 199c.Podtelezhnikov, A. A., Cozzarelli, N. R., and
(1988)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 2579– U.S.A.92, 7140–7142 Vologodskii, A. V. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
2583 170. Woodson, S. A., and Crothers, D. M. (1988) U.S.A.96, 12974–12979
136. Dickerson, R. E., and Drew, H. R. (1981) Proc. Biochemistry27, 3130–3141 200. Reich, Z., Levin-Zaidman, S., Gutman, S. B.,
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.78, 7318–7322 171. Miller, M., Harrison, R. W., Wlodawer, A., Arad, T., and Minsky, A. (1994) Biochemistry
136a.Packer, M. J., and Hunter, C. A. (1998) J. Mol. Appella, E., and Sussman, J. L. (1988) Nature 33, 14177–14184
Biol.280, 407–420 (London)334, 85–86 201. Eriksson, M. A. L., Härd, T., and Nilsson, L.
137. Hogan, M., Dattagupta, N., and Crothers, D. 172. Hunter, W. N., Brown, T., Kneale, G., Anand, (1995)Biophys. J.68, 402–426
M. (1979) Nature (London)278, 521–524 N. N., Rabinovich, D., and Kennard, O. (1987) 202. Keller, W. (1975) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
138. Mitra, C. K., Sarma, M. H., and Sarma, R. H. J. Biol. Chem.262, 9962–9970 72, 2550–2554
(1981)J. Am. Chem. Soc.103, 6727–6737 173. Lane, A., Martin, S. R., Ebel, S., and Brown, T. 203. Kornberg, R. D., and Klug, A. (1981) Sci. Am.
139. Cluzel, P., Lebrun, A., Heller, C., Lavery, R., (1992)Biochemistry31, 12087–12095 244(Feb), 52–64
Viovy, J.-L., Chatenay, D., and Caron, F. (1996) 174. Li, Y., and Agrawal, S. (1995) Biochemistry34, 204. Wang, B.-C., Rose, J., Arents, G., and
Science271, 792–794 10056–10062 Moudrianakis, E. N. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.236,
140. Smith, S. B., Cui, Y., and Bustamante, C. 175. Manning, G. S. (1978) Q. Rev. Biophys.11, 179–188
(1996)Science271, 795–799 179–246

--- Page 276 ---

273
References
205. Malik, M., Bensaid, A., Rouviere-Yaniv, J., and 239. Hanvey, J. C., Shimizu, M., and Wells, R. D. 271. Miura, T., Benevides, J. M., and Thomas, G. J.,
Drlica, K. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.256, 66–76 (1988)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 6292– Jr. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.248, 233–238
206. Serrano, M., Salas, M., and Hermoso, J. M. 6296 272. Schierer, T., and Henderson, E. (1994)
(1993)Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 202–206 240. Htun, H., and Dahlberg, J. E. (1989) Science Biochemistry33, 2240–2246
207. Seidl, A., and Hinz, H.-J. (1984) Proc. Natl. 243, 1571–1576 273. Hardin, C. C., Corregan, M., Brown, B. A., II,
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.81, 1312–1316 241. Mirkin, S. M., and Frank-Kamenetskii, M. D. and Frederick, L. N. (1993) Biochemistry32,
208. Rahmouni, A. R., and Wells, R. D. (1989) (1994)Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23, 5870–5880
Science246, 358–363 541–576 274. Cheong, C., and Moore, P. B. (1992)
209. Spolar, R. S., and Record, M. T., Jr. (1994) 242. Singh, S., Patel, P. K., and Hosur, R. V. (1997) Biochemistry31, 8406–8414
Science263, 777–784 Biochemistry36, 13214–13222 275. Chen, F.-M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 23090–
210. White, J. H., Gallo, R. M., and Bauer, W. R. 243. Van Meervelt, L., Vlieghe, D., Dautant, A., 23096
(1992)Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 7–12 Gallois, B., Précigoux, G., and Kennard, O. 276. Kettani, A., Kumar, R. A., and Patel, D. J.
211. van Holde, K., and Zlatanova, J. (1995) J. Biol. (1995)Nature (London)374, 742–744 (1995)J. Mol. Biol.254, 638–656
Chem.270, 8373–8376 244. Reddy, G., Jwang, B., Rao, B. J., and Radding, 277. Kang, C. H., Berger, I., Lockshin, C., Ratliff,
212. Keller, W. (1975) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. C. M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 11486–11492 R., Moyzis, R., and Rich, A. (1994) Proc. Natl.
72, 4876–4880 245. Kim, M. G., Zhurkin, V. B., Jernigan, R. L., Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 11636–11640
213. Hamiche, A., Schultz, P., Ramakrishnan, V., and Camerini-Otero, R. D. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 278. Gehring, K., Leroy, J.-L., and Guéron, M.
Oudet, P., and Prunell, A. (1996) J. Mol. Biol. 247, 874–889 (1993)Nature (London)363, 561–565
257, 30–42 246. Cox, M. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 26021– 279. Lacroix, L., Mergny, J.-L., Leroy, J.-L., and
214. Alfonso, P. J., Crippa, M. P., Hayes, J. J., and 26024 Hélène, C. (1996) Biochemistry35, 8715–8722
Bustin, M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.236, 189–198 247. Jain, S. K., Cox, M. M., and Inman, R. B. (1995) 280. Chen, L., Cai, L., Zhang, X., and Rich, A.
215. Bednar, J., Furrer, P., Stasiak, A., Dubochet, J., J. Biol. Chem.270, 4943–4949 (1994)Biochemistry33, 13540–13546
Egelman, E. H., and Bates, A. D. (1994) J. Mol. 248. Best, G. C., and Dervan, P. B. (1995) J. Am. 281. Kang, C. H., Berger, I., Lockshin, C., Ratliff,
Biol.235, 825–847 Chem. Soc.117, 1187–1193 R., Moyzis, R., and Rich, A. (1995) Proc. Natl.
216. Kumar, A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12921–12925 249. Greenberg, W. A., and Dervan, P. B. (1995) Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 3874–3878
217. Stigter, D. (1995) Biophys. J.69, 380–388 J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 5016–5022 282. Benevides, J. M., Kang, C., and Thomas, G. J.,
218. Baeza, I., Gariglio, P., Rangel, L. M., Chavez, 250. Hashem, G. M., Pham, L. P., Vaughan, M. R., Jr. (1996) Biochemistry35, 5747–5755
P., Cervantes, L., Arguello, C., Wong, C., and and Gray, D. M. (1998) Biochemistry37, 61–72 283. Gallego, J., Chou, S.-H., and Reid, B. R. (1997)
Montañez, C. (1987) Biochemistry26, 6387– 251. Gryaznov, S. M., Lloyd, D. H., Chen, J.-K., J. Mol. Biol.273, 840–856
6392 Schultz, R. G., DeDionisio, L. A., Ratmeyer, L., 284. Selsing, E., Wells, R. D., Alden, C. J., and
219. Schmid, M. B. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, and Wilson, W. D. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Arnott, S. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 5417–5422
131–135 U.S.A.92, 5798–5802 285. Nishizaki, T., Iwai, S., Ohkubo, T., Kojima, C.,
220. Quigley, G. J., Wang, A. H.-J., Ughetto, G., van 252. Betts, L., Josey, J. A., Veal, J. M., and Jordan, S. Nakamura, H., Kyogoku, Y., and Ohtsuka, E.
der Marel, G., van Boom, J. H., and Rich, A. R. (1995) Science270, 1838–1841 (1996)Biochemistry35, 4016–4025
(1980)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 7204– 253. Tomac, S., Sarkar, M., Ratilainen, T., Wittung, 286. Salazar, M., Champoux, J. J., and Reid, B. R.
7208 P., Nielsen, P. E., Nordén, B., and Gräslund, A. (1993)Biochemistry32, 739–744
221. Campbell, A. M., and Jolly, D. J. (1973) (1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 5544–5552 287. Seeman, N. C., and Kallenbach, N. R. (1994)
Biochem. J.133, 209–226 253a.Ray, A., and Nordén, B. (2000) FASEB J.14, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23, 53–86
222. Depew, R. E., and Wang, J. C. (1975) Proc. 1041– 1060 288. Zhang, S., Fu, T.-J., and Seeman, N. C. (1993)
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.72, 4275–4279 253b.Izvolsky, K. I., Demidov, V. V., Nielsen, P. E., Biochemistry32, 8062–8067
223. Westof, E., and Sundaralingam, M. (1980) and Frank-Kamenetskii, M. D. (2000) 289. Pikkemaat, J. A., van den Elst, H., van Boom,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 1852–1856 Biochemistry39, 10908 – 10913 J. H., and Altona, C. (1994) Biochemistry33,
224. Sobell, H. M. (1974) Sci. Am.231(Aug), 82–91 254. White, S., Szewczyk, J. W., Turner, J. M., 14896–14907
225. Chen, H., and Patel, D. J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Baird, E. E., and Dervan, P. B. (1998) Nature 290. Carlström, G., and Chazin, W. J. (1996)
Soc.117, 5901–5913 (London)391, 468–471 Biochemistry35, 3534–3544
226. Chaires, J. B., Satyanarayana, S., Suh, D., Fokt, 255. Marsh, T. C., and Henderson, E. (1994) 291. Holliday, R. (1964) Genet. Res. Camb.5, 282–304
I., Przewloka, T., and Priebe, W. (1996) Biochemistry33, 10718–10724 292. Bennett, R. J., and West, S. C. (1995) J. Mol.
Biochemistry35, 2047–2053 256. Blackburn, E. H. (1991) Nature (London)350, Biol.252, 213–226
227. Rajeswari, M. R., Bose, H. S., Kukreti, S., 569–573 293. Grainger, R. J., Murchie, A. I. H., and Lilley, D.
Gupta, A., Chauhan, V. S., and Roy, K. B. 257. Blackburn, E. H. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, M. J. (1998) Biochemistry37, 23–32
(1992)Biochemistry31, 6237–6241 378–381 294. Lilley, D. M. J. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
227a.Leitner, D., Schröder, W., and Weisz, K. (2000) 258. Moyzis, R. K. (1991) Sci. Am.265(Aug), 48–55 U.S.A.94, 9513–9515
Biochemistry39, 5886 – 5892 259. Henderson, E., Hardin, C. C., Wolk, S. K., 295. Panyutin, I. G., Biswas, I., and Hsieh, P. (1995)
228. Felsenfeld, G., Davies, D., and Rich, A. (1957) Tinoco, I., Jr., and Blackburn, E. (1987) Cell51, EMBO J.14, 1819–1826
J. Am. Chem. Soc.79, 2023–2024 899–908 296. Chen, J., and Seeman, N. C. (1991) Nature
229. Felsenfeld, G., and Miles, H. T. (1967) Ann. 260. Laughlan, G., Murchie, A. I. H., Norman, D. (London)350, 631–633
Rev. Biochem.36, 407–448 G., Moore, M. H., Moody, P. C. E., Lilley, D. 297. Zhang, Y., and Seeman, N. C. (1994) J. Am.
230. Arnott, S., and Selsing, E. (1974) J. Mol. Biol. M. J., and Luisi, B. (1994) Science265, 520–527 Chem. Soc.116, 1661–1669
88, 509–521 261. Kang, C. H., Zhang, X., Ratliff, R., Moyzis, R., 297a.Liu, F., Sha, R., and Seeman, N. C. (1999) J. Am.
231. Wang, E., Koshlap, K. M., Gillespie, P., and Rich, A. (1992) Nature (London)356, 126– Chem. Soc.121, 917–922
Dervan, P. B., and Feigon, J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol. 131 297b.Fahlman, R. P., and Sen, D. (1999) J. Am. Chem.
257, 1052–1069 262. Smith, F. W., and Feigon, J. (1993) Biochemistry Soc.121, 11079–11085
232. Radhakrishnan, I., and Patel, D. J. (1994) 32, 8682–8692 298. Feagin, J. E. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 19373–
Biochemistry33, 11405–11416 263. Balagurumoorthy, P., and Brahmachari, S. K. 19376
233. Radhakrishnan, I., and Patel, D. J. (1994) J. (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 21858–21869 299. Stuart, K. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 68–72
Mol. Biol.241, 600–619 264. Williamson, J. R. (1994) Annu. Rev. Biophys. 300. Simons, R. W., and Grunberg-Manago, M.,
234. Rhee, S., Han, Z.-j, Liu, K., Miles, H. T., and Biomol. Struct.23, 703–730 eds. (1997) RNA Structure and Function, Cold
Davies, D. R. (1999) Biochemistry38, 16810– 265. Frank-Kamenetskii, M. (1992) Nature (London) Spring Harbor Lab. Press, Cold Spring
16815 356, 105 Harbor, New York
235. Roberts, R. W., and Crothers, D. M. (1996) 266. Wang, K. Y., Swaminathan, S., and Bolton, P. 301. Nicoloso, M., Qu, L.-H., Michot, B., and
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 4320–4325 H. (1994) Biochemistry33, 7517–7527 Bachellerie, J.-P. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.260, 178–195
236. van Dongen, M. J. P., Heus, H. A., Wymenga, 267. Wang, Y., and Patel, D. J. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 302. Gold, L., Polisky, B., Uhlenbeck, O., and Yarus,
S. S., van der Marel, G. A., van Boom, J. H., 251, 76–94 M. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, 763–797
and Hilbers, C. W. (1996) Biochemistry35, 268. Laporte, L., and Thomas, G. J., Jr. (1998) 303. Draper, D. E. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21,
1733–1739 Biochemistry37, 1327–1335 145–149
237. Klysik, J. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.245, 499–507 269. Ross, W. S., and Hardin, C. C. (1994) J. Am. 304. Sich, C., Ohlenschläger, O., Ramachandran,
238. Srinivasan, A. R., and Olson, W. K. (1998) Chem. Soc.116, 6070–6080 R., Görlach, M., and Brown, L. R. (1997)
J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 484–491 270. Sen, D., and Gilbert, W. (1990) Nature (London) Biochemistry36, 13989–14002
344, 410–414

--- Page 277 ---

274 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
References
305. Egli, M., Portmann, S., and Usman, N. (1996) 337. Wakao, H., Romby, P., Westhof, E., Laalami, 370. Patel, D. J., Suri, A. K., Jiang, F., Jiang, L., Fan,
Biochemistry35, 8489–8494 S., Grunberg-Manago, M., Ebel, J.-P., P., Kumar, R. A., and Nonin, S. (1997) J. Mol.
306. Auffinger, P., and Westhof, E. (1997) J. Mol. Ehresmann, C., and Ehresmann, B. (1989) J. Biol.272, 645–664
Biol.274, 54–63 Biol. Chem.264, 20363–20371 371. Crick, F. H. C. (1966) Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
307. Salazar, M., Fedoroff, O. Y., Miller, J. M., 338. Hou, Y.-M., and Schimmel, P. (1992) Quant. Biol.31, 3–9
Ribeiro, N. S., and Reid, B. R. (1993) Biochemistry31, 4157–4160 372. Cornish-Bowden, A. (1996) Trends Biochem.
Biochemistry32, 4207–4215 339. Leehey, M. A., Squassoni, C. A., Friederich, M. Sci.21, 155
308. Fedoroff, O. Y., Salazar, M., and Reid, B. R. W., Mills, J. B., and Hagerman, P. J. (1995) 373. Hall, B. D. (1979) Nature (London)282, 129–130
(1993)J. Mol. Biol.233, 509–523 Biochemistry34, 16235–16239 374. Barrell, B. G., Bankier, A. T., and Drouin, J.
309. Ratmeyer, L., Vinayak, R., Zhong, Y. Y., Zon, 340. Quigley, G. J., and Rich, A. (1976) Science194, (1979)Nature (London)282, 189–194
G., and Wilson, W. D. (1994) Biochemistry33, 796–806 375. Horowitz, S., and Gorovsky, M. A. (1985) Proc.
5298–5304 341. Brimacombe, R., Atmadja, J., Stiege, W., and Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 2452–2455
310. Varani, G., Cheong, C., and Tinoco, I., Jr. Schüler, D. (1988) J. Mol. Biol.199, 115–136 376. Chambers, I., and Harrison, P. R. (1987) Trends
(1991)Biochemistry30, 3280–3289 342. Mueller, F., and Brimacombe, R. (1997) J. Mol. Biochem. Sci.12, 255–256
311. Butcher, S. E., Dieckmann, T., and Feigon, J. Biol.271, 524–544 377. Gardner, M. (1970) Sci. Am.223(Aug), 110–112
(1997)J. Mol. Biol.268, 348–358 343. Turner, D. H., and Sugimoto, N. (1988) Ann. 378. Mirkin, S. M., Lyamichev, V. I., Drushlyak, K.
312. van Dongen, M. J. P., Wijmenga, S. S., van der Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.17, 167–192 N., Dobrynin, V. N., Filippov, S. A., and
Marel, G. A., van Boom, J. H., and Hilbers, C. 344. Brimacombe, R. (1988) Biochemistry27, 4207– Frank-Kamenetskii, M. D. (1987) Nature
W. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.263, 715–729 4213 (London)330, 495–497
313. SantaLucia, J., Jr., Kierzek, R., and Turner, D. 345. Schnare, M. N., Damberger, S. H., Gray, M. 379. Guieysse, A.-L., Praseuth, D., and Hélène, C.
H. (1992) Science256, 217–219 W., and Gutell, R. R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.256, (1997)J. Mol. Biol.267, 289–298
314. Murphy, F. L., and Cech, T. R. (1994) J. Mol. 701–719 380. Panayotatos, N., and Fontaine, A. (1987) J.
Biol.236, 49–63 346. Yonath, A. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 227– Biol. Chem.262, 11364–11368
315. Jucker, F. M., Heus, H. A., Yip, P. F., Moors, E. 230 381. Pabo, C. O., and Sauer, R. T. (1984) Ann. Rev.
H. M., and Pardi, A. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.264, 347. Pennisi, E. (1999) Science285, 2048–2051 Biochem.53, 293–321
968–980 348. Svergun, D. I., Koch, M. H. J., Pedersen, J. S., 382. Berg, O. G., and von Hippel, P. H. (1988)
315a.Gutell, R. R., Cannone, J. J., Konings, D., and and Serdyuk, I. N. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.240, Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 207–211
Gautheret, D. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.300, 791–803 78–86 383. Marmorstein, R. Q., Joachimiak, A., Sprinzl,
316. Fountain, M. A., Serra, M. J., Krugh, T. R., 349. Vladimirov, S. N., Druzina, Z., Wang, R., and M., and Sigler, P. B. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262,
and Turner, D. H. (1996) Biochemistry35, Cooperman, B. S. (2000) Biochemistry39, 183– 4922–4927
6539–6548 193 384. Muto, A., and Osawa, S. (1987) Proc. Natl.
317. Huang, S., Wang, Y.-X., and Draper, D. E. 350. Gregory, S. T., and Dahlberg, A. E. (1999) J. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 166–169
(1996)J. Mol. Biol.258, 308–321 Mol. Biol.285, 1475–1483 385. Singer, C. E., and Ames, B. N. (1979) Science
318. Nowakowski, J., and Tinoco, I., Jr. (1996) 351. Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P. B., 170, 822–826
Biochemistry35, 2577–2585 and Steitz, T. A. (2000) Science289, 905–920 386. Singer, C. E., and Ames, B. N. (1972) Science
319. Chang, K.-Y., and Tinoco, I., Jr. (1997) J. Mol. 352. Cate, J. H., Yusupov, M. M., Yusupova, G. Z., 175, 1391
Biol.269, 52–66 Earnest, T. N., and Noller, H. F. (1999) Science 387. Harrison, S. C. (1991) Nature (London)353,
320. Rosendahl, G., Hansen, L. H., and 285, 2095–2104 715–719
Douthwaite, S. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.249, 59–68 353. Culver, G. M., Cate, J. H., Yusupova, G. Z., 388. Churchill, M. E. A., and Travers, A. A. (1991)
321. Pleij, C. W. A. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, Yusupov, M. M., and Noller, H. F. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 92–97
143–147 Science285, 2133–2135 389. Travers, A. (1993) DNA-Protein Interactions,
322. ten Dam, E., Pleij, K., and Draper, D. (1992) 354. Carter, A. P., Clemons, W. M., Brodersen, D. Chapman & Hall, New York
Biochemistry31, 11665–11676 E., Morgan-Warren, R. J., Wimberly, B. T., and 390. Jones, S., van Heyningen, P., Berman, H. M.,
323. Shen, L. X., and Tinoco, I., Jr. (1995) J. Mol. Ramakrishnan, V. (2000) Nature (London)407, and Thornton, J. M. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.287,
Biol.247, 963–978 340–348 877–896
324. Pinard, R., Payant, C., and Brakier-Gingras, L. 355. Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Ban, N., Moore, P. B., 391. Arents, G., and Moudrianakis, E. N. (1995)
(1995)Biochemistry34, 9611–9616 and Steitz, T. A. (2000) Science289, 920–930 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 11170–11174
325. Puglisi, J. D., Wyatt, J. R., and Tinoco, I., Jr. 356. Muth, G. W., Ortoleva-Donnelly, L., and 392. Starich, M. R., Sandman, K., Reeve, J. N., and
(1988)Nature (London)331, 283–286 Strobel, S. A. (2000) Science289, 947–950 Summers, M. F. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 187–203
326. Qiu, H., Kaluarachchi, K., Du, Z., Hoffman, 357. Cech, T. R. (2000) Science289, 878–879 393. Hud, N. V., Milanovich, F. P., and Balhorn, R.
D. W., and Giedroc, D. P. (1996) Biochemistry 358. Pennisi, E. (1996) Science273, 574–575 (1994)Biochemistry33, 7528–7535
35, 4176–4186 359. O’Gara, M., Klimasauskas, S., Roberts, R. J., 394. Lohman, T. M., and Ferrari, M. E. (1994) Ann.
326a.Kolk, M. H., van der Graaf, M., Wijmenga, S. and Cheng, X. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.261, 634–645 Rev. Biochem.63, 527–570
S., Pleij, C. W. A., Heus, H. A., and Hilbers, C. 360. Gommers-Ampt, J. H., and Borst, P. (1995) 395. Overman, L. B., and Lohman, T. M. (1994) J.
W. (1998) Science280, 434–438 FASEB J.9, 1034–1042 Mol. Biol.236, 165–178
327. Shi, P.-Y., Brinton, M. A., Veal, J. M., Zhong, Y. 361. Maltman, K. L., Neuhard, J., and Warren, R. 396. Folmer, R. H. A., Nilges, M., Folkers, P. J. M.,
Y., and Wilson, W. D. (1996) Biochemistry35, A. J. (1981) Biochemistry20, 3586–3591 Konings, R. N. H., and Hilbers, C. W. (1994) J.
4222–4230 362. Lipscomb, L. A., Peek, M. E., Morningstar, M. Mol. Biol.240, 341–357
328. Hubbard, J. M., and Hearst, J. E. (1991) L., Verghis, S. M., Miller, E. M., Rich, A., 397. Olah, G. A., Gray, D. M., Gray, C. W., Kergil,
Biochemistry30, 5458–5465 Essigmann, J. M., and Williams, L. D. (1995) D. L., Sosnick, T. R., Mark, B. L., Vaughan, M.
329. Soll, D., and Abelson, J., eds. (1979) Transfer Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 719–723 R., and Trewhella, J. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.249,
RNA, Cold Spring Harbor Lab. Press, Cold 363. Leonard, G. A., McAuley-Hecht, K. E., Gibson, 576–594
Spring Harbor, New York N. J., Brown, T., Watson, W. P., and Hunter, W. 398. Kanellopoulos, P. N., Tsernoglou, D., van der
330. Zimmermann, R. A. (1996) Science271, 1240– N. (1994) Biochemistry33, 4755–4761 Vliet, P. C., and Tucker, P. A. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.
1241 364. Wrzesinski, J., Bakin, A., Nurse, K., Lane, B. 257, 1–8
331. Steinberg, S., Gautheret, D., and Cedergren, G., and Ofengand, J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 399. Bogdarina, I., Fox, D. G., and Kneale, G. G.
R. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.236, 982–989 8904–8913 (1998)J. Mol. Biol.275, 443–452
332. Holbrook, S. R., Sussman, J. L., Warrant, R. 365. Ellington, A. D., and Szostak, J. W. (1990) 400. Pluta, A. F., Mackay, A. M., Ainsztein, A. M.,
W., and Kim, S.-H. (1978) J. Mol. Biol.123, Nature (London)346, 818–822 Goldberg, I. G., and Earnshaw, W. C. (1995)
631–660 366. Fan, P., Suri, A. K., Fiala, R., Live, D., and Science270, 1591–1594
333. Rich, A., and Kim, S. H. (1978) Sci. Am.238 Patel, D. J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.258, 480–500 401. Schevitz, R. W., Otwinowski, Z., Joachimiak,
(Jan), 52–62 367. Jenison, R. D., Gill, S. C., Pardi, A., and A., Lawson, C. L., and Sigler, P. B. (1985)
334. Rich, A. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 34–37 Polisky, B. (1994) Science263, 1425–1429 Nature (London)317, 782–786
335. Moras, D., Comarmond, M. B., Fischer, J., 368. Hamasaki, K., Killian, J., Cho, J., and Rando, 402. Zhang, R.-G, Joachimiak, A., Lawson, C. L.,
Weiss, R., Thierry, J. C., Ebel, J. P., and Giegé, R. R. (1998) Biochemistry37, 656–663 Schevitz, R. W., Otwinowski, Z., and Sigler, P.
R. (1980) Nature (London)288, 669–674 369. Connell, G. J., Illangesekare, M., and Yarus, B. (1987) Nature (London)327, 591–597
336. Woo, N. H., Roe, B. A., and Rich, A. (1980) M. (1993) Biochemistry32, 5497–5502
Nature (London)286, 346–351

--- Page 278 ---

275
References
403. Otwinowski, Z., Schevitz, R. W., Zhang, R.-G., 435. Baltimore, D., and Beg, A. A. (1995) Nature 466. Howley, P. M. (1986) N. Engl. J. Med.315,
Lawson, C. L., Joachimiak, A., Marmorstein, (London)373, 287–288 1089–1090
R. Q., Luisi, B. F., and Sigler, P. B. (1988) 436. Kaufmann, E., Müller, D., and Knöchel, W. 467. Hess, M., Cuzange, A., Ruigrok, R. W. H.,
Nature (London)335, 321–329 (1995)J. Mol. Biol.248, 239–254 Chroboczek, J., and Jacrot, B. (1995) J. Mol.
404. Shakked, Z., Guzikevich– Guerstein, G., 437. Burd, C. G., and Dreyfuss, G. (1994) Science Biol.252, 379–385
Frolow, F., Rabinovich, D., Joachimiak, A., 265, 615–621 468. Athappilly, F. K., Murali, R., Rux, J. J., Cai, Z.,
and Sigler, P. B. (1994) Nature (London)368, 438. Nagai, K., and Mattaj, I. W., eds. (1994) RNA- and Burnett, R. M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.242,
469–473 Protein Interactions, IRL Press, Oxford 430–455
405. Lawson, C. L., and Carey, J. (1993) Nature 439. Draper, D. E. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, 469. Witkowski, J. A. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13,
(London)366, 178–182 593–620 110–113
406. Lawson, C. L., and Sigler, P. B. (1988) Nature 440. Hentze, M. W. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 470. Sugden, B. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 45–46
(London)333, 869–871 101–103 471. Zhou, Z. H., Prasad, B. V. V., Jakana, J., Rixon,
407. Guenot, J., Fletterick, R. J., and Kollman, P. A. 441. Allain, F. H.-T., Gubser, C. C., Howe, P. W. A., F. J., and Chiu, W. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.242, 456–
(1994)Protein Sci.3, 1276–1285 Nagai, K., Neuhaus, D., and Varani, G. (1996) 469
408. Rastinejad, F., Artz, P., and Lu, P. (1993) J. Mol. Nature (London)380, 646–650 472. Trus, B. L., Booy, F. P., Newcomb, W. W.,
Biol.233, 389–399 442. Kenan, D. J., Query, C. C., and Keene, J. D. Brown, J. C., Homa, F. L., Thomsen, D. R., and
409. Markiewicz, P., Kleina, L. G., Cruz, C., Ehret, (1991)Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 214–220 Steven, A. C. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.263, 447–462
S., and Miller, J. H. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.240, 443. Fierro-Monti, I., and Mathews, M. B. (2000) 473. Henle, W., Henle, G., and Lennette, E. T.
421–433 Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 241–246 (1974)Sci. Am.241(Jul), 48–59
410. Lewis, M., Chang, G., Horton, N. C., Kercher, 444. Voyles, B. A. (1993) The Biology of Viruses, 474. Berardelli, P. (1997) Science278, 1710
M. A., Pace, H. C., Schumacher, M. A., Mosby, St. Louis, Missouri 475. Senkevich, T. G., Bugert, J. J., Sisler, J. R.,
Brennan, R. G., and Lu, P. (1996) Science271, 445. Fields, B. N., and Knipe, D. M., eds. (1990) Koonin, E. V., Darai, G., and Moss, B. (1996)
1247–1254 Fields Virology, 2nd ed., Raven Press, New York Science273, 813–816
411. Brennan, R. G., and Matthews, B. W. (1989) J. 446. Cann, A. (1993) Principles of Molecular Virology, 476. Hohn, T., Hohn, B., and Pfeiffer, P. (1985)
Biol. Chem.264, 1903–1906 Academic Press, San Diego, California Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 205–209
412. Jordan, S. R., and Pabo, C. O. (1988) Science 447. Endemann, H., and Model, P. (1995) J. Mol. 477. Rosa, P., Mantovani, S., Rosboch, R., and
242, 893–899 Biol.250, 496–506 Huttner, W. B. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 12227–
413. Wolberger, C., Dong, Y., Ptashne, M., and 448. Williams, K. A., Glibowicka, M., Li, Z., Li, H., 12232
Harrison, S. C. (1988) Nature (London)335, Khan, A. R., Chen, Y. M. Y., Wang, J., Marvin, 478. Diener, T. O. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2808–2813
789–795 D. A., and Deber, C. M. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.252, 479. Diener, T. V. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9,
414. Aggarwal, A. K., Rodgers, D. W., Drottar, M., 6–14 133–136
Ptashne, M., and Harrison, S. C. (1988) Science 449. Wen, Z. Q., Overman, S. A., and Thomas, G. 480. Diener, T. O. (1979) Viroids and Viroid Diseases,
242, 899–907 J., Jr. (1997) Biochemistry36, 7810–7820 Wiley, New York
415. Bell, A. C., and Koudelka, G. B. (1993) J. Mol. 450. Sanger, F., Air, G. M., Barrell, B. G., Brown, N. 481. Martínez-Soriano, J. P., Galindo-Alonso, J.,
Biol.234, 542–553 L., Coulson, A. R., Fiddes, J. C., Hutchison, C. Maroon, C. J. M., Yucel, I., Smith, D. R., and
416. Mandel-Gutfreund, Y., Schueler, O., and A., III, Slocombe, P. M., and Smith, M. (1977) Diener, T. O. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
Margalit, H. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.253, 370–382 Nature (London)265, 687–695 U.S.A.93, 9397–9401
417. Ferré-D’Amaré, A. R., Prendergast, G. C., Ziff, 451. McKenna, R., Ilag, L. L., and Rossmann, M. G. 482. Polson, A. G., Bass, B. L., and Casey, J. L.
E. B., and Burley, S. K. (1993) Nature (London) (1994)J. Mol. Biol.237, 517–543 (1996)Nature (London)380, 454–456
363, 38–44 452. McKenna, R., Xia, D., Willingmann, P., Ilag, L. 483. Wang, K.-S., Choo, Q.-L., Weiner, A. J., Ou, J.-
418. Junius, F. K., O’Donoghue, S. I., Nilges, M., L., Krishnaswamy, S., Rossmann, M. G., H., Najarian, R. C., Thayer, R. M., Mullenbach,
Weiss, A. S., and King, G. F. (1996) J. Biol. Olson, N. H., Baker, T. S., and Incardona, N. G. T., Denniston, K. J., Gerin, J. L., and
Chem.271, 13663–13667 L. (1992) Nature (London)355, 137–143 Houghton, M. (1986) Nature (London)323,
419. Keller, W., König, P., and Richmond, T. J. 453. Godson, G. N. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 508–514
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.254, 657–667 249–253 484. Lai, M. M. C. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64,
420. Harbury, P. B., Kim, P. S., and Alber, T. (1994) 454. McKenna, R., Bowman, B. R., Ilag, L. L., 259–286
Nature (London)371, 80–83 Rossmann, M. G., and Fane, B. A. (1996) J. 485. Unge, T., Liljas, L., Strandberg, B., Vaara, I.,
421. Klug, A., and Schwabe, J. W. R. (1995) FASEB J. Mol. Biol.256, 736–750 Kannan, K. K., Fridborg, K., Nordman, C. E.,
9, 597–604 455. Wu, H., and Rossmann, M. G. (1993) J. Mol. and Lentz, P. J., Jr. (1980) Nature (London)285,
422. Rhodes, D., and Klug, A. (1993) Sci. Am.268 Biol.233, 231–244 373–377
(Feb), 56–65 456. Tsao, J., Chapman, M. S., Agbandje, M., 486. Larson, S. B., Koszelak, S., Day, J., Green-
423. Pavletich, N. P., and Pabo, C. O. (1991) Science Keller, W., Smith, K., Wu, H., Luo, M., Smith, wood, A., Dodds, J. A., and McPherson, A.
252, 809–817 T. J., Rossmann, M. G., Compans, R. W., and (1993)Nature (London)361, 179–182
424. Mackay, J. P., and Crossley, M. (1998) Trends Parrish, C. R. (1991) Science251, 1456–1464 487. Larson, S. B., Koszelak, S., Day, J., Green-
Biochem. Sci. 23, 1–4 457. Chipman, P. R., Agbandje-McKenna, M., wood, A., Dodds, J. A., and McPherson, A.
425. Miller, J., McLachlan, A. D., and Klug, A. Kajigaya, S., Brown, K. E., Young, N. S., Baker, (1993)J. Mol. Biol.231, 375–391
(1985)EMBO J.4, 1609–1614 T. S., and Rossmann, M. G. (1996) Proc. Natl. 488. Golmohammadi, R., Valegård, K., Fridborg, K.,
426. Pieler, T., and Theunissen, O. (1993) Trends Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 7502–7506 and Liljas, L. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.234, 620–639
Biochem. Sci.18, 226–230 458. Howarth, A. J., and Goodman, R. M. (1982) 489. LeCuyer, K. A., Behlen, L. S., and Uhlenbeck,
427. Pavletich, N. P., and Pabo, C. O. (1993) Science Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 180–182 O. C. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10600–10606
261, 1701–1707 459. Tiollais, P., Pourcel, C., and Dejean, A. (1985) 490. Stonehouse, N. J., Valegård, K.,
428. Krizek, B. A., Amann, B. T., Kilfoil, V. J., Nature (London)317, 489–495 Golmohammadi, R., van den Worm, S.,
Merkle, D. L., and Berg, J. M. (1991) J. Am. 460. Tiollais, P., and Buendia, M.-A. (1991) Sci. Am. Walton, C., Stockley, P. G., and Liljas, L. (1996)
Chem. Soc.113, 4518–4523 264(Apr), 116–123 J. Mol. Biol.256, 330–339
429. Somers, W. S., and Phillips, S. E. V. (1992) 461. Böttcher, B., Wynne, S. A., and Crowther, R. 491. Beremarand, M. N., and Blumenthal, T. (1979)
Nature (London)359, 387–393 A. (1997) Nature (London)386, 88–91 Cell18, 257–266
430. Phillips, S. E. V. (1994) Annu. Rev. Biophys. 462. Reddy, V. B., Thimmappaya, B., Dhar, R., 492. Hogle, J. M., Chow, M., and Filman, D. J.
Biomol. Struct.23, 671–701 Subramanian, K. N., Zain, B. S., Pan, J., (1985)Science229, 1358–1365
431. Breg, J. N., van Opheusden, H. J., Burgering, Ghosh, P. K., Celma, M. L., and Weissman, S. 493. Hogle, J. M., Chow, M., and Filman, D. J.
M. J. M., Boelens, R., and Kaptein, R. (1990) M. (1978) Science200, 494–502 (1987)Sci. Am.256(Mar), 42–49
Nature (London)346, 586–589 463. Liddington, R. C., Yan, Y., Moulai, J., Sahli, R., 494. Najaran, R., Caput, D., Gee, W., Potter, S. J.,
432. Bonnefoy, E., Takahashi, M., and Yaniv, J. R. Benjamin, T. L., and Harrison, S. C. (1991) Renard, A., Merryweather, J., Van Nest, G.,
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.242, 116–129 Nature (London)354, 278–284 and Dina, D. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
433. Müller, C. W., Rey, F. A., Sodeoka, M., 464. Griffith, J. P., Griffith, D. L., Rayment, I., U.S.A.82, 2627–2631
Verdine, G. L., and Harrison, S. C. (1995) Murakami, W. T., and Caspar, D. L. D. (1992) 495. Rossmann, M. G., Arnold, E., Griffith, J. P.,
Nature (London)373, 311–317 Nature (London)355, 652–654 Kamer, G., Luo, M., Smith, T. J., Vriend, G.,
434. Ghosh, G., Van Duyne, G., Ghosh, S., and 465. Yang, R. C. A., and Wu, R. (1979) Science206, Rueckert, R. R., Sherry, B., McKinlay, M. A.,
Sigler, P. B. (1995) Nature (London)373, 303–310 456–462 Diana, G., and Otto, M. (1987) Trends Biochem.
Sci.12, 313–318

--- Page 279 ---

276 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
References
496. Olson, N. H., Kolatkar, P. R., Oliveira, M. A., 526. Grossman, L., and Moldave, K., eds. (1967) 559. Gillespie, D. (1968) in Methods in Enzymology,
Cheng, R. H., Greve, J. M., McClelland, A., Methods in Enzymology, Vol. 12A, Academic Vol. 12B (Grossman, L., and Moldave, K.,
Baker, T. S., and Rossmann, M. G. (1993) Proc. Press, New York (pp. 531–708) eds), pp. 641–668, Academic Press, New York
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 507–511 527. Robyt, J. F., and White, B. J. (1996) Biochemical 560. Hall, B. D., Haarr, L., and Kleppe, K. (1980)
497. Hadfield, A. T., Oliveira, M. A., Kim, K. H., Techniques, Theory and Practice, 2nd ed., Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 254–256
Minor, I., Kremer, M. J., Heinz, B. A., Shepard, Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, Illinois 561. Britten, R. J., and Kohne, D. E. (1967) Carnegie
D., Pevear, D. C., Rueckert, R. R., and Rossmann, 528. Blackburn, G. M., and Gait, M. J., eds. (1996) Instit. Washington Yearbook, 65th ed., Carnegie
M. G. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.253, 61–73 Nucleic Acids in Chemistry and Biology, 2nd ed., Instit., Washington, D. C. (pp. 78–106)
498. Küpper, H., Keller, W., Kurz, C., Forss, S., Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 562. Marmur, J. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 343–
Schaller, H., Franze, R., Stohmaier, K., 529. Rajeswari, M. R., Montenay-Garestier, T., and 346
Marquardt, O., Zaslavsky, V. G., and Helene, C. (1987) Biochemistry26, 6825–6831 563. Szabo, P., and Ward, D. C. (1982) Trends
Hofschneider, P. H. (1981) Nature (London) 530. Hecker, R., Colpan, M., and Riesner, D. (1985) Biochem. Sci.7, 425–427
289, 555–559 Journal of Chromatography326, 251–261 564. Kessler, C., ed. (1992) Nonradioactive Labeling
499. Brown, F. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, 325–327 531. Edwardson, P. A. D., Atkinson, T., Lowe, C. and Detection of Biomolecules, Springer-Verlag,
500. Acharya, R., Fry, E., Stuart, D., Fox, G., R., and Small, D. A. P. (1986) Anal. Biochem. New York
Rowlands, D., and Brown, F. (1989) Nature 152, 215–220 565. Leitch, A. R., Chwarzacher, T., Jackson, D.,
(London)337, 709–716 532. Lawrance, S. K., Smith, C. L., Srivastava, R., and Leitch, I. J. (1994) In Situ Hybridization:
501. Luo, M., Vriend, G., Kamer, G., Minor, I., Cantor, C. R., and Weissman, S. M. (1987) a Practical Guide, Bios, Oxford
Arnold, E., Rossmann, M. G., Boege, U., Science235, 1387–1390 566. Kumar, A., Tchen, P., Roullet, F., and Cohen, J.
Scraba, D. G., Duke, G. M., and Palmenberg, 533. Cantor, C. R., Smith, C. L., and Matthew, M. (1988)Anal. Biochem.169, 376–
A. C. (1987) Science235, 182–191 K. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.17, 567. Isaac, P. G., ed. (1994) Protocols for Nucleic Acid
502. Choi, H.-K., Tong, L., Minor, W., Dumas, P., 287–304 Analysis by Nonradioactive Probes, Humana
Boege, U., Rossmann, M. G., and Wengler, G. 534. Smith, C. L., and Cantor, C. R. (1987) Trends Press, Totowa, New Jersey
(1991)Nature (London)354, 37–43 Biochem. Sci.12, 284–287 568. Gillevet, P. M. (1990) Nature (London)348,
503. Simons, K., Garoff, H., and Helenius, A. 535. Kochetkov, N. K., and Budovskii, E. I. (1972) 657–658
(1982)Sci. Am.246(Feb), 58–66 Organic Chemistry of Nucleic Acids, Plenum, 569. Negro, F., Pacchioni, D., Shimizu, Y., Miller,
504. Harrison, S. C., Olson, A. J., Schutt, C. E., New York (Part A, pp. 137–147) R. H., Bussolati, G., Purcell, R. H., and
Winkler, F. K., and Bricogne, G. (1978) Nature 536. Bozic, D., Grazulis, S., Siksnys, V., and Huber, Bonino, F. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
(London)276, 368–373 R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 176–186 89, 2247–2251
505. Erickson, J. W., Silva, A. M., Murthy, M. R. N., 537. Smith, H. O. (1979) Science205, 455–462 570. Maniatis, T., Fritsch, E. F., and Sambrook, J.
Fita, I., and Rossmann, M. G. (1985) Science 538. Air, G. M. (1979) CRC Crit. Revs. Biochem.6, (1982)Molecular Cloning. A Laboratory Manual,
229, 625–629 1–33 Cold Spring Harbor Lab. Press, Cold Spring
506. Bloomer, A. C., Champness, J. N., Bricogne, 539. Roberts, R. J. (1980) Methods Enzymol.65, 1–15 Harbor, New York
G., Staden, R., and Klug, A. (1978) Nature 540. Koob, M., and Szybalski, W. (1990) Science 571. Gubler, U., and Hoffman, B. J. (1983) Gene25,
(London)276, 362–368 250, 271–273 263–269
507. Holmes, K. C. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 4–7 541. Veselkov, A. G., Demidov, V. V., Frank- 572. Watson, C. J., and Jackson, J. F. (1985) in DNA
507a.Lauffer, M. A. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, Kamenetskii, M. D., and Nielsen, P. E. (1996) Cloning Vol. I: A Practical Approach (Glover, D.
369–371 Nature (London)379, 214 M., ed), pp. 79–100, IRL Press, Washington, DC
508. Wang, H., and Stubbs, G. (1994) J. Mol. Biol. 542. Zaug, A. J., Been, M. D., and Cech, T. R. (1986) 573. Ohtsuka, E., Matsuki, S., Ikehara, M.,
239, 371–384 Nature (London)324, 429–433 Takahashi, Y., and Matsubara, K. (1985) J. Biol.
509. Kaplan, M. M., and Webster, R. G. (1977) Sci. 543. Uhlenbeck, O. C. (1987) Nature (London)328, Chem.260, 2605–2608
Am.237(Dec), 88–106 596–600 574. Warner, B. D., Warner, M. E., Karus, G. A., Ku,
510. von Itzstein, M., and 17 other authors. (1993) 544. Landgraf, R., Chen, C.-hB., and Sigman, D. S. L., Brown-Shimer, S., and Urdea, M. S. (1983)
Nature (London)363, 418–423 (1994)Biochemistry33, 10607–10615 DNA4, 401–411
511. Clarke, D. K., Duarte, E. A., Elena, S. F., Moya, 545. Adams, R. L. P., Burdon, R. H., Campbell, A. 575. Sekiya, T., Takeya, T., Brown, E. L., Belagaje,
A., Domingo, E., and Holland, J. (1994) Proc. M., and Smellie, R. M. S. (1976) Davidson’s The R., Contreras, R., Fritz, H.-J., Gait, M. J., Lees,
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 4821–4824 Biochemistry of the Nucleic Acids, 8th ed., R. G., Ryan, M. J., Khorana, H. G., and Norris,
512. Varmus, H. (1988) Science240, 1427–1434 Academic Press, New York (pp. 50–82) K. E. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 5787–5801
513. Darlix, J.-L., Lapadat-Tapolsky, M., de 546. Rayford, R., Anthony, D. D., Jr., O’Neill, R. E., 576. Wada, T., Sato, Y., Honda, F., Kawahara, S.-i,
Rocquigny, H., and Roques, B. P. (1995) J. Mol. Jr., and Merrick, W. C. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. and Sekine, M. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119,
Biol.254, 523–537 260, 15708–15713 12710–12721
514. Löwer, R., Löwer, J., and Kurth, R. (1996) Proc. 547. Bochner, B. R., and Ames, B. N. (1982) J. Biol. 577. Matteucci, M. D., and Caruthers, M. H. (1981)
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 5177–5184 Chem.257, 9759–9769 J. Am. Chem. Soc.103, 3185–3191
515. Stephenson, J. R., ed. (1980) Molecular Biology 548. Chen, H., and Shaw, B. R. (1994) Biochemistry 578. Beaucage, S. L., and Caruthers, M. H. (1981)
of RNA Tumor Viruses, Academic Press, New 33, 4121–4129 Tetrahedron Letters22, 1859–1862
York 549. Hayatsu, H., and Shiragami, M. (1979) 579. Air, G. M. (1979) CRC Crit. Revs. Biochem.6,
516. Compans, R. W., and Bishop, D. H. L., eds. Biochemistry18, 632–647 1–33
(1983)Double-Stranded RNA Viruses, Elsevier, 550. Spiro, T. G., ed. (1980) Nucleic Acid-Metal Ion 580. Alvarado-Urbina, G., Sathe, G. M., Liu, W.-C.,
Biomedical, New York Interactions, Wiley, New York Gillen, M. F., Duck, P. D., Bender, R., and
517. Thornton, A., and Zuckerman, A. J. (1975) 551. Dische, Z. (1955) Nucleic Acids1, 755 Ogilvie, K. K. (1981) Science214, 270–274
Nature (London)254, 557–558 552. Marmur, J., and Doty, P. (1962) J. Mol. Biol.5, 581. Caruthers, M. H. (1985) Science230, 281–285
518. Baldwin, M. A., Cohen, F. E., and Prusiner, S. 109–118 582. Lashkari, D. A., Hunicke-Smith, S. P., Norgren,
B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 19197–19200 553. Korolev, N., Lyubartsev, A. P., and Norden- R. M., Davis, R. W., and Brennan, T. (1995)
519. Manuelidis, L., Sklaviadis, T., Akowitz, A., skiöld, L. (1998) Biophys. J.75, 3041–3056 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 7912–7915
and Fritch, W. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 554. Davidson, J. N. (1972) The Biochemistry of 583. Usman, N., Ogilvie, K. K., Jiang, M.-Y., and
U.S.A.92, 5124–5128 Nucleic Acids, 7th ed., Academic Press, New Cedergren, R. J. (1987) J. Am. Chem. Soc.109,
520. Prusiner, S. B. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, York (p. 148) 7845–7854
482–487 555. Wada, A., Yabuki, S., and Husimi, Y. (1980) 584. Ebe, K., Schöed, M., Rossi, J. J., and Wallace,
521. Prusiner, S. B. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Crit. Revs. Biochem.9, 87–144 R. B. (1987) DNA6, 497–504
U.S.A.95, 13363–13383 556. Britten, R. J., and Kohne, D. E. (1968) Science 585. Usman, N., and Cedergren, R. (1992) Trends
522. Weissmann, C. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 3–6 161, 529–540 Biochem. Sci.17, 334–339
523. Chesebro, B. (1998) Science286, 660–662 557. Wilson, D. A., and Thomas, C. A., Jr. (1974) 586. Eaton, B. E., and Pieken, W. A. (1995) Ann.
524. Balter, M. (1999) Science286, 660–662 J. Mol. Biol.84, 115–144 Rev. Biochem.64, 837–863
525. Temin, H. M. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 558. Bendich, A. J., and Bolton, E. T. (1968) in 587. Rohatgi, R., Bartel, D. P., and Szostak, J. W.
N80–N83 Methods in Enzymology, Vol. 12B (Grossman, (1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 3340–3344
525a.Sambrook, J., and Russell, D. (2000) Molecular L., and Moldave, K., eds), pp. 635–640, 588. Kleppe, K., Ohtsuka, E., Kleppe, R., and
Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 3rd ed.,Cold Academic Press, New York Khorana, H. G. (1971) J. Mol. Biol.56, 341–361
Spring Harbor Lab. Press, Plainview, New 589. Panet, A., and Khorana, H. G. (1974) J. Biol.
York Chem.249, 5213–5221

--- Page 280 ---

277
References
590. Saiki, R. K., Scharf, S., Faloona, F., Mullis, K. 626. Bassam, B. J., Caetano-Anolles, G., and 661. Tullius, T. D., and Dombroski, B. A. (1986)
B., Horn, G. T., Erlich, H. A., and Arnheim, N. Gresshoff, P. M. (1991) Anal. Biochem.196, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 5469–5473
(1985)Science230, 1350–1354 80–83 662. Prigodich, R. V., and Martin, C. T. (1990)
591. Mullis, K. B. (1990) Sci. Am.262(Apr), 56–65 627. Mizusawa, S., Nishimura, S., and Seela, F. Biochemistry29, 8017–8019
592. Rabinow, P. (1996) Making PCR: A Story of (1986)Nucleic Acids Res.14, 1319–1324 663. Flaus, A., Luger, K., Tan, S., and Richmond,
Biotechnology, Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago, 628. Gerken, T. A., Gupta, R., and Jentoft, N. (1992) T. J. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93,
Illinois Biochemistry31, 639–648 1370–1375
593. Mullis, K., Ferré, F., and Gibbs, R., eds. (1994) 629. Hengen, P. N. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 664. Tornaletti, S., and Pfeifer, G. P. (1995) J. Mol.
The Polymerase Chain Reaction, Birkhäuser, 33–34 Biol.249, 714–728
Boston, Massachusetts 630. Poncz, M., Solowiejczyk, D., Ballantine, M., 664a.Chaulk, S. G., Pezacki, J. P., and MacMillan,
594. Saiki, R. K., Gelfand, D. H., Stoffel, S., Scharf, Schwartz, E., and Surrey, S. (1982) Proc. Natl. A. M. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10448–10453
S. J., Higuchi, R., Horn, G. T., Mullis, K. B., Acad. Sci. U.S.A.79, 4298–4302 665. Jaeger, J. A., SantaLucia, J., Jr., and Tinoco, I.,
and Erlich, H. A. (1988) Science239, 487–491 631. Henikoff, S. (1984) Gene28, 351–359 Jr. (1993) Ann. Rev. Biochem.62, 255–287
595. Erlich, H. A., Gelfand, D. H., and Saiki, R. K. 632. Adams, M. D., Kerlavage, A. R., Kelley, J. M., 666. Hüttenhofer, A., and Noller, H. F. (1994)
(1988)Nature (London)331, 461–462 Gocayne, J. D., Fields, C., Fraser, C. M., and EMBO J.13, 3892–3901
596. Appenzeller, T. (1990) Science247, 1030–1032 Venter, J. C. (1994) Nature (London)368, 474–475 667. Laughrea, M., and Tam, J. (1992) Biochemistry
597. Newton, C., and Graham, A. (1997) PCR, 2nd 633. Smith, L. M., Sanders, J. Z., Kaiser, R. J., 31, 12035–12041
ed., Springer-Verlag, New York Hughes, P., Dodd, C., Connell, C. R., Heiner, 668. Reid, B. R. (1981) Ann. Rev. Biochem.50, 969–996
598. Bloch, W. (1991) Biochemistry30, 2735–2747 C., Kent, S. B. H., and Hood, L. E. (1986) 669. Hare, D. R., Ribeiro, N. S., Wemmer, D. E., and
599. White, B. A., ed. (1993) PCR Protocols, Nature (London)321, 674–679 Reid, B. R. (1985) Biochemistry24, 4300–4306
Humana Press, Totowa, New Jersey 634. Ju, J., Ruan, C., Fuller, C. W., Glazer, A. N., 670. Ikuta, S., Chattopadhyaya, R., Ito, H.,
599a.Innis, M. A., Gelfand, D. H., and Sninsky, J. J., and Mathies, R. A. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Dickerson, R. E., and Kearns, D. R. (1986)
eds. (1999) PCR Applications, Academic Press, U.S.A.92, 4347–4351 Biochemistry25, 4840–4849
San Diego, California 635. Fu, D.-J., Broude, N. E., Köster, H., Smith, C. 671. Lefèvre, J.-F., Lane, A. N., and Jardetzky, O.
600. Cohen, J. (1994) Science263, 1564–1565 L., and Cantor, C. R. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. (1987)Biochemistry26, 5076–5090
601. Pääbo, S. (1993) Sci. Am.269(Nov), 86–92 Sci. U.S.A.92, 10162–10166 672. Bax, A., and Lerner, L. (1986) Science232,
602. Pääbo, S., Higuchi, R. G., and Wilson, A. C. 636. Bult, C. J., and 39 other authors. (1996) Science 960–967
(1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 9709–9712 273, 1058–1073 673. Patel, D. J., Shapiro, L., and Hare, D. (1987)
603. Höss, M., Pääbo, S., and Vereshchagin, N. K. 637. Sutcliffe, J. G. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 87–90 Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.16, 423– 454
(1994)Nature (London)370, 333 638. Rowen, L., Mahairas, G., and Hood, L. (1997) 674. Flynn, P. F., Kintanar, A., Reid, B. R., and
604. Scharf, S. J., Horn, G. T., and Erlich, H. A. Science278, 605–607 Drobny, G. (1988) Biochemistry27, 1191–1197
(1986)Science233, 1076–1078 639. Mathies, R. A., Huang, X. C., and Quesada, 675. Cohen, J. S. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12,
605. Li, H., Gyllensten, U. B., Cui, X., Saiki, R. K., M. A. (1992) Anal. Chem.64, 2149–2154 133–135
Erlich, H. A., and Arnheim, N. (1988) Nature 640. Yeung, E. S., and Li, Q. (1998) in High 676. Wemmer, D. E., Chou, S.-H., and Reid, B. R.
(London)335, 414–417 Performance Capillary Electrophoresis (Khaldi, (1984)J. Mol. Biol.180, 41–60
606. Engelke, D. R., Hoener, P. A., and Collins, F. S. M. G., ed), Wiley, New York 677. Schmidt, P. G., Sierzputowska-Gracz, H., and
(1988)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 544–548 641. Little, D. P., Aaserud, D. J., Valaskovic, G. A., Agris, P. F. (1987) Biochemistry26, 8529–8534
607. Karlovsky, P. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 419 and McLafferty, F. W. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 678. Farmer, B. T., Jr., and Müller, L. (1993) J. Am.
608. Hengen, P. N. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 118, 9352–9359 Chem. Soc.115, 11040–11041
372–373 642. Maxam, A. M., and Gilbert, W. (1977) Proc. 679. Nikonowicz, E. P., and Pardi, A. (1992) Nature
609. Wong, G. K.-S., Yu, J., Thayer, E. C., and Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.74, 560–564 (London)355, 184–186
Olson, M. V. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 643. Gilbert, W. (1981) Science214, 1305–1312 680. Tate, S.-i, Ono, A., and Kainosho, M. (1994)
94, 5225–5230 644. Maxam, A. M., and Gilbert, W. (1980) Methods J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 5977–5978
610. Bernardi, G. (1978) Nature (London)276, 558– Enzymol.65, 499–560 681. Marino, J. P., Prestegard, J. H., and Crothers,
559 645. Brownlee, G. G. (1972) in Determination of D. M. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 2205–2206
611. Bonitz, S. G., Coruzzi, G., Thalenfeld, B. E., Sequences in RNA (Work, T. S., and Work, E., 682. Moore, P. B. (1995) Acc. Chem. Res.28, 251–256
Tzagoloff, A., and Macino, G. (1980) J. Biol. eds), North-Holland Publ., Amsterdam 683. Pardi, A. (1995) Nature Struct. Biol.1, 846–849
Chem.255, 11927–11941 646. Pilly, D., Niemeyer, A., Schmidt, M., and 684. Mer, G., and Chazin, W. J. (1998) J. Am. Chem.
612. Martin, N. C., Miller, D. L., and Donelson, J. Bargetzi, J. P. (1978) J. Biol. Chem.253, 437–445 Soc.120, 607–608
E. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 11729–11734 647. Bayev, A. A. (1995) Comprehensive Biochemistry 684a.Nikonowicz, E. P., Michnicka, M., and
613. Fischer, S. G., and Lerman, L. S. (1979) 38, 439–479 DeJong, E. (1998) J. Am. Chem. Soc.120,
Methods Enzymol.68, 183–191 648. Campbell, P. N. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 3813–3814
614. Southern, E. M. (1975) J. Mol. Biol.98, 503–517 259–260 684b.Liu, A., Majumdar, A., Hu, W., Kettani, A.,
615. Southern, E. (1979) Methods Enzymol.68, 152– 649. Myers, T. W., and Gelfand, D. H. (1991) Skripkin, E., and Patel, D. J. (2000) J. Am.
176 Biochemistry30, 7661–7666 Chem. Soc.122, 3206–3210
616. Grunstein, M., and Wallis, J. (1979) Methods 650. Simoncsits, A., Brownlee, G. G., Brown, R. S., 685. Tolbert, T. J., and Williamson, J. R. (1996) J.
Enzymol.68, 379–389 Rubin, J. R., and Guilley, H. (1977) Nature Am. Chem. Soc.118, 7929–7940
617. Sanger, F., and Coulson, A. R. (1975) J. Mol. (London)269, 833–836 686. Xu, J., Lapham, J., and Crothers, D. M. (1996)
Biol.94, 441–448 651. Stanley, J., and Vassilenko, S. (1978) Nature Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 44–48
618. Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. R. (1977) (London)274, 87–89 687. Horowitz, J., Ofengand, J., Daniel, W. E. Jr.,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.74, 5463–5467 652. Kitamura, N., and Wimmer, E. (1980) Proc. and Cohn, M. (1977) J. Biol. Chem.252, 4418–
619. Alphey, L. (1997) DNA Sequencing, Springer- Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 3196–3200 4420
Verlag, New York 653. Josse, J., Kaiser, A. D., and Kornberg, A. (1961) 688. Schroeder, S. A., Roongta, V., Fu, J. M., Jones,
620. Ansorge, W., Voss, H., and Zimmerman, J., J. Biol. Chem.236, 864–875 C. R., and Gorenstein, D. G. (1989) Biochemistry
eds. (1997) DNA Sequencing Strategies - 654. Stormo, G. D. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biophys. 28, 8292–8303
Automated and Advanced Approaches, Wiley, Biophys. Chem.17, 241–263 689. Radhakrishnan, I., Patel, D. J., and Gao, X.
New York 655. Goad, W. B. (1986) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. (1992)Biochemistry31, 2514–2523
621. Griffin, H. G., and Griffin, A. M., eds. (1993) Chem.15, 79–95 690. Schurter, E. J., Sayer, J. M., Oh-hara, T., Yeh,
DNA Sequencing Protocols, Humana Press, 656. Garner, M. M., and Revzin, A. (1986) Trends H. J. C., Yagi, H., Luxon, B. A., Jerina, D. M.,
Totowa, New Jersey Biochem. Sci.11, 395–396 and Gorenstein, D. G. (1995) Biochemistry34,
622. Smith, A. J. H. (1980) Methods Enzymol.65, 657. Berger, R., Duncan, M. R., and Berman, B. 9009–9020
560–580 (1993)BioTechniques15, 650–652 691. Mao, H., Deng, Z., Wang, F., Harris, T. M., and
623. Gillam, S., and Smith, M. (1980) Methods 658. Welsh, J., and Cantor, C. R. (1984) Trends Stone, M. P. (1998) Biochemistry37, 4374–4387
Enzymol.65, 687–701 Biochem. Sci.9, 505–508 692. Chou, S.-H., Zhu, L., Gao, Z., Cheng, J.-W., and
624. Chen, E. Y., and Seeburg, P. H. (1985) DNA4, 659. Galas, D., and Schmitz, A. (1978) Nucleic Acids Reid, B. R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.264, 981–1001
165–170 Res.5, 3157–3170 693. Kettani, A., Guéron, M., and Leroy, J.-L. (1997)
625. Ornstein, D., Moen, P. T., and Kashdan, M. A. 660. Tullius, T. D. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 1108–1115
(1985)DNA4, 94 297–300 694. Chu, Wen-C., Liu, J. C.-H., and Horowitz, J.
(1997)Nucleic Acids Res.25, 3944–3949

--- Page 281 ---

278 Chapter 5. The Nucleic Acids
Study Questions
1. Describe the typical distribution pattern of RNA 11. Electrophoresis of a mixture of the dinucleotides
and DNA in bacterial cells and in eukaryotic cells. ApC and ApU at pH 3.5 separates two compo-
nents. Identify these and explain the order of
2. Draw the structures of the Watson–Crick base migration. Be as quantitative as possible.
pairs guanine – cytosine (GC) and adenine – thym-
ine (AT). Also draw the GU pair, which is not a 12. Draw the structure of the predominant form of
Watson – Crick pair. pGpC as it occurs at pH 3.5.
3. Draw the tautomeric structures possible for the 13. Why is DNA denatured at pH 11?
cation formed by protonation of 9-methyladenine.
14. Draw a schematic representation of the polynucle-
4. What unusual base pairs could arise from a minor otide portion of a DNA molecule and of an RNA
tautomer of cytosine or from a minor tautomer of molecule and indicate positions of cleavage by the
guanine? following treatments:
a) Mild HCl
5. The minor imino tautomeric form of adenosine b) More vigorous HCl
occurs infrequently in DNA. Can this cause muta- c) Mild NaOH
tions? Explain; draw structures to illustrate your d) More vigorous NaOH
answer. e) Pancreatic RNase
f) Pancreatic DNase
6. Will the substitution of hypoxanthine for adenine g) Splenic DNase
in DNA result in mutation? Explain. h) Splenic phosphodiesterase
i) Snake venom phophodiesterase
7. Why is the methylation of DNA to form O6-methyl j) Dnase from Micrococcus
guanine mutagenic?
15. A sample of DNA from a virus was hydrolyzed by
8. Draw the structure of a dinucleotide that might be acid and was found to have the following base
obtained by the partial hydrolysis of RNA. Indicate composition (in mol%): adenine, 30; thymine, 39;
the following: guanine, 18; cytosine, 13. This differs from that of
a) The 5' end most DNA preparations. Offer a possible explana-
b) The 3' end tion. Sketch the expected temperature-absorbance
c) The torsion angle χ profile of this DNA. Do you expect much hyper-
d) The point of cleavage by pancreatic ribonuclease chromicity? Explain your answer.
e) The point of cleavage by periodic acid
f) Two points at which the structure might be 16. Adenine is found to constitute 16.3% of the nucleic
methylated by modifying enzymes acid bases in a sample of bacterial DNA. What are
acting on a polynucleotide the percentages of the other three bases?
9. Draw the structure of guanosine-5'-phosphate in 17. For the following DNA sequence
such a way that the configurations of the sugar
ring and of the glycosidic linkage are clearly indi- 3'-CGATACGGCTATGCCATAGGC-5'
cated. State whether you have drawn a syn or an
anti conformer. Circle the most acidic proton in write a) the sequence of the complementary
the guanine ring and indicate its approximate pK . DNA strand;
a
Which is the most basic center? What is the ap- b) the sequence of the corresponding
proximate pK of the conjugate acid? segment of mRNA formed using the
a
DNA segment above as the template;
10. What are the chemical functional groups in DNA? c) the amino acid sequence encoded by
In RNA? this segment.
18. What is the molecular mass of a segment of B-DNA
that encodes a 386-residue protein? What is the
length in nm? in Å? Do not make allowance for
introns.

--- Page 282 ---

279
Study Questions
19. Complete the following table: 25. A circular DNA plasmid of length 1144 bp is super-
Range of
coiled with a twist (Tw) of 110. Assume that the
molecular
DNA has 10.4 bp per turn in its relaxed state.
Name Monomer Linkage masses
a) What is the linking number Lk and the writhe
Protein Wr in the plasmid?
Polysaccharide b) Is the plasmid negatively or positively super-
Nucleic acid
coiled?
Teichoic acid
Poly-β-hydroxybutyrate c) Ethidium bromide is an intercalating agent that
inserts between the stacked base pairs, separat-
20. What is meant by the T of a DNA sample? How ing the stacks and causing local unwinding
m
does T vary with base composition and what is that decreases the value of Tw. What effect
m
the explanation of this? would ethidium bromide have on the migra-
tion rate of the plasmid during electrophoresis?
21. Isolated “naked” bacterial DNA, from which d) If part of the plasmid were to undergo a transi-
proteins have been removed, is supercoiled. DNA tion from B-DNA to Z-DNA, what would be
in the bacterial chromosome is also supercoiled. the effect on Lk,Tw, and Wr?
When naked DNA is nicked, its supercoiling is
abolished. In contrast nicking the chromosomal 26. You have been given a sample of nucleic acid,
DNA does not abolish its supercoiling. Explain. describe two ways you could determine whether
it is RNA or DNA and two ways to determine
22. A closed circular duplex DNA has a 90 base-pair whether it is single- or double-stranded.
segment of alternating G and C residues. Upon
transfer to a solution containing a high salt concen- 27. What conclusions can you draw about the nature
tration, this segment undergoes a transition from of the protein binding site on DNA from the obser-
the B conformation to the Z conformation. vation that methylation of cytosine residues in the
a) Explain why the high salt concentration protein-recognition sequence inhibits protein
induces a B→ Z transformation. binding?
b) What changes would you expect in (1) the
linking number Lk, (2) the writhe Wr, and (3) 28. The anticodon loop of one of the tRNA Gly mole-
the twist Tw of the DNA as a result of this cules from E. coli is as follows. Identify the anti-
transition. codon, reading from 3' to 5'. This tRNA recognizes
two different Gly codons. What are they? Write
23. Name two or more characteristics of a DNA se- them from 5' to 3'.
quence or of its environment that will favor con-
version of B-DNA into Z-DNA. C G
G C
tRNAGly
24. Suppose one double helical turn of a superhelical 3 A U
DNA molecule changes from a B conformation to 30C G
the Z conformation. Calculate the approximate C G
U A
changes in (1) the linking ∆Lk, (2) the writhe ∆Wr, U A
and (3) the twist ∆Tw of the DNA as a result of this G C 35 C
transition. Show your calculations and explain
your answers. For this problem assume that the B
form of DNA has 10.4 bp per turn. Why is the B→ The complete tRNA contains 75 nucleotides.
Z transition favored in naturally occurring super- Sketch the rest of the molecule in the cloverleaf
coiled DNA? representation. Label the 5' and 3' ends and the
dihydrouridine and TψC loops. What are the last
three nucleotides at the 3' end?
29. Are viruses alive? Explain your answer.

--- Page 283 ---

280 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
Ice and water are in equilibrium at 0°C and atmospheric pressure. When ice melts under these conditions
the heat Q absorbed from the surroundings is the enthalpy change,∆H, which equals 6.008 kJ mol–1. For
a reversible reaction the entropy change,∆S,equals∆H/T and the entropy increases when the ice melts
by 6.008 x 103 J / 273.16 = 22.0 JK–1. Along the frozen edges of the river the ice and water are not in a true
equilibrium but in a steady state. It is an open system in which water flows and energy is exchanged
with the surroundings. Similarly, the cells of Vorticella represent open systems through which water and
nutrients flow, and energy is exchanged with the surrounding water. Many chemical reactions within the
cells are near equilibrium while the organism maintains its own structure. Photos: Frosty River, Banff
Natl. Park, Alberta © Stephen J. Kraseman; Vorticella courtesy of Ralph Buchsbaum.
Contents
281 A. Thermodynamics Boxes
282 1. The First Law of Thermodynamics 295 Box 6-A Measurement of Intracellular pH
282 2. Enthalpy Changes and Thermochemistry 299 Box 6-B Magnesium
282 Processes at constant pressure 308 Box 6-C Linear Gibbs Energy Relationships
282 Enthalpies of combustion and physiological fuel values 314 Box 6-D Calcium
284 3. The Second Law of Thermodynamics 317 Box 6-E Metallothioneins
284 The thermodynamic temperature
285 Entropies from measurement of heat capacities Tables
285 4. A Criterion of Spontaneity: The Gibbs Energy 283 Table 6-1 Units of Energy and Work and the Values
286 5. Practical Thermochemistry of Some Physical Constants
286 Summing changes in Gibbs energy 283 Table 6-2 Caloric Values of Food Components
287 Reactions in solution 285 Table 6-3 Entropies of Selected Substances
287 ∆G° and the equilibrium constant 290 Table 6-4 Gibbs Energies of Formation and of
288 Activity coefficients and concentration Oxidation at 25°C for Compounds of
equilibrium constants Biochemical Interest
289 Changes in equilibria with temperature 293 Table 6-5 Values of pKa,∆G°, and ∆H° for
289 6. Thermodynamics and Life Processes Ionization of Acids at 25°C
292 B. Tables of (cid:1)G° Values for Biochemical Compounds 294 Table 6-6 Gibbs Energies of Hydrolysis at 25°C
292 1. Gibbs Energies of Formation (in kJ mol-1)
292 2. Gibbs Energies of Dissociation of Protons 298 Table 6-7 Empirical Bond Energies and Resonance
292 3. Group Transfer Potentials Energies
293 4. “Constants” That Vary with pH and Magnesium 301 Table 6-8 Reduction Potentials of Some Biologically
Ion Concentrations Important Systems
297 5. A New Standard for Biochemical Thermodynamic? 310 Table 6-9 Logarithms of Binding Constants for
297 6. Bond Energies and Approximate Methods for Some 1:1 Metal Complexes at 25°C
Estimation of Thermodynamic Data 311 Table 6-10 Ionic Radii in Nanometers for Some
297 7. Gibbs Energies of Combustion by O and by NAD+ Metallic and Nonmetallic Ions
2
300 C. Electrode Potentials and Gibbs Energy Changes
for Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
302 D. The Adenylate System
302 1. Storage and Utilization of Energy
303 2. Synthesis of ATP
303 3. Creatine Phosphate, an Energy Buffer
303 4. Phosphorus-31 NMR
304 E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria
305 1. Effects of pH on Equilbria
305 2. Microscopic Dissociation Constants and
Tautomerization
307 3. The Binding of Metal Ions
307 Factors affecting the strength of binding of a
metal in a complex
311 How properties of the metal ion affect chelation
311 Metal binding sites in cells
312 Calcium-binding proteins
319 References
321 Study Questions

--- Page 284 ---

281
6
Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
We all know from experience the importance of
A. Thermodynamics
energy to life. We know that we must eat and that
hard work not only tires us but also makes us hungry.
Thermodynamics is concerned with the quantita-
Our bodies generate heat, an observation that led
tive description of heat and energy changes and of
Lavoisier around 1780 to the conclusion that respira-
chemical equilibria.1– 10 Knowledge of changes in
tion represented a slow combustion of foods within thermodynamic quantities, such as ∆H and ∆S, enables
the body. It soon became clear that respiration must
us to predict the equilibrium positions in reactions and
provide the energy for both the mechanical work done
whether or not under given circumstances a reaction
by muscles and the chemical synthesis of body constit-
will or will not take place. Furthermore, the consider-
uents. All organisms require energy and the ways in
ation of thermodynamic quantities provides insight into
which living things obtain and utilize energy is a major
the nature of forces responsible for bonding between
theme of biology.
molecules, enzymatic catalysis, functioning of DNA
The discovery of the first and second laws of
and RNA, and many other phenomena.
thermodynamics permitted the development of precise,
It is important to realize that while thermodynamic
quantitative relationships between heat, energy, and
information will tell us whether or not a reaction can
work. It also allowed chemical equilibria to be
take place it says nothing about the rate of the reaction.
understood. Modern biochemical literature abounds
It will not even say whether a reaction will proceed at
with references to the thermodynamic quantities
all within a given period of time. This has led to the
energyE,enthalpyH,entropyS, and Gibbs energy
occasional assertion that thermodynamics is not rele-
(also called free energy) G. The purposes of this chapter
vant to biochemistry. This is certainly not true; it is
are: (1) to provide a short review of thermodynamic
important to understand energy relationships in bio-
equations, (2) to provide tables of thermodynamic
chemical reactions. At the same time, one should avoid
quantities for biochemical substances and to explain
the trap of assuming that thermodynamic calculations
the use of these data in the consideration of equi-
appropriate for equilibriumsituations can always be
libria in biochemical systems, and (3) to introduce
applied directly to the steady state found in a living cell.
theadenylate system, which consists of adenosine
Thermodynamics is an exact science and its laws
triphosphate (ATP), adenosine diphosphate (ADP),
deal with measurable quantities whose values are
adenosine mono-phosphate (AMP), and inorganic
determined only by the state of the system under
phosphate (P). This system plays a central role in
i consideration. For example, the system might be the
energy metabolism, and (4) to provide a quantitative
solution in a flask resting in a thermostated bath. To
understanding of the effects of pH and of metal ions
specify its state we would have to say whether it is
on biochemical equilibria. Many readers will want to go
pure solid, liquid, or gas, or a solution of specified
directly to Section D, which deals with the adenylate system
composition and give the temperature and pressure.
and its significance for life.
The flask, the bath, and everything else would be

--- Page 285 ---

282 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
calledsurroundings or environment. The system plus Processes at constant pressure. Chemical and
surroundings is sometimes referred to as the universe. biochemical reactions are much more likely to be con-
ducted at constant pressure (usually 1 atm) than they
are at constant volume. For this reason, chemists tend
1. The First Law of Thermodynamics to use the enthalpy H more often than the internal
energy E.
The first law of thermodynamics asserts the con-
servation of energy and also the equivalence of work H = E + PV (6-3)
andheat. Work and heat are both regarded as energy
in transit. Heat may be absorbed by a system from the It follows from Eq. 6-3 that if the pressure is constant, ∆H
P
surroundings or evolved by a system and absorbed in is equal to ∆E + P ∆V . Since in a process at constant
P
the surroundings. Work can be done bya system on pressure, P∆V is exactly the pressure–volume work
the surroundings or it can be done ona system. The done on the surroundings, the heat absorbed at constant
first law postulates that there is an internal energy E pressure (Q ) is a measure of ∆H.
P P
(also designated U), which is dependent only on the
present state of the system and in no way is dependent Q = ∆E + P∆V = ∆H (6-4)
upon the history of the system. The first law states P P P
thatE can be changed only by the flow of energy as heat or Since enthalpy changes can be obtained directly
by work. In other words, energy can neither be created from measurement of heat absorption at constant
nor destroyed. pressure, even small values of ∆H for chemical and
In mathematical form, the first law is given as biochemical reactions can be measured using a micro-
follows: calorimeter.11,12 Using the technique of pulsed acoustic
calorimetry, changes during biochemical processes can
∆E = E(products) − E(reactants) = Q − W (6-1) be followed on a timescale of fractions of a millisecond.
An example is the laser-induced dissociation of a
Here Q is the heat absorbed by the system from the carbon monoxide–myoglobin complex.13
surroundings and W is the work done by the system The term enthalpy was coined to distinguish H from
on the surroundings. Energy, heat, and work are all E, but we sometimes tend to be careless about language
measured in the same units. Chemists have tradition- and many discussions of energy in the literature are
ally used the calorie (cal) or kilocalorie (kcal) but in fact about enthalpy. The difference is often not
are switching to the SI unit, the joule (Table 6-1).10a significant because if the pressure–volume work is
Work done by the system may be mechanical (e.g., by negligible,E and H are the same.
changing the volume of the surroundings), electrical
(e.g., by charging of a battery), or chemical (e.g., by Enthalpies of combustion and physiological
effecting the synthesis of a polypeptide from amino fuel values. Theheat of combustion (–∆H c ) of an
acids). organic substance is usually determined from ∆E c ,
which is measured in a bomb calorimeter. Since ∆E
V
and∆E are nearly identical, it follows that ∆H = ∆E
P P V
2. Enthalpy Changes and Thermochemistry +P∆V. Here ∆V is the volume change which would
have occurred if the reaction were carried out
We are most often interested in the changes in the at constant pressure P; thus, ∆H can be estimated by
P
thermodynamic functions when a chemical reaction calculation. Since ∆H is desired for combustion to
takes place; for example, the heat absorbed by the carbon dioxide, water, elemental nitrogen (N 2 ), and
system within a bombcalorimeter where the volume sulfur, correction must be made for the amounts of the
stays constant (Q ) is a direct measure of the change in E: latter elements converted into oxides. By these proce-
V dures, it has been possible to obtain highly accurate
values of ∆H both for biochemical compounds and
Q V = ∆E for mixed foo c dstuffs. In nutrition, – ∆H is sometimes
c
(6-2)
referred to as the gross energy. Values are usually
To measure ∆E for combustion of a biochemical com-
expressed in kilocalories(kcal) by chemists but often
pound, the substance may be placed in a bomb together
asCal (with a capital C) in the nutritional literature.
with gaseous oxygen and the mixture ignited within
Caloric values of foods (physiological fuel values)
the calorimeter by an electric spark. In this case, heat
are enthalpies of combustion but with an opposite
will be evolved from the bomb and will pass into the sign, (– ∆H ), and corrected for energy lost in urine
surroundings. Q and ∆E will be negative. The bomb c
V (e.g., as urea) and feces. While enthalpies of combustion
calorimeter is designed to measure Q and thereby to
V of foods are all negative, the caloric values are given
give us a way of determining ∆E for reactions.
as positive numbers. Caloric values for proteins are

--- Page 286 ---

A. Thermodynamics 283
TABLE 6-1 From a thermochemical viewpoint, can a human
Units of Energy and Work and the Values of Some or animal be regarded as just a catalyst for the com-
Physical Constants bustion of foodstuffs? To answer this question, large
calorimeters were constructed into which an animal or
The joule, SI unit of energy a human being was placed. If, while in the calorimeter,
1 J = 1 kg m2 s–2 the subject neither gained nor lost weight, the heat
= 1 N m (newton meter) evolved should have been just equal to –∆Hfor com-
= 1 W s (watt second) bustion of the food consumed to CO , water, and urea.
2
= 1 C V (coulomb volt)
That this prediction was verifed experimentally does
Thermochemical calorie not seem surprising, but at the time that the experi-
1 cal = 4.184 J ments were first done in the early years of the century
Large calorie there may have been those who doubted that the first
1 Cal = 1 kcal = 4.184 kJ law of thermodynamics applied to mammals.
In practice, animal calorimetry is quite complicated
Work required to raise 1 kg 1 m on earth
because of the inherent difficulty of accurate heat
(at sea level) = 9.807 J
measurements, uncertainties about the amount of food
Gibbs energy of hydrolysis of 1 mole of ATP stored, and the necessity of corrections for ∆H of the
at pH 7, millimolar concentrations = c
waste products. However, the measurement of energy
– 12.48 kcal = – 52.2 kJ
metabolism has been of considerable importance in
Work required to concentrate 1 mole of a substance
nutrition and medicine. Indirect methods of calorime-
1000-fold, e.g., from 10–6 to 10–3M
tery have been developed for use in measuring the basal
= 4.09 kcal = 17.1 kJ
metabolic rate of humans. For a good discussion see
Avogadro’s number, the number of particles in a mole Whiteet al.14
N = 6.0220 x 1023
The basal metabolic rate is the rate of heat evolution
Faraday 1 F = 96,485 C mol–1 (coulombs per mole) in the resting, postabsorptive state, in which the subject
has not eaten recently. In this condition, stored foods
Coulomb 1 C= 1 A s (ampere second)
= 6.241 x 1018 electronic charges provide the energy and are oxidized at a relatively
constant rate. The basal metabolic rate tends to be
The Boltzmann constant
proportional to the surface area; which can be approxi-
k = 1.3807 x 10–23 J deg–1
B mated (in units of m–2) as 1/60 [height (cm) × mass
The gas constant, R = N k B (kg)].15 For a young adult female, the basal metabolic
R = 8.3144 J deg–1 mol–1 rate is typically ∼154 kJ h–1 m–2 and for a young adult
= 1.9872 cal deg –1 mol–1 male∼172 kJ h–1 m–2. This is ∼320– 360 kJ h–1 for a 70-kg
= 0.08206 1 atm deg–1 mol–1
and at 25°CRT = 2.479 kJ mol–1 person. Note that 360 kJ h–1 is the same as the power
output of a 100-watt lightbulb. While there is consid-
The unit of temperature is the kelvin (K); 0°C =
erable variation among individuals, basal metabolic
273.16 K
rates far below or above normal may indicate a patho-
lnx = 2.3026 log x logical condition such as an insufficiency or oversupply
One atmosphere (atm) = 101.325 kilopascals (kPa) of the thyroid hormone thyroxine. Metabolic rates fall
somewhat below the basal value during sleep and are
much higher than basal during hard exercise. A human
calculated for the conversion of the nitrogen to urea, may attain rates as high as 2500 kJ (600 kcal) per hour.
the major nitrogenous excretion product in mammals, At a basal rate of 320 kJ (76 kcal) per hour, a person
rather than to elemental nitrogen. Typical values are requires 7680 kJ (1835 kcal) each 24 h to supply his or
shown in Table 6-2. her basal needs, plus additional energy during periods
of muscular exercise. Routine light exercise as in the
office or during housework increases metabolism to
TABLE 6-2 about double the basal rate. Although the caloric values
Caloric Values of Food Components in Table 6-2 are reliable for prediction of metabolic
energy needs, they must be adjusted to predict the
Component Caloric values per gram efficiency of utilization for growth. In one study16 a
group of rats deposited 28% of the available energy
Carbohydrates 4.1 kcal 17 kJ from sucrose as body protein and fats, but fats were
Pure glucose 3.75 kcal 15.7 kJ deposited with an efficiency of 36%.
Lipids 9.3 kcal 39 kJ
Proteinsa 4.1 kcal 17 kJ
aNitrogen excreted as urea.

--- Page 287 ---

284 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
Here q is an infinitesimal quantity of heat absorbed
3. The Second Law of Thermodynamics
from the surroundings by the system and T is measured
in kelvins (K). For a reversible phasetransitionsuch as
Why does heat flow from a warm body into a cold
the melting of ice at constant pressure and temperature,
one? Why doesn’t it ever flow in the reverse direction?
the change in entropy of the H O is just ∆H/T.
We can see that differences in temperature control the 2
direction of flow of heat, but this observation raises
still another question: What is temperature? Reflec- ∆S) = Q T = ∆H T (6-7)
P,T,reversible
tion on these questions, and on the interconversion of
heat and work, led to the discovery of the second law Entropy is measured in units of joules per kelvin (or °C)
of thermodynamics and to the definition of a new or calories per K, the latter sometimes being abbreviated
thermodynamic function, the entropy S. as e. u. (entropy units). Since the melting of ice at 0°C
Consider the melting of ice. This is a phase transi- is a reversible process, the second law asserts that the
tion that usually takes place at constant temperature entropy of the surroundings decreases by the same
and pressure. At a temperature just above 0°C ice amount that the entropy of the water increases. The
melts completely, but at a temperature just below 0°C value of T∆S is numerically equal to the heat of fusion,
it does not melt at all. At 0°C we have an equilibrium. 6.008 kJ mol–1 in the case of water at 0°C. Thus, the
In the language of thermodynamics, the melting of ice entropy increase in the ice as it melts at 0°C is 6.008 x
at 0°C is a reversible reaction. What criterion could 103 J/273.16 K = 22.0 J K–1.
be used to predict this behavior for water? For many
familiar phenomena, e.g., combustion, a spontaneous The thermodynamic temperature. The definition
reaction is accompanied by the evolution of a large of thermodynamic temperature in kelvins (Eq. 6-8) also
amount of heat, i.e., ∆H is negative. However, when follows from Eq. 6-6. See textbooks of thermodynamics
ice melts it absorbs heat. The ∆H of fusion amounts to for further treatment.
6.008 kJ mol–1 at 0°C and is nearly the same just below
0°C, where the ice does not melt, and just above 0°C, T = (∂E ∂S) = (∂H ∂S) (6-8)
where the ice melts completely. In the latter case, the V P
melting of ice is a spontaneous reaction for which ∆H
The entropy of a substance can be given a precise
is positive. It is clear from such facts that the sign of the
mathematical formulation involving the degree of
enthalpy change does notserve as a criterion of spontaneity.
molecular disorder (Eq. 6-9).
A correct understanding of the ice–water transi-
tion came when it was recognized that when ice melts
not only does H increase by 6.008 kJ mol–1, as the mole- S = k B lnΩ (6-9)
cules acquire additional internal energy of translation,
vibration, and rotation, but also the molecules become Here k is the Boltzmann constant (see Table 6-1)
B
more disordered. Although historically entropy was andΩ is given precisely as the number of microscopic
introduced in a different context, it is now recognized states (different arrangements of the particles) of the
to be a measure of “microscopic disorder.” When ice system corresponding to a given macroscopic state,
melts, the entropy S increases because the structure i.e., to a given temperature, pressure, and quantity. It
becomes less ordered. increases as volume or temperature is increased and in
The second law of thermodynamics is stated in going from solid to liquid to gaseous states. Equation
many different ways, but the usual mathematical 6-9 is not part of classical thermodynamics (which
formulation asserts that for the universe (or for an deals only with macroscopic systems, i.e., with large
isolated system) collections of molecules). However, using the methods
of statistical thermodynamics,17 this equation can be
∆S (system + surroundings) = 0 used to predict the entropies of gases.
for reversible processes Theracemization ofan amino acid provides a bio-
chemical example that can be related directly to Eq. 6-9.
∆S> 0 A solution of an L-amino acid will be efficiently changed
for real (nonreversible) processes (6-5) into the racemic mixture of 50% D and 50% L by the
action of an enzyme (a racemase) with no uptake or
The second law is sometimes stated in another way: evolution of heat. Thus, ∆H = 0 and the only change
The entropy of the universe alwaysincreases. is an entropy change. Let us designate Ω for the pure
The second law also defines both S and the thermo- isomer as Ω’. Since there are just two choices of con-
dynamic temperature scale as follows: figuration for each of the N molecules in 1 mole of the
racemate we see that for the racemate
dS = q T (6-6)
reversible
Ω = 2N Ω′ (6-10)

--- Page 288 ---

A. Thermodynamics 285
Applying Eq. 6-9 we calculate ∆Sas follows: molecular disorder is present in the crystalline state
even at 0 K. For these substances a term representing
the entropy at 0 K must be added to Eq. 6-12.
∆S = k (ln2N + lnΩ′) − k lnΩ′
B B The entropies of a few substances are given in
= Nk ln2 = Rln2 = 5.76JK−1mol−1 Table 6-3. Notice how the entropy increases with
B
(6-11) increasing complexity of structure, with transitions
from solid to liquid to gas, and with decreasing hard-
Entropies from measurement of heat capacities. ness of solid substances.
It follows from Eq. 6-9 that S = 0 when T = 0 for a Measurements of C p versus temperature for solu-
perfect crystalline substance in which no molecular tions of macromolecules or for biological membranes
disorder exists. The third law of thermodynamics asserts (Fig. 8-9) over a narrower temperature range are also
that as the thermodynamic temperature T approaches of interest. These can be obtained with a differential
0 K the entropy S also approaches zero for perfect scanning calorimeter18,19 or by an indirect procedure.20
crystalline substances. From this it follows that at any Denaturation of polymers or phase changes in mem-
temperature above 0 K, the entropy is given by Eq. 6-12. branes may be observed. Larger values of C p are ob-
served for open, denatured, or random-coil structures
that are usually present at higher temperatures than
S =
∫T
C p d ln T (6-12) for tightly folded molecules.
0
In this equation C is the heat capacity at constant
P 4. A Criterion of Spontaneity: The Gibbs
pressure:
Energy
C = (∂H ∂T) (6-13) We have seen that while many spontaneous pro-
P P
cesses, e.g., combustion of organic compounds, are
IfC is measured at a series of low temperatures down accompanied by liberation of heat (negative ∆H), others
P
to near zero K, Eq. 6-12 can be used to evaluate the are accompanied by absorption of heat from the sur-
absolute entropy S. If phase transitions occur as the roundings (positive ∆H). An example of the latter is
temperature is raised, entropy increments given by Eq. the melting of ice at a temperature just above 0°C,
6-7 must be added to the value of S given by Eq. 6-12. during which there is a large increase in the entropy of
For a few compounds, such as water (Chapter 2), the water. As we have seen, at 0°C at equilibrium T∆S
is just equal to – ∆H (Eq. 6-7).
The recognition that ∆H–T∆S = 0 for a system at
TABLE 6-3
equilibrium led J. W. Gibbs to realize that the proper
Entropies of Selected Substancesa
thermodynamic function for determining the sponta-
neity of a reaction is what is now known as the Gibbs
Entropy S
energy or Gibbs function G (Eq. 6-14).
Substance Stateb cal K–1 mol–1 J K–1 mol–1
C (diamond) s 0.55 2.3 G = H − TS (6-14)
C (graphite) s 1.36 5.7
In the older literature the Gibbs energy was usually
Cu s 8.0 33 called the free energy or Gibbs free energy and was
Na s 12.2 51 often given the symbol F. For a process at constant
temperature and pressure the change in G is given by
H O (ice) s 9.8 41
2
Eq. 6-15 in which all quantities refer to the system.
H O l 16.7 70
2
H O g (1 atm) 45.1 189
2 ∆G = ∆H − T ∆S (6-15)
T,P
He g 30.1 126
H g 31.2 131 For a reversible (equilibrium) process doing only
2
N g 45.8 192 pressure–volume work:
2
CO g 51.1 214
2
∆G) = ∆H − T ∆S = 0 (6-16)
Benzene g 64.3 269 T,reversible
Cyclohexane g 71.3 298 It can also be shown readily that ∆Gisnegative for any
a All values are given in entropy units (e.u.) of calories per Kelvin spontaneous (irreversible) process. Such a process is
per mole and in joules per Kelvin per mole at 25°C (298.16 K). calledexergonic. Likewise, if ∆G is positive, a given
b Here s stands for solid, l for liquid, and g for gaseous.

--- Page 289 ---

286 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
reaction will not proceed spontaneously and is called Summing changes in Gibbs energy. A conve-
endergonic. The magnitude of the decrease in the nient feature of thermodynamic calculations is that if
Gibbs energy (–∆G) is a direct measure of the maximum two or more chemical equations are summed, ∆G for
work which could be obtained from a given chemical the resulting overall equation is just the sum of the
reaction if that reaction could be coupled in some ∆G’s for the individual equations as illustrated in Eqs.
fashion reversibly to a system able to do work. It 6-17 to 6-20. The same applies for ∆H and ∆S.
represents the maximum amount of electrical work
that could be extracted or the maximum amount of
CH COOH (1) −→ 2C + 2H + O
muscular work or osmotic work obtainable from a 3 2 2
reaction in a biological system. In any real system, −∆G °for acetic acid = +396.4kJmol−1 (6-17)
f
the amount of work obtainable is necessarily less than
– ∆G because real processes are irreversible, i.e., entropy
2O + 2C −→ 2CO
is created. 2 2
Returning to the older assumption that the magni- 2∆G f °forCO 2 = −788.8kJmol−1 (6-18)
tude of ∆H might be an index of work obtainable, we
note that T∆S amounts to only a few kilojoules for O + 2H −→ 2H O
most reactions. Therefore, if ∆H is large, as in the 2 2 2
2∆G °forH O = −474.4kJmol−1 (6-19)
combustion of foodstuffs, it is not greatly different from f 2
∆G for the same process. Therefore, we can justify use CH COOH (l) + 2O −→ 2CO + 2H O (l)
3 2 2 2
of the caloric value of a food as an approximate measure
∆G °°for acetic acid = −866.8kJmol−1 (6-20)
of the work obtainable from its metabolism in the c
body.
In this example an equation for the decomposition of
acetic acid into its elements (Eq. 6-17) has been summed
5. Practical Thermochemistry with Eqs. 6-18 and 6-19, which represent the formation
of the proper number of molecules of CO and H O
2 2
For thermodynamic data to be useful in chemical from the elements. The sum of the three equations
calculations, we must agree upon standard states for gives the equation for the combustion of acetic acid to
elements and compounds. If we wish to talk about the CO 2 and water, and the sum of the ∆G values for the
change in the Gibbs energy that occurs when one or three equations gives ∆G for combustion of acetic acid.
more pure compounds are converted to other pure The resulting value of ∆G is for combustion of pure
substances, we must agree upon a state (crystalline, liquid acetic acid by oxygen at 1 atm to give CO 2 at 1
liquid, gaseous, or in solution) and upon a pressure atm and pure liquid water, all reactants and products
(especially when gases are involved) at which the data being in their standard states.
apply. The standard pressure is usually 1 atm. Stan- The process described in the preceding paragraph
dard states of the elements are the pure crystalline,solid, is represented by Eq. 6-21, which is a general equation
orgaseousmaterials, e.g., C (graphite), S (crystalline, for calculation of ∆G° for any reaction from ∆G f ° of
rhombic), P (crystalline, white), and N , O , and H products and reactants.
2 2 2
(gaseous). It is also essential to specify the temperature.
Thermodynamic data are most often given for 25°C, ∆G° = Σ∆G °(products) − Σ∆G °(reactants)
f f
but there is a standard state for each substance at each (6-21)
temperature.
It is usually impractical to measure the values of How does the change in Gibbs energy vary if we go
G or H, but ∆G and ∆H for a chemical reaction can be from the standard state of a compound to some other
evaluated. Changes in Gibbs energy can be calculated state? Consider a change of pressure in a gas. It is
from tables of ∆G for formation of compounds from easy to show (see any thermodynamics text) that
the elements (Eq. 6-17). These values of ∆G can be
f
obtained experimentally by measuring ∆H of combus- (∂G ∂P) = V (6-22)
tion for the compound of interest and for H , elemental T
2
carbon, and other elements present in the compound
Using Eq. 6-22 together with the perfect gas law, we
and also by obtaining entropies from heat capacity
obtain the relationship (Eq. 6-23) between the Gibbs
measurements. Many other tabulated ∆G values have
f energy Gof one mole of a substance at pressure P and
been obtained indirectly utilizing data from equilibrium the standard Gibbs energy G° at pressure P°.
constants. The resulting standard Gibbs energies
of formation are given the symbol ∆G°. The values of
f
∆G f °for the elements in their standard states are all exactly G − G° = RTln P = RT ∆lnP (6-23)
zero. P°

--- Page 290 ---

A. Thermodynamics 287
Here the bar over the symbol G indicates that the calculations which are often of interest to biochemists,
Gibbs energy is for one mole of substance. Since P° is it is customary to equate concentration with activity.
by definition 1 atm, the Gibbs energy change per mole Furthermore, in dilute solutions, the more usual molar
upon changing the pressure from P° to P is just RT ln P. concentrations (moles per liter) are nearly equal to molal
concentrations. The same equations can be used with
Reactions in solution. It is customary in books mole fractions rather than molal concentrations.
on thermodynamics to develop most of the important
thermodynamic equations as applied to a perfect gas, (cid:1)G° and the equilibrium constant. Consider
but we will move at this point to a consideration of the following generalized chemical equation (Eq. 6-27)
biochemical substances in solution. Biochemists are for reaction of a moles of A with b moles of B to give
usually interested in the behavior of substances dis- products C and D, etc.
solved in relatively dilute aqueous solutions but also
in cytoplasm, in which some concentrations may be a A + b B + . . . = c C + d D . . . (6-27)
very high. Sometimes the interest may be in nonaque-
ous solutions. In any case, it is necessary to establish The standard Gibbs energy change ∆G° for the process
a standard state for the solute. The standard state of a is given by Eq. 6-28:
substance in aqueous solution is customarily taken as
a strictly hypothetical one molal solution (one mole of ∆G° = c G°(C) + d G°(D) + . . .
solute per kilogram of water) whose properties arethose
of a solute at infinite dilution. An equation exactly anal- – a G°(A)– b G°(B). . . (6-28)
ogous to Eq. 6-23 can be written relating the Gibbs
energy of one mole of dissolved solute G to the Gibbs The symbol G° (A) designates the Gibbs energy of
i
energy G° in the hypothetical standard state of unit A, etc. The value of ∆G for any desired concentrations
i
activity and to the activitya of the solute (Eq. 6-24). of reactants or products can be related to this ∆G° by
i
applying to each component Eq. 6-24 with the follow-
ing result:
G = G ° + RTlna (6-24)
i i i
a c a d . . .
Here the subscript i designates a particular component ∆G = ∆G° + RT ln C D
in a solution which also contains solvent and, perhaps, a a a b . . .
A B
(6-29)
other components. To be precise, G is a partial molar
i
Gibbs energy, i.e., the changes in total Gibbs energy of
Here a represents the activity of component C, etc.
a very large volume of solution when one mole of the C
This useful equation permits us to calculate ∆G for
component is added.
the low concentrations usually found in biochemical
From Eq. 6-24 it follows that the Gibbs energy change
systems. These are more often in the millimolar range
for dilution from one activity a to another a is:
1 2 or less rather than approaching the hypothetical 1 M of
the standard state. Often concentrations are substituted
∆G (dilution froma toa ) = RTln(a a ) in Eq. 6-29 for activities:
1 2 2 1
(6-25)
[C]c[D]d
Equation 6-24 and the equations that follow from it ∆G ≈ ∆G° + RTln
[A]a[B]b
apply to molal activities. However, the concentration (6-30)
can be substituted for activity in very dilute solution
Equation 6-29 is used in another way by noting that
where the behavior of the dissolved molecules approx-
∆G = 0 when a system is at equilibrium and that at
imates that of the hypothetical ideal solution for which
equilibrium the product a ca d . . ./a aa b . . . is just the
the standard state is defined. For any real solution, the C D A B
equilibrium constant K. It follows that
activity can be expressed as the product of an activity
coefficient and the concentration (Eq. 6-26).
∆G° = −RTlnK = −2.303RTlogK
a = γc (6-26) = −19.145TlogK Jmol−1
where a = activity, γ = activity coefficient, and c = molal = −5.708logKkJmol−1at25°C
concentration. Thus, to use the tabulations of thermo- = −1.364logKkcalmol−1at25°C
(6-31)
dynamic functions for substances in solution to predict
behavior in other than very dilute solution, we must
Although the units of ∆G° are kJ mol–1, the Gibbs energy
multiply the concentration of every component by the
change in Eq. 6-31 is that for the reactions of a moles of
appropriate activity coefficient. For the approximate

--- Page 291 ---

288 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
A,b moles of B, etc., as in the equation used to define Straight lines of slope – 0.509 (z 2–z 2) are expected.
A HA
K (Eq. 6-27 in this instance). It is also important to The observed (negative) slopes (Fig. 6-1) are ~ 1.5 for
realize that the log term in Eq. 6-31 must be unitless. H PO – and AMP–, ~ 2.5 for ADP2–, and ~ 3.5 for ATP3–.
2 4
Although we usually write ln K or log K,K here repre- The data over the entire range of ionic strength are
sentsK/Q, where Q = 1 because it has the same form fitted by empirical relationships of the type of Eq. 6-35a:
asK but with all components in their standard states.
Since the units of K and Q are the same, log K is unit-
less. Similar considerations apply to expressions of K (6-35a)
in exponential form.
in which a and b are empirically determined constants.
Activity coefficients and concentration For example, for H 2 PO 4 –a = 1.52 and b = 1.96. The
equilibrium constants. Strictly speaking, Eq. 6-31 value of pK a found was 7.18, about 0.22 greater than
applies only to thermodynamic equilibrium constants the value at µ = 0.2, an ionic strength more commonly
–that is, to constants that employ activities rather than used in the laboratory and close to that found in tissues.
concentrations. The experimental determination of Note that the difference between the extrapolated pK a
such constants requires measurements of the apparent for ATP3– of 7.68 and the observed value of ~ 7.04 at µ =
equilibrium constant or concentration equilibrium 0.2 is even greater. Serious errors can be introduced
constant21K at a series of different concentrations into calculations by using extrapolated values for K for
c
and extrapolation to infinite dilution (Eq. 6-32). solutions of appreciable ionic strength. The errors will
be maximal for ions of high charge type such as ATP3–
and ATP4–.
K = concentration equilibrium constant
c
[C]c[D]d
= at equilibrium
[A]a[B]b
(6-32)
7.8
25°C
Extrapolation of K to infinite dilution to give K is 7.6
c
usually easy because the activity coefficients of most
ionic substances vary in a regular manner with ionic 7.4
strength and follow the Debye–Hückel equation
7.2
(Eq. 6-33) in very dilute solutions (ionic strength < 0.01). ATP
7.0 ortho
(6-33)
ADP
6.8
The integers z and z are the numbers of charges
1 2 6.6
(valences) for the cation and anion of the salt. The AMP
ionic strength (µ, or I) is evaluated as follows:
6.4
6.2
(6-34) 0 10 20 30 40
Here c are the molar concentrations of the ions. The
i
summation is carried out over all the ions present. The
activity coefficient γ (Eq. 6-33) is the mean activity Figure 6-1 The apparent pK values for secondary ionizations
a
coefficient for both the cation and anion. of AMP, ADP, ATP, and H PO (abbreviated ortho) plotted
3 4
Equation 6-33 suggests that extrapolation of equi- against . Temperature: 25°C. From R. C. Phillips et al.22
librium constants to infinite dilution is done appropri-
ately by plotting log K vs . For example, Fig. 6-1
c
shows plots of pK’ for dissociation of H PO –, AMP–,
a 2 4
and ADP2–, and ATP3– vs . The variation of pK’ a Another problem with equilibrium constants for
with at low concentrations (Eq. 6-35) is derived by reactions that use or produce hydrogen ions is that
application of the Debye-Hückel equation (Eq. 6-33): there is no rigorous relationship between pH and a +
H
or [H+]. Indeed, the concept of an activity of a single
ion has little meaning in thermodynamics. Neverthe-
(6-35) less, in the pH range of interest to biochemists, results
that are very close to those obtained by more rigorous
methods are achieved by assuming that the pH meter
Kp c
pK ’ = pK – a µ + bµ for µ < 0.2
a a
µ
log = – 0.509z z
1 2
µ = 1Σcz2
2 i i i
µ× 102
µ
µ
µ
µ
pK ’ = pK – 0.509 (z 2 – z 2) µ a a A HA

--- Page 292 ---

A. Thermodynamics 289
responds to hydrogen ion activity. The almost univer- but living beings are never in equilibrium. The laws
sal practice of biochemists is to assume the pH meter of thermodynamics are usually described as statistical
reading obtained with a glass electrode equal to – log laws. How can such laws apply to living things, some
a + and to substitute the value of a + so obtained for of which contain all of their genetic information in a
H H
[H+] in defining the concentration equilibrium constant, single molecule of DNA?24,25 The ideal, reversible
K. It is also customary in most branches of chemistry reactions of classical thermodynamics occur at infini-
c
to use values of equilibrium constants and of Gibbs tesimal speeds. How can thermodynamics be applied
energy which have notbeen extrapolated to µ = 0. to the very rapid chemical reactions that take place in
Thus most values of K and ∆G, including many of those organisms? One answer is that thermodynamics can
in this book, are actually of K and ∆G. An international be used to decide whether or not a reaction is possible
c c
Commission on Biothermodynamics21 recommended under given conditions. Thus, if we know the steady-
that values of K be measured with the lowest effective state concentrations of reactants and products within
c
buffer concentration and that the ionic strength be a cell, we can state whether a reaction will or will not
brought to 0.1 with KCl. tend to go in a given direction.
We may still ask whether there are generalities
Changes in equilibria with temperature. At comparable to the laws of thermodynamics that apply
constant pressure ∆G varies with absolute temperature to the kind of steady state or “dynamic equilibrium”
as follows: that exists in organisms. Lars Onsager showed that
such relationships can be found for conditions that are
d(∆G T)
= −∆H T2 near equilibrium. Ilya Prigogine and associates extended
dT (6-36) Onsager’s findings and showed that under conditions
that are far from equilibrium the system tends to become
The corresponding variation in K is described by the
unstable and to spontaneously develop new structures,
van’t Hoff equation:
which Prigogine calls dissipative structures.26– 28
Vortices in flowing water, tornados and hurricanes are
dlnK = ∆H° examples of dissipative structures. The maintenance
dT RT2 of dissipative structures depends upon a flow of energy
and matter through the system. The flow of energy is
dlnK −∆H° sufficient to “organize” a system. Thus, if a flask of
or =
water is placed on a hot plate, a cycle is established.
d(1T) R
The water moves via cyclic convection currents that
develop as a result of the flow of energy through the
−0.01914 dlog K system. Morowitz reckoned that the 6 ± 3 x 1018 kJ/year
or ∆H°(kJ mol−1) = 10
d(1T) (6-37) of solar energy that falls on the earth supplies the
organizing principle for life.28 Just as it drives the great
cycles within the atmosphere and within the seas, it
If∆H° can be assumed constant over the temperature gives rise to the branching and interconnecting cycles
range of an experiment, a plot of ln K vs 1/T provides of metabolism. This idea may even make the sponta-
a convenient estimate of ∆H ° (or ∆H’ if ln K’ is plotted). neous development of the organized systems that we
The slope of the line will be –∆H°/R. Since ∆G° can call life from inanimate precursors through evolution
be calculated from K, the method also permits evalua- seem a little more understandable.
tion of ∆S° using Eq. 6-15. However, unless great care A characteristic of this nonequilibrium or irrever-
is taken the method is of low accuracy23 and it is prefera- sible thermodynamics is that time is explicitly intro-
ble to establish ∆H by direct calorimetry. Also, espe- duced. Furthermore, open systems, in which materials
cially for proteins, the assumption that ∆H° is constant and energy flow into and out of the system, are con-
over a significant temperature range may be erroneous. sidered. Clearly, a living organism is an open system
From observations at only two temperatures, T , not a closed one of classical thermodynamics. Because
1
and T , Eq. 6-37 becomes of the flow of materials concentration gradients are set
2
up and transport phenomena often become of primary
∆H° = Rln(K K )[TT (T − T )] kJmol−1 importance. Articles and books that provide an intro-
2 1 1 2 2 1 duction to nonequilibrium thermodynamics and to the
(6-37a)
literature in the field include the following.10,26,28– 34
Whether these methods can be applied in a practical
way to metabolic systems has been debated.35,36
6. Thermodynamics and Life Processes
Can thermodynamics be applied to living organ-
isms? Classical thermodynamics deals with equilibria,

--- Page 293 ---

290 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
TABLE 6-4
Gibbs Energies of Formation and of Oxidation at 25°C for Compounds of Biochemical Interesta,b
+
For oxidation by NAD
∆G° ∆G° ∆G° ∆G° (pH 7) Number of
f c ox ox
Compound Formula (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) electrons
Acetaldehyde CHO –139.7 –1123.5 171.5 –28.3 10
2 4
Acetic acid CHO –369.4 –866.8 169.2 9.3 8
2 4 2
Acetate– –369.2 –894.0 142.0 22.1 8
Acetyl-CoA –374.1* –889.1* 146.9* –13.0* 8
Acetyl-P –1218.4 –901.7 134.3 –25.6 8
Acetylenec CH 209.2 –1235.2 59.8 –140.0 10
2 2
Acetoacetate– CHO– –493.7 –1795.4 276.5 –3.2 16
4 5 3
Acetone CHO –161.2 –1733.6 338.4 18.7 16
3 6
cis-Aconitate3– CHO3– –920.9 –2157.0 173.9 –65.8 18
6 3 6
L-Alanine C
3
H
7
O
2
N –371.3 –1642.0 300.4 0.8 15
L-Asparagine C
4
H
8
O
3
N
2
–526.6 –1999.7 331.2 –28.4 18
L-Aspartate– C
4
H
6
O
4
N– –700.7 –1707.0 235.4 –24.3 15
n-Butanol CH O –171.8 –2591.7 516.2 36.7 24
4 10
n-Butyric acid CHO –380.2 –2146.1 443.8 44.2 20
4 8 2
n-Butyrate– CHO– –352.6 –2173.7 416.2 56.6 20
4 7 2
Butyryl-CoA –357.5* –2168.8* 421.1* 21.5* 20
Caproate– CH O– –329.7 –3459.7 684.1 84.7 32
6 11 2
CO (g) –394.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0
2
CO (aq) –386.2 –8.2 –8.2 –8.2 0
2
HCO– –587.1 –44.5 –44.5 –4.6 0
3
CO (g) –137.3 –257.1 1.9 –38.1 2
Citrate3– CHO3– –1166.6 –2148.4 182.5 –57.3 18
6 5 7
Creatine CHON –264.3 –2380.6 338.8 –80.8 21
4 9 2 3
Creatinine CHON –28.9 –2378.8 340.6 –79.0 21
4 7 3
Crotonate– CHO– –275.7 –2013.4 317.5 –2.1 18
4 5 2
Cysteine CHONS –339.8 –2178.3 541.1 121.5 21
3 7 2
Cystine CH ONS –665.3 –4133.8 1046.0 246.9 40
6 12 4 2 2
Dihydroxyacetone-Pd –1293.2 –1458.4 95.5 –144.2 12
Erythrose 4-Pd –1439.1 –1944.1 127.8 –191.9 16
Ethanol CHO –181.5 –1318.8 235.1 –4.6 12
2 6
Ethylene (g)c CHO 68.1 –1331.3 222.7 –17.1 12
2 4
Formaldehyde CHO –130.5 –501.0 16.9 –63.0 4
2
Formic acid CHO –356.1 –275.5 –16.5 –56.5 2
2 2
Formate– CHO– –350.6 –281.0 –22.0 –22.0 2
2
Fructose CH O –915.4 –2874.1 233.8 –245.7 24
6 12 6
Fructose 6-Pd –1758.3 –2888.1 219.8 –259.7 24
Fructose di-Pd –2600.8 –2902.5 205.4 –274.1 24
Fumaric acid CHO –647.1 –1404.8 149.2 –90.6 12
4 4 4
Fumarate– CHO– –604.2 –1447.7 106.2 –93.6 12
4 3 4
α-D-Galactose C
6
H
12
O
6
–923.5 –2865.9 242.0 –237.5 24
α-D-Glucose C
6
H
12
O
6
–917.2 –2872.2 235.6 –243.8 24
Glucose 6-P –1760.3 –2886.0 221.8 –257.6 24
L-Glutamate– C
5
H
8
O
4
N– –696.8 –2342.5 376.9 –2.7 21
L-Glutamine C
5
H
10
O
3
N
2
–524.8 –2633.1 474.8 –4.7 24
3-P glycerate– d –1515.7 –1235.9 59.0 –100.8 10
2-Pglycerate– d –1509.9 –1241.8 53.2 –106.6 10
Glyceraldehyde 3-Pd –1285.6 –1466.0 87.9 –151.8 12
Glycerol CHO –488.5 –1643.4 169.5 –110.2 14
3 8 3
Glycerol-P –1336.2 –1652.6 160.3 –119.3 14
Glycine CHON –373.5 –1008.3 157.2 –22.6 9
2 5 2
Glycogen CH O –665.3 –2887.0 220.9 –258.6 24
6 10 5
Glycolate– CHO– –523.4 –739.7 37.2 –42.7 6
2 3 3
Glyoxylate– CHO– –461.1 –564.9 –46.9 –86.9 4
2 3
HO (l) –237.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0
2
OH– –157.3 –79.9 –79.9 –39.9 0
H+ 0.0 0.0 0.0 0
H (g) 0.0 –237.2 21.8 –18.2 2
2
HO –136.8 –100.4 –359.4 –319.4 –2
2 2
HS –27.4 –714.6 321.3 161.5 8
2
HS– 12.6 –754.5 281.4 161.5 8
β-Hydroxybutyric acid CHO –531.4 –1994.9 336.0 –23.6 18
4 8 3
β-Hydroxybutyrate– CHO– –506.3 –2020.0 310.9 –8.8 18
4 7 3
Hydroxypyruvate CHO –615.9 –1041.6 –5.7 –165.5 8
3 4 4

--- Page 294 ---

A. Thermodynamics 291
TABLE 6-4
(continued)
+
For oxidation by NAD
∆G° ∆G° ∆G° ∆G° (pH 7) Number of
f c ox ox
Compound Formula (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) electrons
Hypoxanthine CHO 89.5 –2773.0 334.8 –144.6 24
5 6
Isocitrate3– CHO3– –1160.0 –2155.1 175.8 –63.9 18
6 5 7
α-Ketoglutarate2– CHO2– –798.0 –1885.5 186.4 –53.3 16
5 4 5
Lactate– CHO– –516.6 –1378.1 175.9 –23.9 12
3 5 3
α-Lactose C H O –1515.2 –5826.5 389.3 –569.7 48
12 22 11
L-Leucine C
6
H
13
O
2
N –356.3 –3551.7 721.6 62.3 33
Mannitol CH O –942.6 –3084.0 282.8 –236.6 26
6 14 6
Malate2– CHO2– –845.1 –1444.0 109.9 –49.9 12
4 4 5
Methane (g) CH –50.8 –818.0 218.0 58.2 8
4
Methanol CHO –175.2 –693.5 83.4 –36.4 6
4
NH+ –79.5 –276.3 112.2 12.3 3
4
NO– –34.5 –84.1 –472.6 –372.7 –3
2
NO (g) 86.7 –86.7 –345.7 –305.7 –2
NO– –110.5 –8.1 –655.6 –515.7 –5
3
Oxalate2– CO2– –674.9 –351.1 –92.1 –52.1 2
2 4
Oxaloacetate2– CHO2– –797.2 –1254.7 40.2 –79.7 10
4 2 5
HPO (aq)e –1147.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0
3 4
HPO– (aq)e –1135.1 –12.1 –12.1 27.8 0
2 4
HPO2–(aq)e –1094.1 –53.1 –53.1 26.8 0
4
n-Propanol CHO –175.8 –1956.1 374.8 15.2 18
3 8
Isopropanol CHO –185.9 –1946.0 384.9 25.3 18
3 8
Propionate– CHO– –360.0 –1534.7 278.2 38.5 14
3 5 2
Pyruvate– CHO– –474.5 –1183.1 111.9 –47.9 10
3 3 3
Phosphoenolpyruvate3– –1269.5 –1245.0 50.0 –109.8 10
Ribose 5-Pd –1599.9 –2414.9 175.0 –224.6 20
Ribulose 5-Pd –1597.6 –2417.1 172.8 –226.8 20
Sedoheptulose 7-Pd –1913.3 –3364.6 261.2 –298.2 28
Sedoheptulose di-Pd –2755.8 –3379.0 246.9 –312.5 28
Sorbitol CH O –942.7 –3083.9 282.9 –236.5 26
6 14 6
Succinate2– CHO2- –690.2 –1598.9 214.1 14.3 14
4 4 4
Succinyl-CoA –686.7* –1602.4* 210.6* –29.2* 14
Sucrose C H O –1551.8 –5789.9 425.9 –533.1 48
12 22 11
SO2– –742.0 0.0 0.0 79.9 0
4
SO2– –497.1 –244.9 14.1 54.0 2
3
SO2– –513.4 –733.4 302.5 222.6 8
2 3
L-Threonine C
4
H
9
O
3
N –514.6 –2130.3 330.1 –49.5 19
L-Tyrosine C
9
H
11
O
3
N –387.2 –4466.8 842.5 23.4 41
Urea CHON –203.8 –664.9 112.0 –7.8 6
4 2
Uric acid CHON –356.9 –2089.4 241.5 –118.1 18
5 4 3 4
L-Valine C
5
H
11
O
2
N –360.0 –2916.5 579.9 40.5 27
Xanthine CHON –139.3 –2425.6 293.8 –125.7 21
5 5 2 4
D-Xylulose C
5
H
10
O
5
–748.1 –2409.8 180.1 –219.5 20
a The quantities tabulated are ∆Gº, the standard free energy of formation from the elements; ∆Gº, the standard free energy of combustion;
f c
∆Gº , the standard free energy of oxidation by NAD+ to products NADH + H+, CO, HO, N, HPO2–, and SO2–;∆G‘ (pH 7), the apparent
ox 2 2 2 4 4 ox
standard free energy change at pH 7. All values are in kJ mol–1 at 25ºC in aqueous solution unless indicated otherwise. If a compound is
designated (g) the values are for the gaseous phase at 1 atm pressure. The number of electrons involved in complete oxidation to CO,
2
HO, N, and HSO is given in the final column. If this number is negative, the compound must be reduced to obtain the products, e.g.,
2 2 2 4
2 NO– + 10 e–+ 12 H+→N + 6 H0. The data for phosphate esters refer to the compounds with completely dissociated phosphate groups
3 2 2
(– O – PO2–). The values of ∆Gº for many of these compounds were calculated as ∆Gº (nonphosphorylated compound) –∆Gº for hydrolysis
3 f f
(to HPO2–, Table 6-6) –∆Gº for HO (one molecule for each phosphate ester formed) + ∆Gº for HPO2– (from this table). Data from Bassman
4 f 2 f 4
and Kraused were used directly. For acyl-CoA derivatives CoA (– SH) is treated as an “element,” i.e., the values of ∆Gº given and designated
f
with an asterisk (*) are for formation from the elements plus free CoA. The values of ∆Gº and ∆G are for oxidation to the usual products
c ox
plus CoA. Values of ∆Gº of hydrolysis (Table 6-6) were used in computing ∆Gº for each of these compounds from that of the corresponding
f
alcohol or carboxylate anion. Another source containing an extensive table of Gibbs energy values is Wilhoit, R. C. (1969) in Biochemical
Microcalorimetry (Brown, H. D. ed.), pp. 305 – 317. Academic Press, New York
b The major source is Long, C., ed. (1961) Biochemists Handbook, pp. 90 – 92. Van Nostrand, Reinhold, Princeton, New Jersey. Most of the
values in this collection are from Burton, K. (1957) Ergeb. Physiol., Biol. Chem. Exp. Pharmakol. 49, 275 – 298
c From Stull, D.R., Westrum, E. F., Jr., and Sinke, G. C. (1969) The Chemical Thermodynamics of Organic Compounds. Wiley, New York
d Bassham, J. A. and Krause, G. H. (1969) Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 189, 207 – 221
e Van Wazer, J. R. (1958) Phosphorus and Its Compounds, Vol. I, p. 889. Wiley (Interscience), New York

--- Page 295 ---

292 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
B. Tables of (cid:1)G°Values for Biochemical 2. Gibbs Energies of Dissociation of Protons
Compounds
Table 6-5 gives thermodynamic dissociation con-
stants and values of ∆G° and ∆H° for a number of acids
1. Gibbs Energies of Formation of interest in biochemistry. Some of these values were
used in obtaining the values of ∆G ° for the ions of
f
Table 6-4 gives, in the first column, standard values Table 6-4. The data of Table 6-5 can also be used in
of Gibbs energies of formation from the elements ∆G ° evaluation of Gibbs energy changes for reactions of
f
for a variety of pure solids, gases, and liquids as well ionic forms not given in Table 6-4.
as values for substances in solution at the hypothetical
1 M activity. As an example, consider the value of ∆G ° 3. Group Transfer Potentials
f
for pure liquid acetic acid, – 389.1 kJ mol–1. The equa-
tion for its formation from the elements is: Recall that the equilibria for reactions by which
monomers are linked to form biopolymers (whether
amides, esters, phosphodiesters, or glycosides) usually
2C(s) + 2H (g,1atm)
2 favorhydrolysis rather than formation (condensation).
+ O (g,1atm) −→ C H O (l) The equilibrium positions depend on the exact struc-
2 2 4 2
∆G ° = −389.1kJmol−1
(6-38)
tures. Some linkages are formed easily if monomer
f concentrations are high enough, but others are never
formed in significant concentrations. Likewise, hydro-
To obtain the Gibbs energy of formation in aqueous
lysis may be partial at equilibrium or it may be 99.9%
solution, we must have solubility data as well as activity
or more complete.
coefficients of acetic acid at various concentrations.
Let us compare the hydrolysis of the two organic
From these data the change in Gibbs energy for solu-
phosphatesadenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
tion of the liquid acetic acid in water to give aqueous
glucose 6-phosphate (Eqs. 6-42 and 6-43).
acetic acid in the hypothetical 1 molal standard state
(Eq. 6-39) can be obtained.
HATP3− + H O −→ HADP2− + H PO −
2 2 4
Aceticacid(l) −→ aceticacid(aq) ∆G° ≈ −32.9kJmol−1
∆G = −7.3kJmol−1 (6-39) ∆H° ≈ −22.6kJmol−1at25°C, µ= 0.25 (6-42)
Summing Eqs. 6-38 and 6-39 we obtain:
α-D-Glucose 6-phosphate− + H
2
O −→
2C + 2H 2 + O 2 −→ aceticacid(aq) glucose + H 2 PO 4 −
∆G
f
° = −396.4kJmol−1
(6-40)
∆G° = −16.4kJmol−1at25°C (6-43)
In many computations it is convenient to have ∆G The decrease in Gibbs energy upon hydrolysis is
values for single ions, e.g., for acetate–. We can obtain twice as large for ATP as it is for glucose 6-phosphate.
∆G ° of acetate– (aq) from that of acetic acid (aq) by Glucose phosphate is thermodynamically more stable
f
making use of ∆G° of dissociation (Eq. 6-41). than ATP. It would be easier to form than would ATP
by a reversal of the hydrolysis reaction and also easier
to form biosynthetically. From the Gibbs energies of
Aceticacid −→ H+ + acetate− hydrolysis it follows that a phospho group could be
∆G° = −5.708logK = 5.708pK transferred spontaneously from ATP to glucose in the
a a
= +27.2kJmol−1at25°C
(6-41)
presence of a suitable catalyst but not vice versa.
By convention wedefinetheGibbsenergyofformationof
O
H+aszero. Then, by summing Eqs. 6-40 and 6-41 we
obtain∆G ° of acetate– = – 369.2 kJ mol–1. P O–
f
OH
Phospho (phosphoryl) group
Because it reflects quantitatively the thermodynamic
tendency for a group to be transferred to another

--- Page 296 ---

B. Tables of (cid:1)G° Values for Biochemical Compounds 293
TABLE 6-5 nucleophile (see Chapter 12), the
Values of pK ,(cid:1)Gº, and (cid:1)Hº for Ionization of Acids at 25ºCa,b Gibbs energy decrease (–∆G°) upon
a
hydrolysis is sometimes called the
Acid pK ∆G° (kJ mol –1) ∆H° (kJ mol–1) group transfer potential. During
a
the hydrolysis of ATP (Eq. 6-42) the
Formic acid 3.75 21.4 0.04 phosphogroup of ATP is transferred
Acetic acid 4.76 27.2 – 0.1 to a hydroxyl ion from water with
Propionic acid 4.87 27.8 – 0.6 a value ∆G° = – 32.9 kJ mol–1. The
Lactic acid 3.97 (35°C) 23.4 2.2 group transfer potential of this
Pyruvic acid 2.49 14.2 12.1
phospho group is 32.9 kJ/mol and
NH + 9.25 52.8 52.2
4 that of the phospho group of glucose
CH NH + 10.59 60.4 55.4
3 4 6-phosphate is only 27.6 kJ mol–1.
Alanine
While the choice of water as the
– COOH 2.35 13.4 3.1
–NH + 9.83 56.1 45.4 reference nucleophile for expression
3
β-Alanine of the group transfer potential is
– COOH 3.55 20.3 4.5 somewhat arbitrary, it is customary.
–NH +(apparent) 10.19 58.2 Transfer of groups is important in
3
L-Alanyl-L-alanine 3.34 19.1 – 0.5 energy metabolism and in biosyn-
Aspartic acid
thesis of polymers. Gibbs energies
– COOH 2.05 11.7 7.7
of hydrolysis are given in Table 6-6
– COOH 3.87 22.1 4.0
for several compounds.
–NH + 10.60 60.5 38.8
3
H CO , pK 6.35c 36.2 9.4
2 3 1
pK 10.33 59.0 15.1
2
H PO , pK 2.12 12.1 – 7.9 4. “Constants”That Vary with
3 4 1
pK 7.18d 41.0 3.8 pH and Magnesium Ion
2
(apparent) 6.78e 38.7 3.3 Concentrations
pK 12.40 70.8 17.6
3
Glycerol 1-phosphate, pK 6.66 38.0 – 3.1
2 Equation 6-42 is written for
Glucose 6-phosphate 6.50 37.1 – 1.8
hydrolysis of HATP3– to HADP2– +
Pyrophosphoric acid, H P O
4 2 7 H PO –, a stoichiometry that applies
pK 6.7 38.1 – 1.3 2 4
(ap 3 parent) 6.12e 34.9 0.5 well in the pH range around 6. How-
pK 9.4 53.6 – 7.1 ever, at a pH above ~ 7 most of the
4
(apparent) 8.95e 51.2 1.7 ATP is in the form ATP4– and is
Adenosine 3.5 20.1 13.0 cleaved to HPO 2– according to Eq.
4
AMP 6-44.
pK (ring, apparent) 3.74e 21.3 4.2
1
pK 2 (phosphate) 6.67d 38.1 3.6 ATP 4– + HO→ ADP 3– + HPO2– + H +
(apparent) 6.45e 36.8 3.6 ∆G°≈ + 5.4 2 kJ mol–1 at 25°C,µ 4 = 0.25
ADP ∆H°≈– 19.7 kJ mol–1
pK 2 (ring, apparent) 3.93e 22.4 4.2 (6-44)
pK (diphosphate) 7.20d 41.1 – 5.7
3
(apparent) 6.83f 39.0 – 5.7
ATP The value of ∆G° = + 5.4 kJ mol–1
pK (ring, apparent) 4.06 23.2 0 for this reaction is hardly the large
3
pK (triphosphate) 7.68d 43.8 – 7.0 negative number expected for a
4
(apparent) 7.06d 40.2 – 7.0 highly spontaneous reaction. What
Pyridine 5.17 29.5 20.1
is the matter? The problem is that
Phenol 9.98 56.9 23.6
H+ is produced and that the stan-
a These are thermodynamic values (infinite dilution) except for those labeled apparent. dard state of H+ is 1 M, not 10–7M.
The latter apply at an ionic strength of 0.2 –0.25. Because of this, biochemists often
b Most data are from Jencks, W. P. and Regenstein, J. (1976) in Handbook of Biochemistry
prefer to use another kind of appar-
and Molecular Biology, 3rd ed., Vol. I (Fasman, G. D. ed.), pp. 305 – 351, CRC Press,
Cleveland, Ohio. ent dissociation constant and an
c Here, pK is for K = [H+][HCO–] / [CO] + [HCO]. From Forster, R. E., Edsall, J. T., apparent(cid:1)G such that the standard
1 1 3 2 2 3
Otis, A. B., and Roughton, F. J. W., eds. (1969) NASA Spec. Publ.188. state of H+ is taken as that of the pH
d From Phillips, R. C., George, P., and Rutman, R. J. (1963) Biochemistry2, 501– 508.
at which the experiments were done,
e From Alberty, R. A. (1969) J. Biol. Chem. 244, 3290 – 3302.
f Values used by Alberty, R. A. (1972) Horizons of Bioenergetics, pp. 135 – 147, Academic usually pH 7. The symbol K‘ has
Press, New York, calculated for 0.2 ionic strength from equations of Phillips, R. C., often be used and is used in this
George, P., and Rutman, R. J. (1966) J. Am. Chem. Soc.88, 2631– 2640. book to represent the following

--- Page 297 ---

294 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
pH-dependent equilibrium constant (Eq. 6-45) which If one proton is produced in the reaction as in Eq. 6-44,
will be a constant only at a single pH. the following relationship will hold.
[ADP3−][HPO 2− ] ∆G‘ = ∆G°– 5.708 x pH kJ mol–1 at 25°C (6-46)
K′ = 4
[ATP4−] (6-45) Note that ∆G‘ = –RT ln K‘ and that [H+] does not
appear in the expression for K‘ given by Eq. 6-45.
From the value ∆G° = + 5.4 kJ mol–1 and applying Eq.
TABLE 6-6
Gibbs Energies of Hydrolysis at 25°C (in kJ mol-1)a
Compound Products ∆G° ∆G’(pH 7) ∆H°
ATP4– ADP3– + HPO 2– + H+ 5.41b –34.54 –19.71
4
ATP4– AMP2– + HP O 3– + H+ 2.54c –37.4 –19.0
2 7
MgATP2– MgADP– + HPO 2– + H+ 16.0d –24.0 –14.2
4
ADP3– AMP2– + HPO 2– + H+ 3.67c –36.3 –13.5
4
AMP2– Adenosine + HPO 2– –9.6e –9.6 0
4
ATP4– Adenosine + HP O 4– –36.0e –36.0 –7.9
3 10
HP O 3– 2 HPO 2– + H+ 6.54c –33.4 –12.6
2 7 4
Acetyl phosphate2– Acetate– + HPO 2– + H+ –7.7f –47.7
4
1,3-Diphosphoglycerate4– 3-Phosphoglycerate3– + HPO 2– + H+ –14.5g –54.5
4
Phosphoenolpyruvate3– Pyruvate– + HPO 2– –61.9 –61.9 –25.1
4
O
–
Carbamoyl phosphate2– H 2 N C O + HPO 4 2– + H+ –11.5 –51.5
Creatine phosphate– Creatine+ + HPO 2– –43.1 –43.1
4
Phosphoarginine– Arginine + HPO 2– –38.1h (Mg2+ present)
4
Glycerol phosphate2– Glycerol + HPO 2– –9.2 –9.2
4
α-D-Glucose 6-phosphate2– α-D-Glucose + HPO
4
2– –13.8 –13.8 –2.5
Glucose 1-phosphate2– Glucose + HPO 2– –20.9 –20.9
4
Maltose (or glycogen) 2-Glucose –16.7 –16.7
Sucrose Glucose + fructose –29.3 –29.3
UDP glucose2– Glucose + UDP3– + H+ 9.4 –30.5
N10-Formyltetrahydrofolic acid Formate– + H+ + tetrahydrofolic acid 14.1 –25.9h
Acetic anhydride 2-Acetate– + 2H+ 31.1 –48.9
Acetyl-CoA Acetate– + H+ + CoA 4.9 –35.1i
Succinyl-CoA– Succinate2– + H+ + CoA –3.5 –43.5j
Ethyl acetate Ethanol + acetate– + H+ 20.2 –19.7
Asparagine Aspartate– + NH + –15.1 –15.1
4
Glycine ethyl ester+ (39°C) Glycine + ethanol + H+ 4.9 –35.1
Valyl-tRNA+ Valine + tRNA + H+ 4.9 –35.1
a Unless indicated otherwise, the values are based on tables from Jencks, W. P. (1976) Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 3rd ed.,
Vol I (Fasman,G.D. ed.), pp. 296–304. CRC Press, Cleveland, Ohio. For a reaction producing one proton at pH 7 ∆G’ = –39.96 kJ mol–1.
b Guynn, R.W. and Veech, R.L. (1973) J. Biol. Chem.248, 6966–6972.
c Based on +11.80 kcal mol–1 for hydrolysis to PO4– plus ∆G° of dissociation of HPO3– as quoted by Alberty, R. A. (1969) J.Biol.Chem.244, 3290–
2 7 2 7
3324. However, 1.017 kcal mol–1 was added to the value of 11.80 to make it consistent with that for hydrolysis of ATP to ADP. Reevaluation by
Frey and Arabshahi (1995) Biochemistry34, 11307–11310, indicates that ∆G’ (pH 7) for hydrolysis of ATP to AMP + PP is ~ 10 kJ mol–1 more
i
negative than is shown here.
d Alberty, R.A. (1972) Horizons of Bioenergetics, Academic Press, New York, pp. 135–147.
e George, P. , Witonsky, R.J., Trachtman, M., Wu, C., Dorwart, W., Richman, L., Richman, W., Shurayh, F., and Lentz, B. (1970) Biochim. Biophys.
Acta.223, 1–15.
f Based on ∆G† = 3.0 kcal mol–1 for acetyl phosphate + CoA → acetyl-CoA + P from Stadtman, E. R. (1973) The Enzymes, (Boyer, P.D., ed.), 3rd
i
ed., Vol. 8. pp. 1–49. Academic Press, New York, together with ∆G’ (pH 7) for hydrolysis of acetyl-CoA.
g Estimated from ∆G° for ATP hydrolysis + ∆G’ = –19.9 kJ mol–1 for the 3-phosphoglycerate kinase reaction: Burton, K. and Krebs, H. A. (1953)
Biophys. J.54, 94–107; and (1955) Biophys. J.59, 44–46.
h Estimated from data at pH 7.7 or 8.0 (tables of Jencks).
i Guynn, R. W., Gelberg, H. J., and Veech, R. L. (1973) J. Biol. Chem. 248, 6957–6965 found ∆G° = –35.75 kJ mol–1 at 38°C. Without data on ∆H,
correction to 25°C is difficult. Burton, K., (1955) Biophys. J. 59, 44–46, gave ∆G’ (pH 7) for ATP4– + acetate– + CoA → ADP3– + acetyl-CoA +
HPO2– as approximately zero at 25°C. Guynn et al. found –0.56 kJ mol–1 at 38°C. This same value (–0.56 kJ) at 25°C was assumed to obtain the
4
figure given here. This is equivalent to assuming ∆H° of hydrolysis as almost the same for ATP and acetyl-CoA, an unsupported assumption.
j Assumed 2 kcal mol–1 more negative than that of acetyl-CoA as in tables of Jencks.

--- Page 298 ---

B. Tables of (cid:1)G° Values for Biochemical Compounds 295
6-46, we obtain for the hydrolysis of ATP at 25°C, met in the biochemical literature. An equilibrium
µ = 0.25: constant, designated in this book as K†, is used to
relate the total concentrations of all ionic forms of the
∆G‘ (pH 7)= –34.5 kJ mol–1 components present at the pH of the experiment.
=–8.26 kcal mol–1 (6-47) Thus,
[ADP, all forms][phosphate, all forms]
K†=
An additional set of standard states is frequently [ATP, all forms] (6-48)
BOX 6-A MEASUREMENT OF INTRACELLULAR pH
What is the pH within a cell? Is it constant or the chromaffin cells of the adrenal cortex, which
does it vary with physiological conditions? Do all accumulate high concentrations of ATP and
cells operate at similar pH? The answers to these catecholamines, is also low, ~ 5.7.p The bacterium
important questions have been sought using a Streptococcus faecalis maintains a higher internal pH
variety of techniques.a Tiny microelectrodes with of ~ 8.0, even when the pH of the medium varies
tips only 1 µm in diameter have been inserted into from 6.5 to 8.0q while E. coli operates at pH 7.6, the
cells. Indicator dyes have been diffused into cells extremes of variation being 7.4 – 7.8 when the external
and either light absorption or fluorescenceb mea- pH changes from 5.5 – 9.r
sured. The distribution of a suitable radiolabeled Changes of internal pH during developmental
weak acid or weak base, such as [14C]methylamine, events such as fertilization of sea urchin eggs (+ 0.3
that is able to permeate cells can be used to calculate unit) have been recorded. However, the significance
the difference between internal and external pH.c of pH changes in metabolic regulation remains
The activity of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, uncertain.c
which is very pH sensitive, can be used to monitor
the pH of mitochrondia.d Since 1973 NMR methods a Kotyk, A., and Slavik, J. (1989) Intracellular pH and its Measure-
have been popular.e– l The chemical shifts of 31P in ment, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
b Rogers, J., Hesketh, T. R., Smith, G. A., and Metcalfe, J. C. (1983)
inorganic phosphate (pK = 6.9), ATP, glucose 6-
a J. Biol. Chem.258, 5994–5997
phosphate, and of other metabolites of 13C in citrate c Nuccitelli, R., and Deamer, D. W., eds. (1982) Intracellular pH:
and bicarbonate,l give direct estimates of pH. How- Its Measurement, Regulation and Utilization in Cellular Functions,
ever, caution must be exercised if internal pH values Liss, New York
d Dodgson, S. J., Forster, R. E., II, and Storey, B. T. (1982) J. Biol.
good to ± 0.1 unit are to be obtained.g More sensitive
Chem.257, 1705–1711
measurements over the pH range 1.3 – 9.1 can be e Moon, R. B., and Richards, J. H. (1973) J. Biol. Chem.248, 7276–
made by diffusing one of a series of aminophospho- 7278
nates into cells and measuring the 31P chemical f Roberts, J. K. M., Ray, P. M., Wade-Jardetsky, N., and Jardetsky,
O. (1980) Nature (London)283, 870–872
shift.h Fluorinated probes such as dimethylfluoro-
g Avison, M. J., Hetherington, H. P., and Shulman, R. G. (1986)
alanine (pK a = 7.3) are also useful because of their Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.15, 377–402
low toxicity and high sensitivity of the 19F NMR h Pietri, S., Miollan, M., Martel, S., Le Moigne, F., Blaive, B., and
signal. These alanine derivatives can be diffused Culcasi, M. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 19505–19512
i Taylor, J. S., and Deutsch, C. (1983) Biophys. J.43, 261–267
into cells as their methyl esters, which are rapidly
j Bailey, I. A., Williams, S. R., Radda, G. K., and Gadian, D. G.
cleaved within cells, allowing the fluorinated amino (1981)Biochem. J.196, 171–178
acids to accumulate.i,m k Barton, J. K., Den Hollander, J. A., Lee, T. M., MacLaughlin, A.,
The pH within cells appears to be tightly con- and Shulman, R. G. (1980) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 2470–
2473
trolled although small variations are sometimes
l Gout, E., Bligny, R., and Douce, R. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267,
observed. Red blood cells, thymocytes, liver, skele- 13903–13909
tal muscles, and intact hearts all maintain a pH in mDeutsch, C. J., and Taylor, J. S. (1987) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.508, 33
the range 7.0 – 7.3.b,h,i However, the pH can fall to 6.2 n Garlick, P. B., Radda, G. K., and Seeley, P. J. (1979) Biochem. J.
184, 547–554
within 13 minutes of oxygen deprivation (ischemia)
o Pan, J. W., Hamm, J. R., Rothman, D. L., and Shulman, R. G.
and to 6.1 after exhaustive exercise.n,o The 31P NMR (1988)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 7836–7839
technique permits the monitoring of pH as well as p Pollard, H. B., Shindo, H., Creutz, C. E., Pazoles, C. J., and
the state of the adenylate system (Section D) in human Cohen, J. S. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 1170–1177
q Kobayashi, H., Murakami, N., and Unemoto, T. (1982) J. Biol.
limbs suffering from circulatory insufficiency.c
Chem.257, 13246–13252
In higher plants the pH of cytoplasm is 7.4 – 7.5 r Slonczewski, J. L., Rosen, B. P., Alger, J. R., and MacNab, R. M.
but vacuoles are acidic with a pH of 4.5 – 6.l The (1981)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.78, 6271–6275
cytoplasm of maize root tips has a pH of 7.1 but the
vacuoles are at a pH of 5.5.f The pH of granules of

--- Page 299 ---

296 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
and The enthalpy of hydrolysis of ATP according to
Eq. 6-44 is approximately – 19.7 kJ mol–1. Using this
∆G† = –RT ln K† (6-49) value and applying Eq. 6-52 we can calculate that ∆G‘
(pH 7) for the hydrolysis of ATP at 38°C is – 35.2 kJ
The Gibbs energy change ∆G† can be related to ∆G‘ mol–1. The value of ∆G‘ (25°C, pH 7), used in obtain-
by considering the relationship of K† to K‘. For ATP ing this answer, is – 35.54 kJ mol–1 which was computed
hydrolysis in the pH range of 2 – 10, K† is given by Eq. from the value of ∆G‘ (pH 7), 38°C of 35.19 kJ mol–1
6-50. reported by Guynn and Veech37 using Eq. 6-52. Bear
in mind that all of the foregoing Gibbs energy changes
 [H+] [H+]2  [H+]  are apparent values applying to solutions of ionic
K′ 1 + +   1 +   strength ~ 0.25.
K† =
 K HADP2− K HADP2− K H2ADP− K HPO4 2− Both ADP and ATP as well as inorganic pyrophos-
 
[H+] [H+]2 phate form complexes with metal ions. Since the mag-
1 + + 
nesium complexes are often the predominant forms of
 K HATP3− K HATP3− K H2ATP2− (6-50)
ADP and ATP under physiological conditions, we must
consider the following Gibbs energy changes. These
In this equation K , etc., are consecutive dissocia- are apparent values for µ = 0.2 at 25°C.
HADP2–
tion constants as given in Table 6-4. The expressions in
parentheses are the Michaelis pH functions, which ATP 4– + Mg 2 +→ Mg ATP 2–
were considered in Chapter 3 (Eqs. 3-4 to 3-6). In Eq. ∆G° = – 26.3; ∆H° = 13.8 kJ mol–1 (6-53)
6-50 they relate the total concentration of each compo-
nent to the concentration of the most highly dissociated ADP 3– + Mg 2 +→ Mg ADP–
form. Thus, for the pH range 2 – 10 ∆G° = – 19.8; ∆H° = 15.1 kJ mol–1 (6-54)
[P i ] total = [HPO 4 2–](1 + [H+] / K H PO – ) (6-51) Combining the apparent ∆G° values for Eqs. 6-47, 6-53,
2 4
and 6-54, we obtain
Using apparent pK values (µ = 0.2) for H PO –, HADP2–,
a 2 4
and HATP3– of 6.78, 6.83, and 7.06 (Table 6-5) and taking MgATP 2– + H O→ MgADP– + HPO 2– + H+
2 2
∆G‘ at pH 7 as – 34.5 kJ mol–1, we compute ∆G† = – 35.0 ∆G‘ (pH 7) = – 28.0 kJ mol–1 (6-55)
kJ mol–1 at pH 7. The difference between ∆G‘ and ∆G†
in this case is small, but it would be larger if the ionic The stoichiometry of Eq. 6-55 never holds exactly.
forms in Eq. 6-44 were not the ones predominating at Some of the Mg2 + dissociates from the MgADP–; both
pH 7. protons and Mg2 + bind to H PO –; and HATP3– and
2 4
To obtain the Gibbs energy change for a reaction HADP2– are present and bind Mg2 + weakly.38 Thus,
underother than standard conditions, Eq. 6-29 must be the observed value of ∆G† varies with both pH and
applied. Thus, at pH 7 and 0.01 M activities of ADP3–, magnesium concentration as well as with changes in
ATP4–, and HPO 2–,∆G for hydrolysis of ATP according ionic strength. Tables and graphs showing the appar-
4
to Eq. 6-44 is – 34.5 – (2 x 5.71) = – 45.9 kJ mol–1 = – 11.0 ent value of ∆G† under various conditions have been
kcal mol–1. We see that at concentrations existing in prepared by Alberty38 and by Phillips et al.39 An exam-
cells (usually in the millimolar range) ATP has a sub- ple is shown in Fig. 6-2. From this graph we find that
stantially higher group transfer potential than under ∆G† for hydrolysis of ATP at pH 7, 25°C, µ = 0.2, and
standard conditions. 1 mM Mg2 + (a relatively high intracellular concentra-
The reader should bear in mind that there is no tion40) is – 30.35 kJ mol–1 (– 7.25 kcal mol–1).
accepted standard usage of K‘ and that K†is just for Figure 6-2 was drawn using the equations of
this book! An international committee21 has recom- Alberty, but the value of ∆G‘ (pH 7) of hydrolysis of
mended that K‘ be used with the same meaning as K† in ATP = 34.54 kJ mol–1 at [Mg2 +] = 0 based on results
this book and more changes may be coming (see the of Guynn and Veech37 was used. The pK values and
a
next section). formation constants of Mg2 + complexes were those of
To obtain ∆G at a temperature other than 25°C, we Alberty.38 Note that George et al.40 provided formation
must know ∆H for the reaction. Using Eq. 6-37a it is constants of these complexes at infinite dilution where
easy to show that ∆G at temperature T is related to the values of ∆G° of formation are considerably more
2
that at T as follows: negative than those given in Eqs. 6-53 to 6-55.
1
From the foregoing considerations we see that
T ∆G − (T − T )∆H complexing with Mg2 + somewhat decreases the group
∆G ≈ 2 1 2 1
2 T (6-52) transfer potential of the phospho group of ATP. Fur-
1
thermore, changes in the concentration of free Mg2 +
with time and between different regions of a cell may

--- Page 300 ---

297
–24
–28
–32
–36
0
0.1
1
–40 10
–44
–48
–52
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
pH
1–lom
Jk
B. Tables of (cid:1)G° Values for Biochemical Compounds
new standard. To change all of the numbers in this
book, which uses a self-consistent set of thermodynamic
quantities, is impractical. However, it is worthwhile to
compare the value of Alberty and Goldberg for ∆G‘°
for hydrolysis of ATP to ADP + P under the proposed
i
biochemical standard conditions with other values
given in this chapter, all at 25°C.
∆G‘° = – 32.49 kJ mol–1 (new proposed biochemical
standard)
∆G† (pH 7) – 35.0 kJ mol–1 (Eq. 6-50)
∆G‘ (pH 7) – 34.5 kJ mol–1 (for ATP 4–→ ADP 3– +
HPO42–; Eq. 6-47)
∆G‘ (pH 7) – 28.0 kJ mol–1 (for MgATP 2–→
MgADP– + HPO4 2–; Eq. 6-55)
6. Bond Energies and Approximate Methods
for Estimation of Thermodynamic Data
For approximate estimation of enthalpy changes
Figure 6-2 Plots of the apparent Gibbs energy ∆G† for during reactions, use can be made of empirical bond
hydrolysis of ATP as a function of pH at a series of different energies (Table 6-7) which represent the approximate
concentrations of free magnesium ions. Millimolar [Mg2 +] is enthalpy changes (–∆H°) for formation of compounds
indicated by the numbers by the curves. Computer-drawn
in a gaseous state from atoms in the gas phase. Other
graphs courtesy of Carol M. Metzler.
more comprehensive methods of approximation have
been developed.49,50
have significant effects.41 While Mg2 + is a principal
cation in tissues, it is by no means the only one. Thus, 7. Gibbs Energies of Combustion by O and
2
Ca2 +, Mn2 +, and even K+ will affect equilibria involving by NAD+
polyphosphates such as ATP.
It is not easy to measure the group transfer poten- Since oxidation processes are so important in the
tial of ATP and published values vary greatly. George metabolism of aerobic organisms, it is often convenient
et al.40 reported ∆G° for Eq. 6-42 as – 39.9 kJ mol–1 at to discuss Gibbs energies of combustion. These are
25°C, µ = 0.2, and as – 41.25 kJ mol–1 at infinite dilution. easily derived from the Gibbs energies of formation.
They regarded these values as good to ± 4 kJ mol–1. For example, ∆G for acetate ion (aqueous) may be
c
However, most other estimates have been at least 4 kJ obtained as follows:
mol–1 less negative.42– 44 The self-consistent set of thermo-
dynamic data used throughout this book are based in Acetate– + H +→ 2 C + 2 H + O
2 2
part on the value of ∆G for hydrolysis of ATP obtained ∆G° = + 369.2 kJ mol–1
by Guynn and Veech.37 =– ∆G ° of acetate (from Table 6-3)
f
2 H + O → 2 H O
2 2 2
5. A New Standard for Biochemical ∆G° = 2 x – 237.2 = – 474.4 kJ mol–1
Thermodynamics? = 2 x ∆G ° of H O (6-56)
f 2
Because of the complexities of the equilibria in- 2 C + 2 O → 2 CO
2 2
volved in biochemical reactions Alberty and others45– 47 ∆G° = 2 x – 394.4 = – 788.8 kJ mol–1
and a Panel on Biochemical Thermodynamics48 have = 2 x ∆G ° of CO
f 2
suggested that tables of thermodynamic properties for
biochemical use be tabulated for the following condi-
tions:T = 298.15 K, P = 1 bar (0.1 MP ≡ 0.987 atm), Acetate– (1 M) + H + (1 M) + 2 O (1 atm) →
a 2
pH = 7, pMg = 3 ([Mg2+] = 10–3M), and ionic strength 2 CO (1 atm) + H O (l)
2 2
I (µ in this chapter) = 0.25 M. There appears to be both ∆G° =– 894.0 kJ mol–1
advantages and disadvantages to this. The proponents =∆G °of acetate–
c
suggest that the symbols ∆G‘,K‘, etc. be used for this

--- Page 301 ---

298 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
TABLE 6-7 The sum of Eqs. 6-57 and 6-58 is the
Empirical Bond Energies and Resonance Energiesa equation for combustion of acetate
by O (Eq. 6-59) and the two ∆G
2
Energy values Energy values Empirical values sum to ∆G c for acetate–.
for single for multiple resonance
bonds bonds energy values Acetate– + H + + 2 O →
2
(kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) 2 CO + 2 H O
2 2
∆G ° = – 894.0 kJ mol–1
c
H–H 436 C=C 615 Benzene 155 ∆G ’ (pH 7) = – 854.0 kJ mol–1
c
C–C 346 N=N 418 Naphthalene 314 (6-59)
Si–Si 177 O=O 402 (‘∆ state)
N–N 161 C=N 615 Styrene 155 + 21 The values of ∆G (Table 6-4)
O–O 139 C=O 686 (formaldehyde) Phenol 155 + 29 ox
not only give an immediate indica-
S–S 213 715 (aldehydes)
tion of the relative amounts of energy
C–H 413 728 (ketones) Benzaldehyde 155 + 17
available from oxidation of substrate
Si–H 295 C=S 477 Pyridine 180
N–H 391 C≡C 812 Pyrrole 130 with NAD+ but also are very conve-
P–H 320 N≡N 946 (N ) Indole 226 nient in evaluating ∆G for fermenta-
2
O–H 463 C≡N 866 (HCN) O tion reactions. For example, consider
S–H 339 891 (nitriles) C OH 117 the fermentation of glucose to ethanol
C–Si 290 (Eq. 6-60):
O
C–N 292
C OR 100
C C – – O S 3 2 5 5 1 9 O α-D-Glucose→ 2 CO 2 + 2 ethanol
C–F 441
C NH2 88 (6-60)
C–Cl 328
C–Br 276 Urea 155 The Gibbs energy change ∆G‘
C–I 240 CO 439 (pH 7) for fermentation of glucose
CO 151
Si–O 369 2 to ethanol and CO can be written
2
immediately from the data of Table
a From Pauling, L. ( 1960) The Nature of the Chemical Bond, 3rd ed., pp. 85, 189, and
6-4 (Eq. 6-61).
195–198, Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca, New York
∆G‘ (pH 7)= – 243.8 – 2 (– 4.6)
Table 6-4 lists values of ∆G° as well as those of ∆G °. =– 234.6 kJ mol–1
c f
(6-61)
Besides CO and H O, the other products assumed in
2 2
calculating the values of ∆G° in Table 6-4 are N (1atm),
c 2 The values of ∆G for H O, CO , and H+ are always
H PO (1 M), and H SO (1 M). ox 2 2
3 4 2 4
zero and need not be considered. The same computa-
Much of the oxidation occurring in cells is carried
tion can be made using the awkwardly large values of
out by the biological oxidizing agent nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) or by the closely related ∆G c ° or using values of ∆G f ° The latter are also large,
NADP+ (Chapter 10). It is convenient to tabulate values and CO 2 and water must be considered in the equa-
of∆G° for complete oxidation of compounds to CO tions. Table 6-4 can be used to obtain values of ∆G° for
2
using NAD+ rather than O as the oxidizing agent. many metabolic reactions considered later in the book.
2
These values, designated ∆G° and ∆G‘ (pH 7), are Data from any column in the table may be used for
ox ox
this purpose, but for simplicity try the values in the
also given in Table 6-3. Notice that these values are
∆G‘ column.
relatively small, corresponding to the fact that little ox
Note, however, that for reactions involving oxida-
energy is made available to cells by oxidation with
NAD+; for example (Eq. 6-57): tion by O 2 or by any oxidant, other than NAD+, not
appearing in Table 6-4, the following two-step proce-
Acetate– + 2 H O + 4 NAD +→ 2 CO + 4 NADH + dure is necessary if the ∆G ox values are used. From the
3 H + (10–7 2 M) 2 ∆G ox values compute ∆G° or ∆G‘ for the reaction under
∆G‘ (pH 7) = + 22.1 kJ mol–1 (6-57) consideration using NAD+ as the oxidant. Then add
ox
to this the Gibbs energy of oxidation by O (or other
2
When the reduced NAD+ (designated NADH) so formed oxidant) of the appropriate number of moles of NADH
formed. The latter is given for O in Table 6-8 and can
is reoxidized in mitochondria (Eq. 6-58), a large amount 2
also be evaluated for a number of other oxidants, such
of energy is made available to cells.
as Fe3+ and cytochrome c, from the data in Table 6-8.
4 NADH + 4 H + + 2 O → 4 H O + 4 NAD +
2 2
∆G‘ (pH 7) = – 876.1 kJ mol–1 (6-58)
ox

--- Page 302 ---

B. Tables of (cid:1)G° Values for Biochemical Compounds 299
BOX 6-B MAGNESIUM
After potassium ion Mg2+ is the most abundant creased irritability. Excess magnesium leads to
cation present in tissuesa,b. The average adult ingests anesthesia. The Mg2+ concentration is high in hiber-
~10– 12 mmol of magnesium ion daily (~ 1/ 4 g). Of nating animals.
this, about one-third is absorbed from the digestive Over 300 enzymes are dependent upon Mg2+,
tract. An equivalent amount is excreted in the urine the largest single group being the phosphotrans-
to maintain homeostasis. Sixty percent of the mag- ferases, for which MgATP complex may be regarded
nesium in the body is found in the bones. The total as the substrate.q Magnesium has a special role in
Mg2+ concentration in serum is ~ 1 mM, while vari- photosynthesis as a component of chlorophyll.
ous tissues contain as much as 5 – 17 mM.c The con- One of the most toxic metals is beryllium. It
centration of free Mg2+ is difficult to measure. A has been suggested that Be2+ competes with Mg2+
variety of measurements using 31P NMR spectroscopy at many enzyme sites, including those of phospho-
of ATP,d– f 19F NMR of added fluorine-containing glucomutase and of phosphatases. However, as
chelators,g fluorescent chelators,h ion selective pointed out by Petsko,r because of its small size
electrodes,c and other indirect proceduresg,i,j indicate beryllium tends not to form Be2+ ions but, rather,
that the free magnesium concentration is almost the covalent complexes such as BeF ·OH –, BeF 2–, and
3 2 4
same in extracellular fluids, cytosol, and mitochondria.h MgADP·-BF (OH). In the latter complex beryllium
2
Most values have been about 0.5 mM, somewhat is covalently linked to the oxygen atom of the β
less in erythrocytes. However, the most recent phospho group of ADP to give an analog of MgATP,
estimates indicate an intracellular [Mg2+] of 0.8 – 1.1 which inhibits many enzymes. See for example, Fig.
mM.c,f 19-16A, in which MgADP·BeF occupies the active
x
The additional Mg2+present in cells is bound to site of myosin.
proteins, nuclei acids, and soluble compounds such
as ATP, ADP, citrate,k and other phosphate- and a Cowan, J. A., ed. (1995) The Biological Chemistry of Magnesium,
carboxylate-containing substances. The binding is VCH Publ., New York
b Strata, P., and Carbone, E., eds. (1991) Mg2+ and Excitable
reversible and equilibration is usually rapid. It has
Membranes, Springer-Verlag, Berlin and New York
been suggested that [Mg2+], like [H+], remains rela- c McGuigan, J. A. S., Blatter, L. A., and Buri, A. (1991) in Mg2+ and
tively constant within cells and that these two ions Excitable Membranes (Strata, P., and Carbone, E., eds), Springer-
are in free equilibrium in the blood serum.l Never- Verlag, Berlin and New York
d Gupta, R. K., and Moore, R. D. (1980) J. Biol. Chem.255, 3987–
theless, there are instances in which at least tempo-
3993
rary alterations in concentrations of both free Mg2+ e Garfinkel, L., and Garfinkel, D. (1984) Biochemistry23, 3547–
and H+ occur.m During rapid catabolism of carbo- 3552
hydrates the formation of lactic acid by glycolysis f Clarke, K., Kashiwaya, Y., King, M. T., Gates, D., Keon, C. A.,
Cross, H. R., Radda, G. K., and Veech, R. L. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.
leads to acidification of muscle cells, the pH falling
271, 21142–21150
from 7.3 to as low as 6.3. This drop in pH causes a g Levy, L. A., Murphy, E., Raju, B., and London, R. E. (1988)
large decrease in the extent of binding of Mg2+ to Biochemistry27, 4041–4048
molecules such as ATP and to a transient increase h Jung, D. W., Apel, L., and Brierley, G. P. (1990) Biochemistry29,
in [Mg2+]. Similarly, the release of bisphosphogly- 4121–4128
i Corkey, B. E., Duszynski, J., Rich, T. L., Matschinsky, B., and
cerate from hemoglobin upon oxygenation leads to
Williamson, J. R. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 2567–2574
a decreased concentration of free Mg2+ as the latter j Magneson, G. R., Puvathingal, J. M., and Ray, W. J., Jr. (1987)
coordinates with bisphosphoglycerate.n The 0.25 J. Biol. Chem.262, 11140–11148
mM [Mg2+] of aerobic red blood cells rises to 0.67 k Kwack, H., and Veech, R. L. (1992) Curr. Top. Cell. Regul.33,
185–207
mM under anaerobic conditions.d Such changes in l Veloso, D., Guynn, R. W., Oskarrson, M., and Veech, R. L. (1973)
the free Mg2+ concentrations will affect many equi- J. Biol. Chem.248, 4811–4819
libriumo and may be of significance in metabolic mPurich, D. L., and Fromm, H. J. (1972) Curr. Top. Cell. Regul.6,
131–167
regulation.
n Bunn, H. F., Ransil, B. J., and Chao, A. (1971) J. Biol. Chem.246,
The magnesium ion has a smaller radius than
5273–5279
Ca2+, a fact that may account for its more ready oCornell, N. W. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 6522–6527
entry into cells. Mg2+ can often be replaced by Mn2+ p Meli, J., and Bygrave, F. L. (1972) Biochem. J.128, 415–420
q Vink, R., McIntosh, T. K., and Faden, A. I. (1991) in Mg2+ and
with full activity for enzymes that require it. On the
Excitable Membranes (Strata, P., and Carbone, E., eds), Springer-
other hand, high concentrations of Ca2+ are often
Verlag, Berlin and New York
antagonistic to Mg2+. This antagonism is clearly r Petsko, G. A. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 538–540
seen in the effect of the two ions on irritability of
protozoa.p Both deficiency of magnesium and excess
of calcium in the surrounding medium cause in-

--- Page 303 ---

300 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
The standard electrode is connected to the experi-
C. Electrode Potentials and Gibbs Energy
mental electrode compartment by an electrolyte-filled
Changes for Oxidation–Reduction
bridge. In the experimental compartment the reaction
Reactions
represented by Eq. 6-62 occurs at the surface of another
electrode (often platinum). The voltage difference
We live under a blanket of the powerful oxidant O .
2 between the two electrodes is measured with a poten-
By cell respiration oxygen is reduced to H O, which is a
2 tiometer. The difference between the observed voltage
very poor reductant. Toward the other end of the scale
and that of the reference electrode gives the electrode
of oxidizing strength lies the very weak oxidant H+,
potential of the couple under investigation. It is im-
which some bacteria are able to convert to the strong
portant that the electrode reaction under study be
reductant H . The O –H O and H+–H couples define
2 2 2 2 strictly reversible. When the electromotive force (emf)
two biologically important oxidation–reduction (redox)
of the experimental cell is balanced with the potenti-
systems. Lying between these two systems are a host
ometer against an external voltage source, no current
of other pairs of metabolically important substances
flows through the cell. However, for a reversible
engaged in oxidation–reduction reactions within cells.
reaction a slight change in the applied voltage will
There are two common methods for expressing the
lead to current flow. The flow will be in either of the
oxidizing or reducing powers of redox couples in a
two directions, depending upon whether the applied
quantitative way. On the one hand, we can list values
of∆G for oxidation of the reduced form of a couple to voltage is raised or lowered.
Not all redox couples are reversible. This is espe-
the oxidized form by O . A compound with a large
value of –∆G for this oxi 2 dation will be a good reductant. cially true of organic compounds; for example, it is not
An example is H for which ∆G of combustion at pH 7 possible to determine readily the electrode potential
2 for an aldehyde–alcohol couple. In some cases, e.g.,
(Table 6-4) is – 237 kJ / mol. Poor reductants such as Fe2 +
are characterized by small values of ∆G of oxidation with enzymes, a readily reducible dye with a potential
(– 8.5 kJ mol–1 for 2 Fe2 +→ 2 Fe3 +). The Gibbs energies similar to that of the couple being measured can be
added. A list of suitable dyes has been described by
of oxidation of biological hydrogen carriers, discussed
Dutton.51 If the dye is able to rapidly exchange elec-
in Chapter 15, for the most part fall between those of
trons with the couple being studied, it is still possible
H and Fe2 +.
2 to measure the electrode potential directly. In many
A second way of expressing the same information
cases electrode potentials appearing in tables have
is to give electrode potentials (Table 6-8). Electrode
been calculated from Gibbs energy data. The student
potentials are also important in that their direct mea-
should be able to calculate many of the potentials in
surement sometimes provides an experimental
Table 6-8 from Gibbs energy data from Table 6-4. If
approach to the study of oxidation–reduction reac-
A, H+, and AH are all present at unit activity in the
tions within cells. To measure an electrode potential 2
experimental cell, the observed potential for the half-
it must be possible to reduce the oxidant of the couple
reaction will be the standard electrode potentialE°.
by flow of electrons (Eq. 6-62) from an electrode sur-
If the emf of the hypothetical cell with the standard
face, often of specially prepared platinum.
hydrogen electrode is positive when electron flow is
A + 2 H + + 2 e– → AH 2 (6-62) i p n o t t h en e t d ia i l r e o c f t i t o h n e c in o d u i p c l a e t e A d / b A y H th e i s a a rr l o so w t a in k e F n ig a . s 6 p -3 o , s t i h ti e ve
2
(and is often called a reduction potential). This is the
Equation 6-62 represents a reversible reaction taking
convention used in establishing Table 6-8, but poten-
place at a single electrode. A complete electrochemical
tials of exactly the opposite sign (oxidation potentials)
cell has two electrodes and the reaction occurring is
are used by some chemists. To avoid confusion in
the sum of two half-reactions. The electrode potential
reading it is best to be familiar with values of one
of a given half-reaction is obtained from the measured
or two potentials such as those of the O –H O and
electromotive force of a complete cell in which one 2 2
NAD+– NADH couples.
half-reaction is that of a standard reference electrode
When electrons flow in the external circuit the
of known potential. Figure 6-3 indicates schematically
maximum amount of work that can be done per mole
an experimental setup for measurement of an electrode
of electrochemical reaction (–∆G) is given by Eq. 6-63
potential. The standard hydrogen electrode consists of
platinum over which is bubbled hydrogen gas at one
∆G =nEF = nE x 96.487 kJ mol–1 V–1
atmosphere pressure. The electrode is immersed in a
=–nE x 23.061 kcal mol–1 V–1 (6-63)
solution containing hydrogen ions at unit activity (a +
H
= 1). The potential of such an electrode is convention-
where F equals the number of coulombs per mole
ally taken as zero. In practice it is more likely that the
of electrons (Avogadro’s number multiplied by the
reference electrode will be a calomel electrode or some
charge on the electron = 96,487 coulombs). E is mea-
other electrode that has been established experimentally
sured in volts and represents the difference of the
as reliable and whose potential is accurately known.

--- Page 304 ---

C. Electrode Potentials and Gibbs Energy Changes for Oxidation–Reduction Reactions 301
electrode potentials of the two half-cells. In the case RT [A][H+]2
E = E° + ln
of a cell using the standard hydrogen electrode, E is nF [AH ]
2
the electrode potential of the experimental couple.
If n = 2
The number of moles of electrons transferred in the
reaction equation (n) is usually 1 or 2 in biochemical [A][H+]2
E = E° + 0.0296log volts at25°C
reactions (2 for Eq. 6-62). [AH ]
2
Since the reactants and products need not be at (6-64)
unit activity, we must define the observed electrode
potentialE as a function of E° and the activities (con- In the biochemical literature values of the appar-
centrations) of A, AH , and H+ (Eq. 6-64). ent standard electrode potential at pH 7 (E°’) are
2
usually tabulated instead of values of E° (Table 6-8,
second column). Note that E°’ (pH 7) for the hydro-
gen electrode is not zero, as it is at pH 0, but – 0.414 V.
Values of E are related to E°’ by Eq. 6-64 with [H+]2
TABLE 6-8
Reduction Potentials of Some Biologically Important Systemsa,b
–∆G’ (pH 7)
E°’ (kJ mol–1)
(pH 7) for oxidation by O
2
Half-reaction E° (V) (V) (per 2 electrons)
O + 4 H+ + 4e–→ 2 H O + 1.229 + 0.815 0.0
2 2
Fe3+ + e–→ Fe2+ 0.771 0.771 8.5
NO – + 2 H+ + 2e–→ NO – + H O0.42176.0
3 2 2
Cytochrome f (Fe3+) + e–→ cytochrome f (Fe2+) 0.365 86.8
Fe (CN) 3– (ferricyanide) + e–→ Fe (CN) 4– 0.36 87.8
6 6
O + 2H+ + 2 e–→ H O 0.709 0.295 100.3
2 2 2
Cytochrome a (Fe3+) + e–→ Cytochrome a (Fe2+) 0.29 101.3
p-Quinone + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ hydroquinone 0.699 0.285 102.3
Cytochrome c (Fe 3+) + e–→ cytochrome c (Fe2+) 0.254 108.3
Adrenodoxin (Fe3+) + e–→ adrenodoxin (Fe2+) 0.15 128.3
Cytochrome b (Fe3+) + e–→ cytochrome b (Fe2+) 0.12 134.1
2 2
Ubiquinone + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ ubiquinone H 0.10 138.0
2
Cytochrome b (Fe3+) + e–→ cytochrome b (Fe2+) 0.075 142.8
Dehydroascorbic acid + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ ascorbic acid 0.058 146.1
Fumarate2– + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ succinate2– 0.031 151.3
Methylene blue + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ leucomethylene blue (colorless) 0.011 155.2
Crotonyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ butyryl-CoA – 0.015 160.2
Glutathione + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ 2-reduced glutathione ~ – 0.10 176.6
Oxaloacetate2– + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ malate2– – 0.166 189.3
Pyruvate– + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ lactate1– – 0.185 193.0
Acetaldehyde + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ ethanol – 0.197 195.3
Riboflavin + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ dihydroriboflavin – 0.208 197.4
Acetoacetyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e–→β-hydroxybutyryl-CoA – 0.238 (38ºC) 203.2
S + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ H S 0.14 – 0.274 210.2
2
Lipoic acid + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ dihydrolipoic acid – 0.29 213.2
NAD+ + H+ + 2 e–→ NADH – 0.113 – 0.32 219.0
NADP+ + H+ + 2 e–→ NADPH – 0.324 219.8
Ferredoxin (Fe3+) + e–→ ferredoxin (Fe2+) (Clostridia) – 0.413 237.0
2 H+ + 2 e–→ H 0 – 0.414 237.2
2
CO + H+ + 2 e–→ formate– – 0.42 (30ºC) 238.3
2
Ferredoxin (Fe3+) + e–→ ferredoxin (Fe2+) (spinach) – 0.432 240.6
a A compound with a more positive potential will oxidize the reduced form of a substance of lower potential with a standard free energy
change∆G° = –nF∆E° = –n∆Ε°× 96.49 kJ mol–1 where n is the number of electrons transferred from reductant to oxidant. The temperature
is 25°C unless otherwise indicated. E° refers to a standard state in which the hydrogen ion activity = 1; E°’ refers to a standard state of pH 7,
but in which all other activites are unity.
b The major source is Loach, P. A. (1976) in Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 3rd ed. Vol. I (Fasman, G. D. ed.),
pp. 122–130, CRC Press, Cleveland, Ohio.

--- Page 305 ---

302 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
E≡ V 2 –V 1 (pK a = 6.8) and HPO 2 2–. Likewise, the symbols AMP,
ADP, and ATP refer to mixtures of ionic forms and PP
V V i
1 2 refers to a mixture of the ions of pyrophosphoric acid.
(1 H at 2 m) G br e id l- g fi e lled D e th le i r r c o e t u c r t o g i n o h n f w l o o i f w re if A (p b K o a v = e 9 p . H 0) , 4 a .4 n d o n P l 2 y O H 7 4 2 – P c 2 O on 7 t 2 r – i b (p u K te a a = p 6 p .1 re ), c H ia P bl 2 y O t 7 o 3– PP i .
emf is positive
Standard
hydrogen
1. Storage and Utilization of Energy
electrode A
a +=1 +
H AH
Platinum 2 ATP is a thermodynamically unstable molecule
electrodes
with respect to hydrolysis to either ADP or AMP as
H 2H+ + 2e– A + 2H+ + 2e– 2H is indicated in the foregoing diagram. The standard
2 2 Gibbs energy of hydrolysis, ∆G‘, of ATP4– to ADP3– +
HPO 2– at pH 7 is – 34.5 kJ mol–1 and that of hydrolysis
4
of ADP3– to AMP2– + HPO 2– is – 36.3 kJ mol–1 at 25°C
Figure 6-3 Device for measurement of electrode potentials. 4
(Table 6-6). The exact value of these changes in Gibbs
The electrode reactions are indicated below each half-cell.
The maximum electrical work that can be done by such a cell energy depends on pH and on the concentration of
on its surroundings is –∆G = nEF, where E = V –V as measured Mg2 + as is detailed in Sections B, 4, 5. Rates of reaction
2 1
by a potentiometer. If A is reduced to AH by H , electrons of components may also depend upon metal ions.
2 2
will flow through an external circuit as indicated. A will be Magnesium ion is especially important and complexes
reduced in the right-hand cell. H 2 will be oxidized to H+ in such as MgATP2– are regarded as the true substrates
the left-hand cell. Protons will flow through the gel bridge
for many ATP-utilizing enzymes.
from left to right as one of the current carriers in the internal
The large Gibbs energy decreases upon hydrolysis
circuit.
(high group transfer potentials) enable cells to use ATP
and ADP as stores of readily available energy. Energy
from the adenylate system is used for many purposes
including biosynthesis, transport of ions and molecules
deleted from the numerator (since the term in log [H+] across membranes, and for doing mechanical work.
is contained in E°’). On the scale of E°’ (pH 7) the poten- The mechanisms by which this energy is utilized are
tial of the oxygen–water couple is 0.815 V, while that considered later (see Chapters 10, 12, and 17 – 19). The
of the NAD+– NADH couple is – 0.32 V. first step most often involves transfer of either the
terminalγ-phospho group of ATP to a site on a differ-
ent molecule or transfer of the entire AMP portion of
D. The Adenylate System the molecule onto another group. Thus the products
of cleavage of ATP in these energy-utilizing processes
may be either ADP + P or AMP + PP. In the latter
i i
case the pyrophosphate is usually hydrolyzed rapidly
NH2 Hydrolysis here
to two molecules of P by pyrophosphatases. This
yields AMP + i
N pyrophosphate (PPi) – process, too, serves an essential function in the adeny-
N O O
late system, because it removes a product of the initial
N
N 5 C ' H2 O P α O P β O P γ O O – A
of
T
t
P
h e
c l
r
e
e
a
a
v
c
a
ti
g
o
e
n
r
s
e
e
a
q
c
u
ti
e
o
n
n
c
,
e
s
i
h
n
i f
t
t
h
in
e
g
d
t
ir
h
e
e
c t
o
io
v
n
er
o
a
f
l l
t h
eq
e
u
p
i
r
l
o
ib
d
r
u
iu
c
m
ts.
– O O O – The adenylate system provides the major store
OH HO
of rapidly available energy but the whole family of
O Hydrolysis here yields
ADP + inorganic nucleoside triphosphates that are related to ATP in
Adenosine triphosphate
phosphate (Pi) structure have similar functions. These include gua-
ATP4–
nosine triphosphate (GTP), uridine triphosphate (UTP),
cytidine triphosphate (CTP), and deoxyribonucleotide
Of central importance to the energy metabolism triphosphates (Table 5-1). These compounds are formed
of all cells is the adenylate system which consists of by successive transfer to the nucleoside monophosphate
adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP), adenosine 5'-diphos- (GMP, UMP, CMP, dGMP, etc.) from two different mole-
phate (ADP), and adenosine 5'-monophosphate clues of ATP of two phospho groups. The resulting
(AMP) together with inorganic phosphate (P), compounds are used to provide energy for a variety of
i
pyrophosphate (PP), and magnesiumions. Remem- specific biosynthetic processes, including synthesis of
i
ber that P refers to the mixture of ionic forms of phos- RNA and DNA. Inorganic polyphosphates, linear
i
phoric acid present under experimental conditions. polymers of orthophosphate (P), are present in nearly
i
Between pH 4 and pH 10 this will be mainly H PO – all living forms.52– 54 Like ATP, they can also store
2 4

--- Page 306 ---

D. The Adenylate System 303
energy and in some organisms substitute for ATP in Measurements on a variety of cells and tissues show
certain enzymatic reactions. that the energy charge is usually between 0.75 and
0.90. Although it is easy to calculate its numerical
value, the energy charge cannot be used in chemical
2. Synthesis of ATP equations and the idea that the energy charge of a cell
plays a key role in regulation of metabolism has been
Thephosphate anhydride (pyrophosphate) challenged.58
linkages of ATP are generated by the joining of
ADP and inorganic phosphate by means of special
phosphorylation reactions. The most important of 3. Creatine Phosphate, an Energy Buffer
the latter occur in the photosynthetic membranes of
chloroplasts (photosynthetic phosphorylation) and Although ATP provides the immediate source of
in oxygen-utilizing membranes of bacteria and of energy for operating muscle, its concentration is only
mitochondria (oxidative phosphorylation). Con- about 5 mM. However, muscle contains, in addition,
version of AMP to ADP is accomplished by transfer of aphosphagen, an N-phospho derivative of a guanidin-
the terminal phospho group from an ATP molecule to ium compound. In mammalian muscle, the phosphagen
AMP in a reaction catalyzed by the extremely active iscreatine phosphate. Related compounds including
enzymeadenylate kinase (Chapter 12) which is found arginine phosphate serve in various invertebrates.
in all cells. The following equations indicate how one The group transfer potential (–∆G°’ of hydrolysis) for
of the special phosphorylation reactions must be used creatine phosphate is 43.1 kJ mol–1. Thus, the transfer
twice for the conversion of one molecule of AMP into of a phospho group from creatine phosphate to ADP to
one molecule of ATP. form ATP (Eq. 6-67) is spontaneous with ∆G‘ = – 8.6 kJ
mol–1. Recent values under a variety of conditions
have been reported by Taugue and Dobson.59 Creatine
Adenylate phosphate, which is present at a concentration of 20
kinase mM, provides a reserve of high-energy phospho groups
AMP ADP ATP
and keeps the adenylate system of muscle buffered at
P i H 2 O a high value of R p .
Phosphorylation system
– –
ATP ADP COO COO
+ +
P
i
H
2
O CH2 NH2
–
CH2 NH2
N C O ADP ATP N C
(6-65)
–
H3C N P O H3C NH2
H O
Various measures of the phosphorylating potential Creatine phosphate Creatine
of the adenylate system within cells have been pro- ∆G' = –8.6 kJ mol–1 (6-67)
posed. One measure is the product [ATP] / [ADP][P],
i
which will be called the phosphorylation state ratio
orR in this book. It is also sometimes called the “phos-
p
phorylation potential.” This ratio directly affects the 4. Phosphorus-31 NMR
Gibbs energy of hydrolysis of ATP, as is shown by Eq.
6-29. The value of R may be as high as 104 to 105 M–1 A spectacular development is the ability to observe
p
within cells55 adding – 22.8 kJ mol–1 to ∆G of hydrolysis components of the adenylate system as well as phos-
of ATP. Another quantity that is sometimes cited is the phocreatine and other phosphate esters in living cells
“energy charge,” the mole fraction of adenylic acid by31P NMR.60– 61a Spectra can be recorded on suspen-
“charged” by conversion to ATP. ADP is regarded as sions of cells60 or of mitochondria,62 on individual
“half-charged.”56,57 excised muscles (Fig. 6-4),63,64 or on perfused organs65,66
including beating rat hearts and surgically exposed
[ATP] + 1[ADP] animal organs.61,61a Metabolism can be observed in
Energy charge = 2 human erythrocytes67 and even in human limbs, liver,
[ATP] + [ADP] + [AMP] hearts, and brain.68– 70 The method can play a valuable
(6-66)
role in understanding human diseases.63,67,70 As is
seen in Fig. 6-4, each phosphorus atom of ATP gives
The energy charge varies from 0 if only AMP is a distinct resonance. The area of the Pγ peak provides
present to 1.0 if all of the AMP is converted to ATP. a direct measure of the ATP concentration, and

--- Page 307 ---

304 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
phosphocreatine (creatine-P) and P can be estimated
i E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria
in a similar way. Knowing the concentrations of ATP,
P, and creatine-P, the amount of ADP present, usually
i The binding of small molecules to larger ones is
too low to be estimated by NMR, may be calculated.61
basic to most biological phenomena. Substrates bind
Barnacle muscle contains, instead of phosphocreatine,
to enzymes and hormones bind to receptors. Metal
a high concentration of phosphoarginine which has
ions bind to ATP, to other small molecules, and to
also been measured by NMR.71
metalloproteins. Hydrogen ions bind to amino acids,
peptides, nucleotides, and most macromolecules. In
this section we will consider ways of describing math-
Creatine-P
ematically the equilibria involved.
The strength of bonding between two particles can
be expressed as a formation constant (or association
ATP
constant)K. Consider the binding of a molecule X to
f
a second molecule P, which may be a protein or some
P
Pα Pγ i
sugar other macromolecule. If there is on the surface of P
Pβ
phosphates only one single binding site for X, the process can be
described by Eq. 6-68 and the equilibrim constant K
f
by Eq. 6-69.
20 10 0 -10 X + P → PX (6-68)
Chemical shift (ppm)
K = [PX] / [P][X] (6-69)
f
Figure 6-4 Phosphorus-31 NMR spectrum of an excised The units for K are liters per mole (M–1). The constant
f
rat muscle (vastus lateralis) in Ringer solution at 15°C. The K is a direct measure of the strength of the binding:
f
spectrum represents the accumulation of 400 scans. From The higher the constant, the stronger the interaction.
P. J. Seeley et al.64
This fact can be expressed in an alternative way by
giving the standard Gibbs energy change (∆G°) for the
reaction (Eq. 6-70). The more negative ∆G °, the stronger
f
the binding.
Usually no ADP can be seen in NMR spectra,
although there may be about 0.5 mM ADP according ∆G°=–RT ln K = – 2.303RT log K
to chemical analysis of rapidly frozen tissues. It has f =– 5.708 lo f g K kJ mol–1 at 25 f °C (6-70)
been concluded that most ADP is bound to proteins. f
In muscle the proteins myosin and actin (Chapter 20)
To avoid confusion, it is important to realize that the
hold most of the ADP leaving only about 0.02 mM
frequently used dissociation constants (K ) are recip-
free.62,72 The same conclusion has been reached on d
rocal association constants (Eq. 6-71). The use of
the basis of other evidence.55
If a perfused heart in an NMR spectrometer is
K = 1 / K (6-71)
deprived of oxygen, the level of phosphocreatine d f
drops rapidly and that of P increases while that of ATP
i association constants and of dissociation constants is
remains relatively constant until the phosphocreatine
firmly entrenched in different parts of the chemical
is gone. Then it too falls and becomes undetectable
literature; be sure to keep them straight. Dissociation
after 17 min.72 Similar changes occur when a tourniquet
constants are customarily used to describe acid–base
is placed on a human arm in the NMR spectrometer.
chemistry, while formation constants are more often
Study of the rate and extent of recovery of the adeny-
employed to describe complexes with metal ions or
late system when oxygen is readmitted is helping to
associations of macromolecules (Section C). However,
provide a better means of protecting kidneys and
both types of equilibria can be described using either
other organs during transplantation operations. Diag-
formation constants or dissociation constants.
nosis of circulatory ailments in human limbs by 31P
Logarithms of formation constants, which are
NMR may soon be routine. Use of radiofrequency
proportional to the Gibbs energies of association, are
coils placed on the body surface allows monitoring
often tabulated. The logarithms of formation constants
of the adenylate system in the heart, brain, and other
and pK values of dissociation constants are identical
tissues deep within the body.69,73 Changes of concen- a
(Eq. 6-72) and are a measure of the standard
tration in the adenylate system and of phosphocreatine
can be monitored very rapidly and evenly throughout
logK = – log K = pK
the cardiac heartbeat cycle.74 f d d
(6-72)

--- Page 308 ---

E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria 305
Gibbs energy decrease in the association reaction. The Either of the two protons might dissociate first as
difference in ∆G° corresponding to a change of one the pH is raised (Eq. 6-75). However, the two micro-
unit in log K or pK is – 5.7 kJ mol–1, a handy number scopic dissociation constants pK * and pK * are dis-
f d A B
to remember. tinctly different. The result is that at 25°C in the neutral
(monoprotonated) form 80% of the molecules carry a
proton on the N, while the other 20% are protonated
1. Effects of pH on Equilibria on the less basic – O–. Notice that the subscripts a and b
used in this discussion do not refer to acidic and basic but
Compounds that contain several acidic or basic to the individual dissociation steps shown in Eq. 6-75.
groups can exist in a number of different ionic forms, Microscopic constants will always be indicated with
H A, H A, H A, HA, A, etc., as is indicated in the asterisks in this discussion.
n n–1 2
following equation, which is identical in form to Eq. 3-3. The two monoprotonated forms of pyridoxine are
the tautomeric pair shown in Eq. 6-75 and whose con-
centrations are related by the tautomeric ratio,R =
K K K
1 n+1 n
H A H A H A HA A [neutral form]/[dipolar ion], a pH-independent equilibrium
n n–1 2
(6-73) constantwith a value of 0.204/0.796 = 0.26 at 25°C.75
Evaluation of microscopic constants for dissociation
The dissociation constants K - - - - K for a multi- of protons from compounds containing non-identical
1 n
protic acid H A are defined as stepwise or macroscopic groups depends upon measurement of the tautomeric
n
constants (also called molecular constants). For some ratio, or ratios if more than two binding sites are present.
compounds, e.g. alanine, the pK values are far apart In the case of pyridoxine, a spectrophotometric method
a
(pK and pK are 2.4 and 9.8, respectively). The macro- was used to estimate R.
1 2
scopic constants can be assigned specifically, K to the
1
carboxyl group and K to the protonated amino group.
2 CH2OH
At the isoelectric pH of 6.1 the alanine exists almost
–
entirely as the dipolar ion. However, for compounds HOH2C O
in which the macroscopic pK values are closer togeth-
a
er, they cannot be assigned to specific groups. We will
consider some specific examples in the next section. N+ CH3
H
pKA* = 5.04
pKC* = 8.79
CH2OH CH2OH
2. Microscopic Dissociation Constants and
–
Tautomerization HOH2C OH HOH2C O
R = 0.26
A microscopic constant applies to a single site.
Consider the dissociation of a simple carboxylic acid: N
+
CH3 N CH3
H
R— COOH R— COO – + H + (6-74) pKB* = 5.62 CH2OH pKD* = 8.21
The dissociation constant is about 1.7 x 10–5 and pK
a
= HOH2C OH
4.8. Since there is only one proton, the observed disso-
ciation constant is also the microscopic dissociation
constant. Now consider the cation of pyridoxine pK1 = 4.94 N CH3 pK2 = 8.89
which has two dissociable protons bound to distinctly
(6-75)
different sites, the phenolic oxygen and the ring nitrogen.
To calculate microscopic constants from stepwise
constants and tautomeric ratios, consider Eq. 6-76 in
CH2OH which [HP] and [HP] are the concentrations of the
A B
two tautomers and K is the first stoichiometric or
HOH2C OH pKA* = 5.04 1
KA* = 7.9 × 10–6 macroscopic dissociation constant for the diprotonated
species H P.
2
N
+
CH3
H pKB* = 5.62 ([HP] + [HP] )[H+]
Pyridoxine KB* = 2.04 × 10–6 K 1 = A B = K A ∗ + K B ∗
[H P]
(vitamin B6) 2
pK = 4.94; K = 1.15 x 10–5 = 9.1 x 10–6+ 2.4 x 10–6
1 1
(6-76)

--- Page 309 ---

306 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
We see that K is just the sum of the two microscopic to measure the tautomeric ratios R.77 In favorable cases
1
constantsK * and K * for dissociation of H P to the measurements of spectra of one kind or another allow
A B 2
pair of tautomers HP(A) and HP(B). In a similar their evaluation. However, because tautomerism may
fashion it can be shown that the second stoichiometric be extremely rapid, NMR spectra will often show only
constantK is related to the microscopic constants K * one peak for a proton present in a mixture of tautomers.
2 C
andK * for dissociation of HP(A) and HP(B) to form P As was pointed out in Chapter 2, tautomerization
D
(Eq. 6-77). ratios are often affected strongly by changes in solvent.
Tautomerism among monoprotonated forms of cysteine,
1 / K = 1 / K * + 1 / K * (6-77) glutathione, and histidine (Eq. 2-6) has received con-
2 C D
siderable attention by biochemists77– 79 as has tautom-
Since the tautomeric ratio R equals [HP] / [HP] , Eqs. erism in binding of protons and other small ligands to
B A
6-76 and 6-77 can be rearranged to Eqs. 6-78 to 6-81. proteins.80,81 For cysteine,78,79 for which the following
These allow the evaluation of all of the microscopic species coexist in the alkaline pH range, the distribution
constants from the two stoichiometric constants K of the various ionic species including the two tautomers
1
andK plus the tautomeric ratio R. is shown in Fig. 6-5. A similar situation is met in the
2
small protein thioredoxin (Box 15-C) which has a buried
pK * = pK + log (l + R) (6-78) aspartate carboxylate that interacts with a nearby
A 1
cysteine– SH group,82 in papain where –SH and imi-
pK * = pK *– log R (6-79) dazole groups interact (Fig. 12-15),83 and in carbohy-
B A
drases where two or more carboxyl and carboxylate
pK * = pK – log (l + R) (6-80) side chains interact (Chapter 12).84
C 2
pK * = pK * + log R (6-81)
D C
CH2S– CH2SH
For pyridoxine pK 1 and pK 2 were determined –OOC C and –OOC C
spectrophotometrically as 4.94 and 8.89. These values, NH3 + NH2
together with that of R given above, were used to H H
estimate the microscopic constants that are given in
Eq. 6-74.75 Notice that the microscopic constants of
Eq. 6-74 are not all independent; if any three of the five
equilibrium constants are known the other two can be
calculated readily. In describing and measuring such 1.0
equilibria it is desirable to select one pathway of disso-
ciation, e.g., H P→ HP(A) → P, and to relate the species
2
HP(B) to it via the pH-independent constant R. 0.8
Often more complex situations arise in which
additional tautomers or other forms arise via pH- 0.6 8.53 10.36
independent reactions. These can all be related back
to the reference ionic species by additional ratios R,
which may describe equilibria for tautomerization, 0.4
hydration, isomerization, etc. (Eq. 6-82).76 In the case
illustrated, only one of the ratios, namely R or R , is
2 3 0.2
likely to be a tautomerization constant because, as a
rule, H P and P will not have tautomers. Equations 8.86 10.03
2
analogous to Eqs. 6-76 to 6-82 can be written easily to 0
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
deriveK *,K * and any other microscopic constants
C D
pH
desired from the stoichiometric constants plus the ratios
R to R . While it is easy to describe tautomerism by
1 4
equations such as Eqs. 6-76 and 6-82 it is often difficult
K* K*
a b
HP(A) HP(A) P(A)
2
R R R R
1 2 3 4
HP(B) HP(B) HP(C) P(B)
2
(6-82)
noitartnecnoc
lanoitcarF
SH
–
Total – S
–OOC NH3 +
S–
S–
–OOC NH3 +
–OOC NH2
SH
–OOC NH2
Figure 6-5 Distribution of various ionic species of cysteine
as a function of pH. The function in each ionic and tauto-
meric form is plotted. Microscopic pK values are given
a
numerically and macroscopic pK ’s are indicated by the
a
vertical lines. From Dixon and Tipton.79

--- Page 310 ---

E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria 307
Because it is usually difficult to measure tautomeric
3. The Binding of Metal Ions
ratios, dissociation constants are frequently assumed
identical to those of compounds in which one of the
Equilibria in the formation of complex ions with
acidic groups has been modified by methylation or
metals are treated exactly as is the binding of small
esterification or in some other manner to prevent
molecules and ions to macromolecules.87– 89 Stepwise
dissociation of a proton. For example, the cation of
constants are defined for the formation of complexes
1-methyluracil can be dissociated to the two tautomers
containing one, two, or more ligands L bound to a
shown in Eq. 6-83.
central metal ion M. The binding constants K ‘s are
f
usually referred to as β’s as in Eq. 6-84.
O
β = K β = K K ... K (6-84)
1 f1 n f 1 f 2 f n
H
N
Many important questions can be asked about the
A
binding of metal ions within living cells. For example,
O N What fraction of a given metal ion is free and what
OH KA*
CH3
fraction is bound to organic molecules? To what ligands
is a metal bound? Since many metal ions are toxic in
H + excess, it is clear that homeostatic mechanisms must
N R
exist. How do such mechanisms sense the free metal
ion activity within cells? How does the body get rid of
H
O N O unwanted metal ions? Answers to all these questions
depend upon the quantitative differences in the binding
CH3 KB*
of metal ions to the variety of potential binding sites
N
found within a cell.
B
Table 6-9 gives formation constants for 1:1 complexes
O N of several metal ions and a number of inorganic as well
as organic ligands.89 Only the values of log K are
CH3 (6-83) 1
given when a series of stepwise constants have been
established. However, in many cases two or more
ligands can bind to the same metal ion. Thus for
The apparent pK values were estimated for dissociation
a cupric ion and ammonia there are four constants.
of the following two dimethylated cations which
resemble that of Eq. 6-83.
Cu2 + + NH log K = 4.0, 3.3, 2.7, 2.0
3 i
They are all separated by more than the “statistical
H
distance,” which in this case is less than the 0.6 loga-
O OCH3
rithmic units for two equivalent binding sites (see
H3C + H + Chapter 7, Section A,2). Thus, the second ligand binds
N pKa = –3.25 N pKa = +0.65 less tightly than the first and anticooperativity in
≈ p pKKAA** ≈ p pKKBA** binding of successive ligands is observed. Most metal
O N O N ions will also bind two or three successive amino acids.
In the case of copper, whose preferred coordination
CH3 CH3 number is four, two ligands may be bound. Again, a
distinct anticooperativity is evident in the spread of
the two constants.
It can reasonably be assumed that these pK values
a
approximate pK * and pK * as indicated. Thus, applying
A B Cu2 + + alanine log K = 8.1, 6.8
Eq. 6-85, log R≈– 3.25 – 0.65 + 3.90. This result indi- i
cates that tautomer A of Eq. 6-89 is overwhelmingly
Factors affecting the strength of binding of a
predominant in water.85,86 It also suggests that, within
metal in a complex. More basic ligands tend to bind
experimental error, the pK for 1-methyluracil will
a metal ions more tightly just as they do protons. How-
equal pK *, namely, – 3.25. In fact, it is close to this
A ever, the strength of bonding to metal ions to a group
(– 3.40).85
is more nearly proportional to the nucleophilic char-
acter (Chapter 12) which is only partly determined by
basicity to protons.

--- Page 311 ---

308 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
BOX 6-C LINEAR GIBBS ENERGY RELATIONSHIPS
Organic functional groups exert characteristic changes in the dissociation constant of benzoic acid
electronic effects upon other groups to which they define the substituent constantsσ, which are used
are attached. The quantitative expression of such in the Hammett equation and are given in the fol-
effects can sometimes be correlated by linear Gibbs lowing table. In this equation we use the symbol
energy relationships. The best known of these is the pK to represent the pK of the unsubstituted parent
0 a
Hammett equation, which deals with the trans- compound and pK to represent the pK of the sub-
a
mission of electronic effects across a benzene or stituted molecule.
other aromatic ring. Consider the acid dissociation
constants of three classes of compounds: For substituted benzoic acids: pK – pK = σ
0
The decreases in the pK of phenylacetic acid
X O X O
occasioned by replacement of the meta-hydrogen
C CH2 C
with Cl or NO are – 0.18 and – 0.34, respectively,
2
OH OH
substantially less than for the benzoic acids. On the
Benzoic acids Phenylacetic other hand, for the phenols the differences amount
to– 0.90 and – 1.53, much greater than for the benzoic
X
acids. The Hammett equation asserts that for reac-
OH
tions such as the dissociation of protons from phe-
nylacetic acids or from phenols, the changes in ∆G
Phenol occasioned by meta substitutions are proportional
to the σ values, i.e., to the changes in ∆G for the
The values of pK given in the following table have standard reaction – dissociation of a proton from
a
been observed for the parent compounds and for benzoic acid.b– d
themeta-chloro- and the meta-nitro-substituted
compounds. Substituent Constants for Use in
the Hammett and Taft Equationsb-d
Values of pK for Unsubstituted and Substituted
Benzoic Acid a s, Phenylacetic Acids, and Phenols Substituent σ m σ p σ p – σ p + σ* (Taft)
– O– – 0.71 – 0.52
Meta Benzoic Phenylacetic
– NH – 0.16 – 0.66 –1.11 0.62
substituent acids* acids Phenols 2
– OH 0.121 – 0.37 – 0.85 1.34
– OCH 0.115 – 0.27 – 0.78 1.81
— H (parent compound) 4.202 4.31 9.92 3
– CH – 0.069 – 0.17 – 0.31 0.00
— Cl 3.837 4.13 9.02 3
– NH – COCH 0.21 – 0.01 – 0.25
— NO 3.460 3.97 8.39 3
2 – H 0 0 0 0.49
– CHOH 0.08 0.08 0.56
* F ac o i r d a s n s e in e d B e o p lt e o n n d a en n t d s F e l t e o m f i p n K g a . a v T al h u e e s v a fo lu r e s s u o b f s t σ it c u a te lc d u b la e t n ed zo f i r c om – – S C O OO 2 – – – 0 0 . . 1 0 0 5 0 0 . . 0 0 0 9 0 0 . .1 11 2 –1.06
them are slightly different from those given here. 3
– SH 0.25 0.15 0.019 1.68
– CHCl 0.18 1.05
2
Since pK a is the negative logarithm of a dissoci- – CONH 2 0.28 0.36
– F 0.337 0.06 0.02 – 0.07
ation constant, it follows from Eq. 6-30 that values
– I 0.352 0.18 0.135
of pK are directly proportional to values of ∆G° for
a – Cl 0.373 0.227 0.114
dissociation of protons. In the Hammett treatment – CHO 0.36 0.22 0.37
differences in pK a values, rather than differences in – COCH 3 0.376 0.502 0.85
∆G°, are considered. When a hydrogen atom in the – COOH 0.37 0.45 0.42 2.08
– COOCH 0.39 0.31 0.49
meta position of benzoic acid is replaced by the 3
– SONH 0.55 0.62 0.61
2 2
electron-withdrawing Cl or NO , pK is lowered, – CN 0.56 0.66 0.89 0.66
2 a
i.e., the basicity of the conjugate base of the acid is – C ≡ CH 2.18
– CF 0.43 0.54 0.61 2.61
decreased. The decrease in pK amounts to – 0.365 3
a – CCl 2.65
form-chlorobenzoic acid and – 0.742 for m-nitroben- 3
– NO 0.710 0.778 1.25 0.790 4.0
2
zoic acid. The Hammett treatment asserts that these – NH+ 1.13 1.70 3.76
3
changes in pK are a measure of the electron-with-
a N (pyridine) 0.73 0.83
drawing power of the meta substituent.b Thus, the
NH+(pyridine) 2.18 2.42 4.0
nitro group is about twice as strong as the chloro
group in this respect. The numerical values of these

--- Page 312 ---

E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria 309
BOX 6-C (continued)
log (K/K ) = pK – pK = ρσ ents such as OH which are able to interact across
0 0
The Hammett equation the ring by resonance. Thus σ for the OH group is
p
– 0.37, while σ + is – 0.85.e For the methoxyl group
p
The proportionality constant ρ, which also appears ( OCH )σ = – 0.27, σ + = – 0.78, and σ = + 0.12.
3 p p m
in the equation, is a measure of the sensitivity of the The use of different kinds of substituent con-
reaction to the presence of electron-withdrawing or stants complicates the application of the Hammett
electron-donating substituents in the ring. For ben- equation and over 20 different sets of σ values have
zoic acid, ρ is taken as 1.00. Using the data from the been proposed. A simplification is the representation
accompanying table together with many other data, of substituent constants as linear combinations of
an average value of ρ = 0.49 has been found for two terms, one representing “field” or “inductive”
phenylacetic acids. Likewise, ρ = 2.23 for phenols, effects and the other resonance effects.e,f
andρ = 5.7 for dissociation of protons from substi- Many other linear Gibbs energy relationships
tuted pyridinium ions. The sensitivity to substitu- have been proposed; for example, the acid strengths
ent changes is highest (highest ρ) in the latter case of aliphatic compounds can be correlated using the
where proton dissociation is directly from an atom “Taft polar substituent constants”σ*.
in the ring and is lowest when the basic center is
removed farthest from the ring (phenylacetic acid). log (K/K ) = ρ*σ*
0
Through knowledge of the value of ρ for a
given reaction, it is possible to predict the effect of For example, the following give good approximations
a substituent on pK using the tabulated values of σ. of pK values.d
a a
In many cases the effects are additive for multisub-
stituted compounds. for R  COOH pK = 4.66 – 1.62 σ*
a
for R  CH  COOH pK = 5.16 – 0.73 σ*
2 a
pK = pK –ρΣσ
a 0
While the examples chosen here concern only
Since substituents in o,m, and p positions have quan- dissociation of protons, the Hammett equation has
titatively different influences, different substituent a much broader application. Equilibria for other
constantsσ are defined for each position. Moreover, types of reactions can be treated. Furthermore,
since special complications arise from ortho inter- since rates of reactions are related to Gibbs energies
actions, it is customary to tabulate σ values only for of activation, many rate constants can be correlated.
meta and para positions. These are designated σ For these purposes the Hammett equation can be
m
andσ . Apparent σ values for ortho substituents are written in the more general form in which k may be
p
also available.d An additional complication is that either an equilibrium constant or a rate constant.b
certain reactions are unusually sensitive to para The subscript j denotes the reaction under consider-
substituents that are able to interact by resonance ation and i the substituent influencing the reaction.
directly across the ring. An example is the acid
dissociation of phenols. While σ for the nitro logk – log k = ρ σ
p ij 0j i j
group is ordinarily 0.778, a correct prediction of the
effect of the p-nitro group on dissociation of phenol An example of a linear Gibbs energy relationship
is given only if σ is taken as 1.25. This higher σ value that is widely used in discussing mechanisms of
p
is designated σ –. The resonance in the phenolate enzymatic reactions is the Brönsted plot (Eqs. 9-90
p
anion giving rise to this enhanced effect of the nitro and 9-91).
group may be indicated as follows:
a Bolton, P. D., Fleming, K. A., and Hall, F. M. (1972) J. Am. Chem.
Soc.94, 1033 –1034
O –O b Hammett, L. P. (1970) Physical Organic Chemistry, 2nd ed.,
– – p. 356, McGraw-Hill, New York
N O N O
c Wells, P. R. (1963) Chem. Rev.63, 171– 219
O O d Barlin, G. B., and Perrin, D. D. (1966) Q. Rev., Chem. Soc.20,
75–101
e Swain, C. G., and Lupton, E. C., Jr. (1968) J. Am. Chem. Soc.90,
(Here the curved arrows represent the direction of
4328– 4337
flow of electrons needed to convert from the one f Hansen, L. D., and Hepler, L. G. (1972) Can. J. Chem.50, 1030 –
resonance structure to the other.) For similar rea- 1035
sons, some reactions require the use of special σ +
p
constants for strongly electron-donating substitu-

--- Page 313 ---

310 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
TABLE 6-9 One of the most important
Logarithms of Binding Constants for Some 1:1 Metal factors in determining the affinity
Complexes at 25°Ca of organic molecules for metal ions
is the chelate effect. The term
Ligand H + Mg2+ Ca2+ Mn2+ Cu2+ Zn2+ chelate (pronounced “keel-ate”) is
from a Greek word meaning crab’s
Hydroxide, OH– 14.0 2.5 1.4 6.5 4.4 claw. It refers to the greatly enhanced
Acetate– 4.7 ~0.65 0.5 ~1.0 2.0 1.5 binding of metal ions resulting from
Lactate– 3.8 ~1.0 ~1.2 1.3 3.0 2.2
the presence of two or more com-
Succinate2– 5.2 1.2 1.2 3.3 2
plexing groups in the same organic
NH 9.3 ~0 –0.2 0.8 4.0 2.4
3 molecule. The chelate effect has been
Ethylenediamine 10.2 0.4 2.8 10.8 6.0
Glycine– 9.6 2.2 1.4* 2.8 8.2 5.0 exploited by nature in the design of
Glycine amide 8.1 ~1.5 5.3 3.3 many important metal-binding
Alanine– 9.7 2.0* 1.2* 3.0* 8.1 4.6 molecules, including porphyrins
Aspartate2– 9.6 2.4 1.6 8.6 5.8 (Fig. 16-5), chlorophyll (Fig. 23-20),
Glycylglycine– 8.1 1.2* 2.2* 5.5 3.4 the siderophores (Fig. 16-1), and
Pyridine 5.2 0.1 2.5 1 metal-binding proteins. Structures
Imidazole 7.5 1.6 4.6 2.6
of two chelate complexes are shown
Histidine 9.1 3.3 10.2 6.6
here. Notice from Table 6-9 that
Adenine 9.8 8.9 6.4
many simple compounds, such as
Citrate3– 5.6 3.2 4.8 3.5 ~4 4.7
EDTA 4– b 10.2 8.8 10.6 13.8 18.7 16.4 theα-amino acids and citric acid,
EGTA4– c 9.4 5.3 10.9 12.2 17.6 12.6 often form strong chelate complexes
ATP 4– 6.5 4.2 3.8 4.8 6.1 4.9 with metal ions.
a All values are for log K. Included is the highest pK for protons. Data for amino acids
1 a
are from Martell, A.E. and Smith, R.M. (1974, 1975) Critical Stability Constants, 3 vols., O
Plenum, New York. Others are from Sillén, L.G. and Martell, A.E. (1964) Stability Constants
of Metal–Ion Complexes, Spec. Publ. No. 17, Chemical Society, London. Most constants
for amino acids are for ionic strength 0.1. Some (designated by asterisks) are for zero C
ionic strength. The values shown for other ligands have been selected from a large
number reported without examination of the original literature. – O CH 2
b Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), a chelating agent widely used by biochemists
O
for
– OOC H2C CH2 COO – C O – N
N CH2 CH2 N Co3+ H H
HC
– OOC H2C CH2 COO – 2 N N H
H
H H
preventing unwanted reactions of metal ions. The high formation constants ensure – O CH
2
that most metal ions remain bound to the EDTA.
c EGTA is similar to EDTA but has the group – CH 2 – CH 2 – O – CH 2 – CH 2 – O – CH 2 – CH 2 – C
joining the two nitrogen atoms in place of – CH – CH – of EDTA. Note that EGTA has
2 2
a higher selectivity for Ca2+ compared to Mg2+ than does EDTA.
O
The pH of the medium always has a strong effect O
on metal binding. Competition with protons means
that metal complexes tend to be of weak stability at
C
low pH. Anions of carboxylic acids are completely
protonated below a pH of ~ 4 and a metal can combine – O O CH 2
only by displacing a proton. However, at pH 7 or C CH
2
higher, there is no competition from protons. On the
–
O N
other hand, in the case of ethylenediamine, whose pK a CH 2
values are 10.2 and 7.5 (Table 6-9), protons are very Co3+
strong competitors at pH 7, even with a strongly com- – O N CH 2
plexing metal ion such as Cu2 +. At high pH there may
be competition between the ligand and hydroxyl ion. C C – O CH
At pH 7 about one-half of Cu2 + dissolved in water is O H 2 2
complexed as CuOH+. Aluminum forms soluble C
complexes Al(OH)2 +, Al(OH) +, and Al(OH) + (Box 12-F).
2 4 O

--- Page 314 ---

E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria 311
How properties of the metal ion affect chelation. array of octahedral geometry. An alternative tetra-
Thecharge, the ionic radius (Table 6-10), the degree hedral arrangement of four molecules of water around
of hydration, and the geometry of orbitals used in the ion has been suggested for Li+ and Na+.90 In either
covalent bonding between metal and chelating groups case additional solvent molecules are held in a looser
all affect the formation constants of a complex. Multi- secondary sphere. For instance, electrochemical trans-
charged ions form stronger complexes than do mono- ference experiments indicate a total of ~ 16 molecules
valent ions, which have a lower charge density. of water around Na+ and ~ 10 around K+.
Among ions of a given charge type (e.g., Na+ vs To form a chelate complex a metal ion must usually
K+; Mg2 + vs Ca2 +), the smaller ions are more strongly lose most of its hydration sphere. For this reason, the
hydrated than are the larger ions in which the charge larger, less hydrated metal ions often bind more strongly
is dispersed over a greater surface area. Most cations, than do the smaller, more hydrated ones. For example,
except for the large ones, have a primary hydration Ca2 + binds to EDTA more tightly than does Mg2 + (Table
sphere containing about six molecules of water. Four 6-9). However, the reverse order may be observed with
molecules of water can be placed around the ion in negatively charged ligands such as OH– in which the
one plane as shown in the following drawing of water charge in highly concentrated. The same is true for
molecules coordinated to Mg2 +. ATP4–, which binds Mg2 + more tightly than Ca2 + (Table
6-9; Section B,5).
Differences in both the charge density and the
hydration of ions determine the Hofmeister series
H H (lyotropic series).91
O
H H Ba2 + > Ca2 + > Mg2 + > Li+ > Na+ > K+ > Cs+ > NH +
4
O O
H H This was originally defined as the order of effectiveness
O in precipitating colloids or protein molecules. The ions
H H to the left are less hydrated than those to the right. A
similar series can be defined for anions. The following,
a well-known sequence of the stabilities of complexes
of metals of the first transition series, applies to many
One additional water molecule can be bound above
different types of complexes including those of the
and another below to provide six molecules in an
α-amino acids, as is shown in Fig. 6-11.
Mn2 + < Fe2 + < Co2 + < Ni2 + < Cu2 + > Zn2 +
TABLE 6-10
Ionic Radii in Nanometers for Some Metallic and Simple electrostatic theory based upon differences
Nonmetallic Ionsa in the ionization potentials or electronegativity of the
ions would predict a gradual monotonic increase in
Mn2+ 0.080 chelate stability from manganese to zinc. In fact, with
nitrogen-containing ligands Cu2 + usually forms by far
Li+ 0.060 Fe2+ 0.076 H– 0.21
the strongest complexes. Cobalt, nickel, and iron ions
Na+ 0.095 Co2+ 0.074 F– 0.136
also show an enhanced tendency to bind to nitrogen-
K+ 0.133 Ni2+ 0.069 Br– 0.195
containing ligands. The explanation is thought to lie
Rb+ 0.148 Cu2+ 0.072b I– 0.216 in the ability of the transition metals to supply d orbitals
Zn2+ 0.074 which can participate in covalent bond formation by
Cd2+ 0.097 accepting electrons from the ligands. Iron, copper,
Be2+ 0.031 and cobalt are often located in the centers of nitrogen-
Mg2+ 0.065 Al3+ 0.050 containing structures such as the heme of our blood
(iron, Fig. 16-5) and vitamin B (Box 16-B).
Ca2+ 0.099 Fe3+ 0.064 12
Sr2+ 0.113 Mo4+ 0.070
Metal binding sites in cells. Functional groups
Ba2+ 0.135 Mo6+ 0.062
that participate in metal binding include negatively
charged carboxylate –COO–, thiolate –S–, phenolate –O–,
a Radii are calculated according to the method of Pauling and
and phosphate–as well as uncharged amino, imida-
are taken from Cotton, F.A. and Wilkinson, G. (1972) Advanced
Inorganic Chemistry, 3rd ed. Wiley (Interscience), New York . zole,– OH, and the polarizable carbonyl groups of
b From Ahrens, L. H. as given by Sienko, M. J. and Plane, R. A. peptide and amide side chains. To which of these
(1963)Physical Inorganic Chemistry, pp. 68 – 69. Benjamin, New ligands will specific ions tend to bind? The alkali
York.
metal ions Na+ and K+ are mostly free within cells

--- Page 315 ---

312 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
(Box 5-A) but are in part bound to defined sites in (Box 12-F), which tends to occupy a fraction of the
proteins. Both Ca2 + and Mg2+ tend to remain partially transferrin sites in blood, although it binds much more
free and complexed with the numerous phosphate and weakly than does Fe. Several other binding sites for
carboxylate ions present in cells. However, they may transition metals are pictured in Chapter 16.
find very specific tight binding sites such as that of
Mg2 + in chlorophyll (Fig. 23-20). The heavier metal
ions, including those of zinc, copper, iron, and other 12
transition metals, usually bind to nitrogen or sulfur
atoms.92 For example, small peptides react with Cu2 + 10
to form chelate complexes in which the peptide carbonyl
8
oxygen binds to the metal (Eq. 6-85, step a).93,94 By
losing a proton the peptide NH can sometimes also
6
function as a metal ligand (Eq. 6-85, step b).
4
2
–
OOC O
0
C
Cu(H2O)n
–
25 26 27 28 29 30
HN HN O
O O
a OH2
Cu2+
NH2 N OH2
Glycylglycine anion H2
b H+
O
C
–
O
O
N
OH2
Cu+
N
OH2
H2 (6-85)
In many metalloproteins the metals are found
inprosthetic groups such as the porphyrin of heme
proteins and the molybdopterin of molybdenum con-
taining enzymes (Fig. 16-31). Very often clusters of
carboxylate, imidazole, and other groups are used to
create binding sites. In carboxypeptidase A (Fig. 12-16)
two imidazole groups and one carboxylate of a gluta-
mate site chain hold Zn2 +. In carbonic anhydrases,
three imidazoles hold a zinc ion (Fig. 13-1), while in
one kind of superoxide dismutase both Zn2 + and Cu2 +
are bound in adjacent locations with six imidazoles and
one carboxylate group participating in the binding. In
contrast, Zn2 + and Cd2 + are bound in metallothioneins
by clusters of thiol groups from cysteine side chains
(Box 6-E). While Fe2 + is bound by from four to six
nitrogen atoms in heme proteins, it is also found attached
to oxygen atoms of tyrosine side chains, as is shown
for a transferrin in Fig. 16-2. One imidazole, one
carboxylate group, and a bicarbonate ion also bind to
the iron. This site is also quite satisfactory for Al3+
KgoL f His–
Gly–
ATP4–
Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn
Figure 6-6 Logarithms of formation constants of metal
complexes of histidine, glycine, and ATP plotted against the
atomic number of elements from manganese to zinc.
Calcium-binding proteins. Much information
about the functions of transition metal ions is given in
Chapter 16. Here and in Box 6-D we consider calcium
ions which, because of their broad distribution and
range of functions, will be discussed in virtually every
chapter of this book. The concentration of Ca2+ varies
greatly in different parts of a cell and also with time
(Box 6-D). Many calcium-binding proteins participate
in mediating the physiological effects of these changes
and also in buffering the calcium ion concentration.
These include a large family of helix–loop–helix or
EF-hand proteins.95– 97 The first of these to be discov-
ered was parvalbumin, a 108-residue protein from
carp muscle.96,98-99a The structure of the pair of metal-
binding sites of the protein is shown in Fig. 6-7.
Each consists of two helices that are almost per-
pendicular and connected by a loop that forms the
Ca2+-binding site. In the site at the left side in Fig. 6-7A
the Ca2+ is bound by four carboxylate groups from
aspartate and glutamate side chains, a hydroxyl group
of serine, and the residue 57 carbonyl oxygen of the
peptide backbone.99b The same peptide group is hydro-
gen bonded to a carbonyl group of another segment of
peptide chain near the second Ca2 + site (to the right in
Fig. 6-7A). This site contains four carboxylate ions, one
of which coordinates the Ca2+ with both oxygen atoms,
and another peptide carbonyl group. By attaching
itself to several different side chain groups, the metal
ion can induce a substantial change in conformation
from that present in the calcium-free protein.97

--- Page 316 ---

E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria 313
A B
Figure 6-7 (A)Part of the 108-residue peptide chain of the calcium-binding protein of carp muscle. The two calcium-binding
loops are shown together with a hydrogen bond between them. (B) A view of the intricate network of hydrogen bonds linking
two segments of the peptide chain in the interior of the molecule. Note especially the bonding of the guanidinium group from
arginine-75 to the carboxylate of glutamic acid 81 and to the peptide carbonyl of residue 18. Note that the carboxylate group
also interacts with two different peptide NH groups. From Kretsinger and Nockolds.98
Kretzinger, who discovered the structure of parval- signaling functions. The best known of these is the
bumin, named the Ca2+-binding helix–loop–helix motif 148-residue calmodulin, which regulates many enzymes
anEF-hand because it is formed by helices E and F and and cellular processes (Box 6-D; also Chapter 11).108,109
resembles a hand with pointer finger extended along The protein, which is present in all eukaryotes, has a
the E helix and the thumb in the direction of the F helix, conserved sequence that forms two pairs of helix–loop–
the flexed middle finger forming the Ca2+-binding helix Ca2 +-binding sites that are separated by a long
loop. Helices C and D also form a hand. The resulting helix (Fig. 6-8).108,110,111 Two of the sites bind Ca2 +
pair of hands can be visualized better at the top of the tightly and cooperatively,110,112 with K values in the
d
calmodulin structure in Fig. 4-8. The EF-hand motif micromolar range. Calmodulin from almost all species
has been identified in over 1000 proteins.100 contains the modified amino acid ε-N-trimethyllysine
Parvalbumins, which are also found in other verte- at position 115. However, octopus calmodulin has
brates, are high-affinity Ca2+-buffers.99 Additional ordinary lysine at this position and seems to function
calcium buffers with EF-hand structures are the vitamin well.108 Calmodulin’s controlling functions result from
D-inducedcalbindins. One 9-kDa calbindin is found Ca2+-induced conformational changes that modify
in mammalian intestinal tissue and in skin. It has its affinity for other proteins whose activity may be
two helix–loop–helix Ca2+-binding sites of differing increased or decreased by bound calmodulin.109,113
affinity101,102 that presumably function in the absorption A protein with a similar dumbell shape and structure
of calcium. A 28-kDa vitamin D-dependent protein istroponin C of skeletal muscles.114,115 Troponin C
from chicken intestine contains six similar Ca2 +-binding binds to a complex of proteins that assemble on the
loops.97,103 thin actin filaments of muscle fibers and control con-
Another group of calcium-buffering and storage traction in response to changes in the calcium ion con-
proteins with remarkable Ca2+-binding properties are centration (Chapter 19).116 Other proteins that contain
the 40 - to 45-kDa calsequestrins, which are found in EF-hand motifs and are therefore responsive to Ca2+
the lumen of the ER (sarcoplasmic reticulum) of skeletal includespectrin of cell membranes,117clathrin light
muscle. Calsequestrins are not typical EF-hand proteins chains from coated vesicles,118,119 the extracellular
but have a high content of glutamate and aspartate. osteonectin of bones and teeth,120 and a birch pollen
They bind ~ 50 Ca2+ per molecule of protein with K antigen.121 Another group of 17 or more small S100
d
~ 1 mM.104,105 Similar proteins called calreticulins EF-hand proteins play a variety of other roles.122–123a
are found in most non-muscle cells.106,107 One of these, which has a high affinity for Zn2+, has
A very large number of EF-hand proteins have been named psoriasin because of its 5-fold or greater

--- Page 317 ---

314 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
BOX 6-D CALCIUM
The essentiality of calcium ions to living things O O
O O
was recognized in the last century by S. Ringer, who – –
O O
showed that ~1 µM Ca2+ was needed to maintain O – O –
the beat in a perfused frog heart. Later, calcium was
N Ca2+ N
shown essential for repair of ruptures in the cell
O O
membrane of the protozoan Stentorand for the
motion of amebas. The animals quickly died in its
absence. The role in the frog heart was traced to
O
transmission of the nerve impulse from the nerve to hν N
the heart muscle. More recently it has been recog-
O
nized that Ca2+ is required for blood clotting and is Ca2+ –
COO
involved in triggering many responses by cells. Cal- (free)
cium ions are also an integral part of many enzymes HN
and have structural roles in proteins, carbohydrate –
COO
– –
gels, and biological membranes. COO COO
Like Na+, the calcium ion is actively excluded
ON
from cells. Indeed, 99% of the calcium in the human
N
body is present in the bones.a– d The blood serum
concentration of Ca2+ is ~3 mM, of which ~1.5 mM O
O
is free. The rest is chelated by proteins, carbohydrates,
and other materials. Within cells the concentration
O
of free Ca2+ is < 1 µM and typically ~0.05 – 0.2 µM
for unexcited cells.d– f However, the total intracellular Calcium chelate compound that releases free calcium ion within
Ca2+ is considerably higher and may be in excess of cells upon irradiation with ultraviolet light.p,q
1 mM. Approximate total concentrations are: red
blood cells, 20 µM; liver, 1.6 mM; and heart, 4 mM. may sometimes be sequestered in microvesicles
A gradient in [Ca2+] of 103 or more is maintained (calciosomes) or in intracellular granulesc,r,s in
across membranes by the calcium ion pump (Chapter which the [Ca2+] is ~ 0.5 – 1 mM but may reach 5 – 10
8). The action of this pump is counteracted by a very mM.f Many regulatory mechanisms exist. For
slow diffusion of the external Ca2+ back through the example,calcitonin and parathyroid hormone
membrane via an Na+– Ca2+ exchange into the cells.g interact with vitamin D and its metabolites in the
Free Ca2+ lacks spectroscopic properties suitable small intestine, bones, and kidneys to control the
for its direct measurement at the low concentrations deposition of calcium in bones, a topic considered
present in cells. However, it can be measured indi- in Box 22-C.
rectly by the use of chelating agents that are relatively A characteristic function of Ca2+ in living things
specific for Ca2+ and which have a measurable prop- isactivation of various metabolic processes. This
erty that changes upon calcium-binding. The fluo- occurs when a sudden change in permeability of
rescent photoprotein aequorin (Chapter 23), which the plasma membrane or in the membranes of the
may be injected into cells or synthesized within cells endoplasmic reticulum (ER) allows Ca2+ to diffuse
from transferred genes is often employed.h,i Various into the cytoplasm. For example, during the con-
synthetic Ca2+ indicators also fluoresce brilliantly traction of muscle, the Ca2+ concentration rises from
upon chelation.j– n Others contain fluorine or a suit- ~ 0.1 to ~10 µM as a result of release from storage in
ably placed atom of 13C which changes its NMR the calciosomes of the ER. The calcium ions bind to
chemical shift upon chelation with Ca2+.o These troponin C initiating muscle contraction (Chapter
compounds may be carried into cells in the form of 19).t The ER membranes of muscle are rich in a Ca2+
esters which pass through membranes but are then pump proteinu,v (Fig. 8-26), and in a series of calcium-
hydrolyzed leaving the indicators trapped in the binding proteins such as calsequestrin (see text).f
cytoplasm.j Chelate compounds that bind Ca2+ Their combined action soon restores the [Ca2+] to
within cells and release it rapidly upon irradiation the original low value.
with ultraviolet light have also been developed.p,q Skeletal muscle is activated by nerve impulses
Consistent with their role in signaling, calcium which induce Ca2+ release through the action of a
ions are unevenly distributed within cells. Mito- voltage sensor, a protein also known as the dihy-
chondria, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, and nuclei dropyridine receptor,w,x together with a calcium
may all take up calcium ions. Cytoplasmic Ca2+ release channel known as the ryanodine

--- Page 318 ---

E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria 315
BOX 6-D (continued)
receptor.w,y – aa Inositol trisphosphate (Fig. 11-9), 60
cyclic ADP-ribose, as well as pH changesbb are
involved in controlling these channels,cc,dd a topic
90
discussed in Chapter 11, E. The release of Ca2+ can
be visualized using high-speed digital imaging
microscopy and fluorescent [Ca2+] indicators.ee,ff 120
Release of Ca2+ stored in sea urchin eggs is induced
by cyclic ADP-ribose and by nicotinic acid adenine 150
dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP+, Eq. 15-16).dd,gg
In a similar manner, when a nerve impulse
180
reaches a neuron ending (synapse) calcium ions are
released into the cytoplasm and provide the trigger
that causes stored neurotransmitters to be dumped
into the narrow synaptic cleft that separates the
endings of two communicating neurons.y,hh The
released neurotransmitter initiates an impulse in the
“postsynaptic neuron” usually again with an inflow
of Ca2+(see Chapter 30).e Hormones and various
other compounds often stimulate the flow of calcium
ions into cells.ii There Ca2+ regulates enzymesjj,kk or other covalent modification of proteins. Such
(Chapter 11), microtubules, clathrin of coated vesicles modification may alter the affinity for Ca2+, allow-
(Chapter 8), K+ channels in nerve membranes, and ing the latter to either bind and induce a conforma-
events within mitochondria,ll,mm in the ER,op and in the tional change or remain unbound,rr without a change
nucleus.nn,oo A substantial fraction of these responses in [Ca2+]. Nevertheless, the free Ca2+ concentration
are mediated by calcium-binding regulatory within cells can change greatly and very rapidly.
proteins. Among the most prominent of these is For example, the oscillatory change in intracellular
calmodulin (Fig. 6-8), which, upon binding of Ca2+ [Ca2+] shown above was observed in pancreatic
activates a host of metabolic processespp as indicat- insulin-secreting β cells responding to stimulation
ed in the following scheme, which is modified from by the agonist carbamoylcholine. The free [Ca2+]
that of Cheung.qq was evaluated from fluorescence measurements
In many cases metabolic control by Ca2+ is mod- using the Ca2+ indicator dye fura 2 (From Prentki
ulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation et alss). Oscillations in [Ca2+] have been observed
under many circumstances.ff,oo,tt – ww
These are of particular interest
Adenylate
because of the possible relation-
cyclase
Myosin light chain kinase Phosphodiesterase ship to the initiation of oscillatory
Smooth muscle activation Phospholipase A nerve conduction (Chapter 30).uu
2
Released Ca2+ often appears
Phosphorylase kinase Ca2+ ATPase (calcium pump)
to move across cells in waves
and sometimes to be released
NO synthase Calmodulin Microtubule disassembly
as“puffs” or “sparks.”ee,ff,oo
Guanylate cyclase Membrane phosphorylation
Ca2+-dependent protein kinase IRS-1 (insulin signalling)
Calcineurin (phosphatase) Neurotransmitter release
NAD
kinase
a Bianchi, C. P. (1968) Cell Ca++, Appleton, New York d Carafoli, E. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 395–433
b Means, A. R., ed. (1994) Calcium Regulation of Cellular Function, e Ghosh, A., and Greenberg, M. E. (1995) Science268, 239–247
Lippincott-Raven, Hagerstown, Maryland f Meldolesi, J., and Pozzan, T. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.23,
c Volpe, P., Krause, K.-H., Hashimoto, S., Zorzato, F., Pozzan, T., 10–14
Meldolesi, J., and Lew, D. P. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. g Khananshvili, D. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 13764–13769
85, 1091–1095 (continued)
stinu
yrartibra
ni
ecnecseroulF
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Time (s)
Calcium oscillations observed with six cultured pancreatic β cells
after a single infusion of 0.2 mM carbamoylcholine. The fluores-
cence intensity of the Ca2+ indicator dye fura 2, with excitation at
380 nm, was recorded versus time. From Pretki et al.ss

--- Page 319 ---

316 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
BOX 6-D (continued)
h Rizzuto, R., Simpson, A. W. M., Brini, M., and Pozzan, T. cc Lee, M. G., Xu, X., Zeng, W., Diaz, J., Wojcikiewicz, R. J. H.,
(1992)Nature (London)358, 325–327 Kuo, T. H., Wuytack, F., Racymaekers, L., and Muallem, S.
i Knight, M. R., Campbell, A. K., Smith, S. M., and Trewavas, (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 15765–15770
A. J. (1991) Nature (London)352, 524–526 dd Graeff, R. M., Franco, L., De Flora, A., and Lee, H. C. (1998)
j Tsien, R. Y., Pozzan, T., and Rink, T. J. (1984) Trends Biochem. J. Biol. Chem.273, 118–125
Sci.9, 263–266 ee Isenberg, G., Etter, E. F., Wendt-Gallitelli, M.-F., Schiefer, A.,
k Davies, P. L., and Hew, C. L. (1990) FASEB J.4, 2460–2468 Carrington, W. A., Tuft, R. A., and Fay, F. S. (1996) Proc. Natl.
l Ganz, M. B., Rasmussen, J., Bollag, W. B., and Rasmussen, H. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 5413–5418
(1990)FASEB J.4, 1638–1644 ff Horne, J. H., and Meyer, T. (1997) Science276, 1690–1693
m Lloyd, Q. P., Kuhn, M. A., and Gay, C. V. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. gg Lee, H. C., and Aarhus, R. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 20378–
270, 22445–22451 20383
n Etter, E., Minta, A., Poenie, M., and Fay, F. (1996) Proc. Natl. hh Miller, R. J. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 1403–1406
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 5368–5373 ii Quitterer, U., Schröder, C., Müller-Esterl, W., and Rehm, H.
o Robitaille, P.-M. L., and Jiang, Z. (1992) Biochemistry31, 12585– (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 1992–1999
12591 jj Suzuki, K. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 103–105
p Ellis-Davies, G. C. R., and Kaplan, J. H. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. kk Martin, B. L., and Graves, D. J. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 14545–
Sci. U.S.A.91, 187–191 14550
q Ellis-Davies, G. C. R., Kaplan, J. H., and Barsotti, R. J. (1996) ll Moudy, A. M., Handran, S. D., Goldberg, M. P., Ruffin, N.,
Biophys. J.70, 1006–1016 Karl, I., Kranz-Eble, P., DeVivo, D. C., and Rothman, S. M.
r Burgoyne, R. D., and Cheek, T. R. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci. (1995)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 729–733
16, 319–320 mmKasumi, T., Tsumuraya, Y., Brewer, C. F., Kersters-Hilderson,
s Golovina, V. A., and Blaustein, M. P. (1997) Science275, 1643– H., Claeyssens, M., and Hehre, E. J. (1987) Biochemistry26,
1648 3010–3016
t Gagné, S. M., Li, M. X., and Sykes, B. D. (1997) Biochemistry36, nn Santella, L., and Carafoli, E. (1997) FASEB J.11, 1091–1109
4386–4392 oo Lipp, P., Thomas, D., Berridge, M. J., and Bootman, M. D.
u MacLennan, D. H., Rice, W. J., and Green, N. M. (1997) J. Biol. (1997)EMBO J.16, 7166–7173
Chem.272, 28815–28818 op Corbett, E. F., and Michalak, M. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25,
v Yonekura, K., Stokes, D. L., Sasabe, H., and Toyoshima, C. 307–311
(1997)Biophys. J.72, 997–1005 pp Ikura, M., Clore, G. M., Gronenborn, A. M., Zhu, G., Klee, C.
w Yano, M., El-Hayek, R., and Ikemoto, N. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. B., and Bax, A. (1992) Science256, 632–638
270, 3017–3021 qq Cheung, W. Y. (1980) Science207, 19–27
x Mitterdorfer, J., Sinnegger, M. J., Grabner, M., Striessnig, J., rr Geisow, M. J. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 120–121
and Glossmann, H. (1995) Biochemistry34, 9350–9355 ss Prentki, M., Glennon, M. C., Thomas, A. P., Morris, R. L.,
y McPherson, P. S., and Campbell, K. P. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, Matschinsky, F. M., and Corkey, B. E. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263,
13765–13768 11044–11047
z Sakube, Y., Ando, H., and Kagawa, H. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.267, tt Tang, Y., and Othmer, H. G. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
849–864 92, 7869–7873
aa Zorzato, F., Fujii, J., Otsu, K., Phillips, M., Green, N. M., Lai, F. uu Putney, J. W., Jr. (1998) Science279, 191–192
A., Meissner, G., and MacLennan, D. H. (1990) J. Biol. Chem. vv Berridge, M. J. (1997) Nature (London)386, 759–760
265, 2244–2256 wwHajnóczky, G., and Thomas, A. P. (1997) EMBO J.16, 3533–3543
bb Donoso, P., Beltrán, M., and Hidalgo, C. (1996) Biochemistry35,
13419–13425
increase above the normal level in keratinocytes of galactose-binding protein of bacterial transport and
patients with the skin disease psoriasis.123b chemotaxis (Fig. 4-18)130 and α-lactalbumin of milk.
Calcium ions are often involved in holding nega- Althoughα-lactalbumin does not contain the helix–
tively charged groups together, for example, in the loop–helix pattern, its Ca2 +-binding site does consist
binding of proteins to phospholipid membranes. Among of three carboxylate groups and two backbone carbonyl
these membrane-associated proteins are the vitamin K- oxygen atoms.131 The α-amylases, thermolysin, and
dependent proteins, all of which contain several residues staphylococcal nuclease (Chapter 12), and the lectin
of the chelating amino acid γ-carboxyglutamate (Chapter favin (Fig. 2-15) all contain bound Ca2+. Calcium ions
15) at their calcium-binding sites.124,125 Many of these also bind to anionic groups in carbohydrates, e.g., to the
are involved in the clotting of blood (Chapter 12). Some sulfate groups in carageenin gels (Chapter 4) where they
of the membrane-binding proteins called annexins provide structural stability.
(Chapter 8) are also Ca2+-dependent ion channels.126,127
Other Ca2+-requiring lipid-binding proteins include the
lipocortins, calpactins, and calelectrins.128 Cadherins
bind Ca2+ and help provide cohesion between cells.129
Many proteins contain bound Ca2+ in precisely defined
sites where it plays a structural role. These include the

--- Page 320 ---

E. Complex Biochemical Equilibria 317
Figure 6-8 Stereoscopic backbone
trace of a 148-residue recombinant
calmodulin. The two helix–turn–
helix (EF-hand) loops and their bound
Ca2+ (as concentric circles) are at the
top and the two near the C terminus
are at the bottom. The long central
helix, seen in this crystal structure,
may undergo conformational changes
during the functioning of this Ca2+-
sensing molecule.132 From Chatto-
padhyayaet al.111 Courtesy of F. A.
Quiocho.
BOX 6-E METALLOTHIONEINS
If animals ingest excessive
amounts of Zn(II), Cd (II), Hg(II),
or Cu(I) their livers and kidneys
accumulate these metals as com-
plexes of proteins called metallo-
thioneins.a– e In mammals at least
three related genes encode these
metal-binding proteins. The best
known, metallothionein II, has
a highly conserved 61-residue
sequence containing 20 cysteine
residues and no aromatic residues.
The protein is organized into two
domains, each able to bind a cluster
of metal ions via thiolate side chains.
The three-dimensional structure of
rat liver metallothionein containing
five Cd2+ and two Zn2+ ions is shown
in the accompanying stereoscopic
diagram.f The 61 alpha carbons,
Metallothionein containing bound Cd2+ and Zn2+. From Robbins et al.f
the beta carbon and sulfur atoms
(green) of cysteine residues and
the bound metal ions are indicated.
The N-terminal domain (residues 1– 29) contains one five of which bridge between pairs of metals. All of
Cd2+ and two Zn2 and nine cysteine sulfurs which the metal ions are tetrahedrally coordinated. The
bind the metal ions. Three of the sulfur atoms form polypeptide chains of metallothioneins consist pre-
bridges between pairs of metals. The second cluster dominantly of beta turns.g Important techniques in
contains four Cd2+ held by 11 cysteine sulfur atoms, the study of these proteins include 113Cd NMR,h,i

--- Page 321 ---

318 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
BOX 6-E METALLOTHIONEINS (continued)
spectroscopic methods,j,k and X-ray absorption.l e Hamer, D. H. (1986) Ann. Rev. Biochem.55, 913–951
Transcription of metallothionein genes is induced f Robbins, A. H., McRee, D. E., Williamson, M., Collett, S. A.,
Xuong, N. H., Furey, W. F., Wang, B. C., and Stout, C. D. (1991)
by metal ions, and toxic metals such as Cd and Hg
J. Mol. Biol.221, 1269–1293
accumulate as metallothionein complexes, suggesting g Pande, J., Pande, C., Gilg, D., Vasák, M., Callender, R., and
that one function is to protect against metal toxicity.m Kägi, J. H. R. (1986) Biochemistry25, 5526–5532
However, synthesis is also induced by glucocorticoid h Cismowski, M. J., Narula, S. S., Armitage, I. M., Chernaik, M.
hormones,n and accumulation of a high concentration L., and Huang, P. C. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 24390–24397
i Vasák, M., Hawkes, G. E., Nicholson, J. K., and Sadler, P. J.
of copper and zinc in fetal metallothionein suggests a
(1985)Biochemistry24, 740–747
role in storage of these essential metals.c Another metal j Willner, H., Vasák, M., and Kägi, J. H. R. (1987) Biochemistry26,
that binds to metallothioneins is Au(I),o which is widely 6287–6292
used in thiolate salts as a chemotherapeutic agent for k Lu, W., and Stillman, M. J. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 3291–
rheumatoid arthritis. 3299
l George, G. N., Byrd, J., and Winge, D. R. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.
Metallothioneins are also found in insects, lower
263, 8199–8203
invertebrates, and even in bacteria.i,p Nevertheless,
mSadhu, C., and Gehamu, L. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 2679–2684
there are other metal-binding proteins.q,r For example, n Karin, M., Haslinger, A., Holtgreve, H., Richards, R. I., Krauter,
albacore tuna contain a 66-kDa glycoprotein that con- P., Westphal, H. M., and Beato, M. (1984) Nature (London)308,
tains eight mole percent histidine and binds three Zn2+, 513–519
each by a cluster of three His.s Plants and fungi contain o Laib, J. E., Shaw, C. F., III, Petering, D. H., Eidsness, M. K.,
Elder, R. C., and Garvey, J. S. (1985) Biochemistry24, 1977–1986
phytochelins, peptides consisting largely of repeated
p Freedman, J. H., Slice, L. W., Dixon, D., Fire, A., and Rubin, C. S.
γ-glutamylcysteine units.a,t,u These appear to protect (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 2554–2564
plants against toxicity of cadmium in the same manner q Waalkes, M. P., and Peratoni, A. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 13097–
as do the metallothioneins in our bodies. 13103
r Willuhn, J., Schmitt-Wrede, H. P., Greven, H., and Wunderlich,
F. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 24688–24691
a Mehra, R. K., Garey, J. R., Butt, T. R., Gray, W. R., and Winge, s Dyke, B., Hegenauer, J., Saltman, P., and Laurs, R. M. (1987)
D. R. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 19747–19753 Biochemistry26, 3228–3234
b Kägi, J. H. R., and Kojima, Y., eds. (1987) Metallothionein II, t Reese, R. N., and Winge, D. R. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 12832–
Birkhäuser, Basel, Berlin 12835
c Fischer, E. H., and Davie, E. W. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. u Clemens, S., Kim, E. J., Neumann, D., and Schroeder, J. I. (1999)
U.S.A.95, 3333 – 3334 EMBO J.18, 3325– 3333
d Kägi, J. H. R., and Schäffer, A. (1988) Biochemistry27, 8509–8515

--- Page 322 ---

319
References
1. Lewis, G. N., and Randall, M. (1961) 32. Katchalsky, A., and Curran, P. F. (1965) Non- 62. Hutson, S. M., Williams, G. D., Berkich, D. A.,
Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical equilibrium Thermodynamics in Biophysics, LaNoue, K. F., and Briggs, R. W. (1992)
Substances, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Massachu- Biochemistry31, 1322–1330
2. Mahan, B. H. (1963) Elementary Chemical setts 63. Burt, C. T., Glonek, T., and Bárány, M. (1977)
Thermodynamics, Benjamin, New York 33. Prigogine, I. (1967) Introduction to Thermody- Science195, 145–149
3. Everdell, M. H. (1965) Introduction to Chemical namics of Irreversible Processes, 3rd ed., Wiley, 64. Seeley, P. J., Sehr, P. A., Gadian, D. G., Garlick,
Thermodynamics, Norton, New York New York P. B., and Radda, G. K. (1977) in NMR in
4. Dickerson, R. E. (1969) Molecular Thermody- 34. Coveney, P. V. (1988) Nature (London)333, Biology (Dwek, R. A., Campbell, I. D.,
namics, Benjamin, New York 409–415 Richards, R. E., and Williams, R. J. P., eds), pp.
5. Jones, M. N., ed. (1988) Biochemical Thermody- 35. Wilson, D. F. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 247–275, Academic Press, London
namics, 2nd ed., Elsevier, Amsterdam 275–278 65. Masson, S., and Quistorff, B. (1992)
6. Hinz, H.-J., ed. (1986) Thermodynamic Data for 36. Westerhoff, H. V. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, Biochemistry31, 7488 – 7493
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Springer- 275–279 66. Jeffrey, F. M., Storey, C. J., Nunnally, R. L., and
Verlag, Berlin 37. Guynn, R. W., and Veech, R. L. (1973) J. Biol. Malloy, C. R. (1989) Biochemistry28, 5323–5326
7. Gutfreund, H., and Edsall, J. T. (1983) Chem.248, 6966–6972 67. Kagimoto, T., Higaki, T., Nagata, K., Morino, Y.,
Biothermo-dynamics, Wiley, New York 38. Alberty, R. A. (1969) J. Biol. Chem.244, 3290– and Takatsuki, K. (1989)NMR in Biomedicine2,
8. Harold, F. M. (1986) The Vital Force: A Study of 3302 93–97
Bioenergetics, Freeman, San Francisco, 39. Phillips, R. C., George, P., and Rutman, R. J. 68. Park, J. H., Brown, R. L., Park, C. R., Cohn,
California (1969)J. Biol. Chem.244, 3330–3342 M., and Chance, B. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
9. Garby, L., and Larsen, P. S. (1995) Bioenerget- 40. George, P., Phillips, R. C., and Rutman, R. J. U.S.A.85, 8780–8784
ics; Its Thermodynamic Foundations, Cambridge (1963)Biochemistry2, 508–512 69. Radda, G. K. (1992) FASEB J.6, 3032–3038
Univ. Press, London and New York 41. Purich, D. L., and Fromm, H. J. (1972) Curr. 70. Radda, G. K. (1986) Science233, 640–645
10. Jou, D., and Llebot, J. E., eds. (1990) Top. Cell. Regul.6, 131–167 71. Burt, C. T. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 404–
Introduction to the Thermodynamics of Biological 42. Jencks, W. P. (1968) in Handbook of Biochemistry 406
Processes, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, (Sober, H. A., ed), pp. J-148, CRC, Cleveland, 72. Grove, T. H., Ackerman, J. J. H., Radda, G. K.,
New Jersey Ohio and Bore, P. J. (1980) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
10a. Wadsö, I. (1985) Eur. J. Biochem.153, 429–434 43. Bassham, J. A., and Krause, G. H. (1969) U.S.A.77, 299–302
11. Sturtevant, J. M. (1971) in Techniques of Biochim. Biophys. Acta.189, 207–221 73. Bottomley, P. A. (1985) Science229, 769–772
Chemistry, Vol. I, Part V (Weissberger, A., ed), 44. Rosing, J., and Slater, E. C. (1972) Biochim. 74. Fossel, E. T., Morgan, H. E., and Ingwall, J. S.
pp. 347–425, Wiley, New York Biophys. Acta.267, 275–290 (1980)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 3654–
12. Brown, H. D., ed. (1969) Biochemical 45. Alberty, R. A. (1992) Biophysical Chem.42, 117– 3658
Microcalorimetry, Academic Press, New York 131 75. Metzler, D. E., Harris, C. M., Johnson, R. J.,
13. Peters, K. S., and Snyder, G. J. (1988) Science 46. Alberty, R. A., and Cornish-Bowden, A. (1993) Siano, D. B., and Thomson, J. A. (1973)
241, 1053–1057 Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 288–291 Biochemistry12, 5377–5392
14. White, A., Handler, P., and Smith, E. L. (1968) 47. Alberty, R. A., and Goldberg, R. N. (1992) 76. Johnson, R. J., and Metzler, D. E. (1970)
Principles of Biochemistry, 4th ed., McGraw- Biochemistry31, 10610–10615 Methods Enzymol.18, 433–471
Hill, New York (pp. 291–301) 48. Alberty, R. A. (1994) Pure & Appl. Chem.66, 77. Dixon, H. B. F. (1992) Essays in Biochemistry27,
15. Mosteller, R. D. (1988) N. Engl. J. Med.318, 1641–1666 161–176
1130 49. Stokes, G. B. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 78. Vander Jagt, D. L., Hansen, L. D., Lewis, E. A.,
16. Donata, K., and Hegsted, D. M. (1985) Proc. 422–424 and Han, L. B. (1972) Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 4866–4870 50. Mavrovouniotis, M. L. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 153, 55–61
17. Ben-Naim, A. (1992) Statistical Thermodynam- 266, 14440–14445 79. Dixon, H. B. F., and Tipton, K. F. (1973)
ics for Chemists and Biochemists, Plenum, New 51. Dutton, P. L. (1971) Biochim. Biophys. Acta.226, Biochem. J.133, 837–842
York 63–80 80. Klotz, I. M., and Hunston, D. L. (1975) J. Biol.
18. Donovan, J. W. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 52. Pepin, C. A., and Wood, H. G. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.250, 3001–3009
340–344 Chem.261, 4476–4480 81. Weber, G. (1975) Adv. Prot. Chem.29, 1–83
19. Tanaka, A., Flanagan, J., and Sturtevant, J. M. 53. Wood, H. G., and Clark, J. E. (1988) Ann. Rev. 82. Chivers, P. T., Prehoda, K. E., Volkman, B. F.,
(1993)Protein Sci.2, 567–576 Biochem.57, 235–260 Kim, B.-M., Markley, J. L., and Raines, R. T.
20. Pace, C. N., and Laurents, D. V. (1989) 54. Crooke, E., Akiyama, M., Rao, N. N., and (1997)Biochemistry36, 14985–14991
Biochemistry28, 2520–2525 Kornberg, A. (1994) 83. Johnson, F. A., Lewis, S. D., and Shafer, J. A.
21. Interunion Commission on J. Biol. Chem.269, 6290–6295 (1981)Biochemistry20, 44–48
Biothermodynamics. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.251, 55. Veech, R. L., Lawson, J. W. R., Cornell, N. W., 84. McIntosh, L. P., Hand, G., Johnson, P. E.,
6879–6885 and Krebs, H. A. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, Joshi, M. D., Körner, M., Plesniak, L. A., Ziser,
22. Phillips, R. C., George, P., and Rutman, R. J. 6538–6547 L., Wakarchuk, W. W., and Withers, S. G.
(1963)Biochemistry2, 501–508 56. Swedes, J. S., Sedo, R. J., and Atkinson, D. E. (1996)Biochemistry35, 9958–9966
23. Liu, Y., and Sturtevant, J. M. (1995) Protein Sci. (1975)J. Biol. Chem.250, 6930–6938 85. Katritzky, A. R., and Waring, A. (1962) J.
4, 2559–2561 57. Chapman, A. G., Fall, L., and Atkinson, D. E. Chem. Soc., 1540–1548
24. Halling, P. J. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, (1971)J. Bacteriol.108, 1072–1086 86. Katritzky, A. R., and Karelson, M. (1991) J.
317–318 58. Purich, D. L., and Fromm, H. J. (1973) J. Biol. Am. Chem. Soc.113, 1561–1566
25. Örstan, A. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 137– Chem.248, 461–466 87. Bjerrum, J. (1941) Metal Amine Formation in
138 59. Teague, W. E., Jr., and Dobson, G. P. (1992) J. Aqueous Solution, Haase & Son, Copenhagen
26. Nicolis, G., and Prigogine, I. (1977) Self- Biol. Chem.267, 14084–14093 88. Eichhorn, G. L., ed. (1973) Inorganic
organization in Non-equilibrium Systems: From 60. Cohen, S. M., Ogawa, S., Rottenberg, H., Biochemistry, 2 vols, Elsevier, Amsterdam
Dissipative Structure to Order Through Glynn, P., Yamane, T., Brown, T. R., and 89. Martell, A. E., and Smith, R. M. (1975) Critical
Fluctuations, Wiley-Interscience, New York Shulman, R. G. (1978) Nature (London)273, Stability Constants, Plenum, New York
27. Procaccia, I., and Ross, J. (1977) Science198, 554–556 90. Michaelian, K. H., and Moskovits, M. (1978)
716–717 60a. Ugurbil, K., Kingsley-Hickman, P. B., Sako, E. Nature (London)273, 135–136
28. Morowitz, H. J. (1968) Energy Flow in Biology, Y., Zimmer, S., Mohanakrishnan, P., Robitaille, 91. Lewsin, S. (1974) Displacement of Water and its
Academic Press, New York P. M. L., Thoma, W. J., Johnson, A., Foker, J. E., Control in Biochemical Reactions, Academic
29. Caplan, S. R., and Essig, A. (1983) Bioenergetics and From, A. H. L. (1987) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. Press, London
and Linear Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics/ The 508, 265 –286 92. Karlin, S., Zhu, Z.-Y., and Karlin, K. D. (1997)
Steady State, Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, 61. Brosnan, M. J., Chen, L., Van Dyke, T. A., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 14225–14230
Massachusetts and Koretsky, A. P. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 93. Freeman, H. C., Healy, M. J., and Scudder, M.
30. Peacocke, A. R. (1983) An Introduction to the 20849–20855 L. (1977) J. Biol. Chem.252, 8840–8847
Physical Chemistry of Biological Organization, 61a. Saupe, K. W., Spindler, M., Hopkins, J. C. A., 94. Torrado, A., Walkup, G. K., and Imperiali, B.
Clarendon Press, Oxford Shen, W., and Ingwall, J. S. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. (1998)J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 609–610
31. Blumenfeld, L. A. (1983) Physics of Bioenergetic 275, 19742 –19746 95. Nakayama, S., and Kretsinger, R. H. (1994)
Processes, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23, 473–507

--- Page 323 ---

320 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
References
96. Kretsinger, R. H. (1976) Ann. Rev. Biochem.45, 123b.Brodersen, D. E., Nyborg, J., and Kjeldgaard,
239–266 M. (1999) Biochemistry38, 1695–1704
96a. Pawlowski, K., Bierzynski, A., and Godzik, A. 124. Christiansen, W. T., Tulinsky, A., and
(1996)J. Mol. Biol.258, 349–366 Castellino, F. J. (1994) Biochemistry33, 14993–
97. Ikura, M. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 14–17 15000
98. Kretsinger, R. H., and Nockolds, C. E. (1973) J. 125. Schwalbe, R. A., Ryan, J., Stern, D. M., Kisiel,
Biol. Chem.248, 3313–3326 W., Dahlbäck, B., and Nelsestuen, G. L. (1989)
99. McPhalen, C. A., Sielecki, A. R., Santarsiero, J. Biol. Chem.264, 20288–20296
B. D., and James, M. N. G. (1994) J. Mol. Biol. 126. Demange, P., Voges, D., Benz, J., Liemann, S.,
235, 718–732 Göttig, P., Berendes, R., Burger, A., and Huber,
99a. Declercq, J.-P., Evrard, C., Lamzin, V., and R. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 272–276
Parello, J. (1999) Protein Sci.8, 2194 – 2204 127. Saurel, O., Cézanne, L., Milon, A., Tocanne,
99b. Biekofsky, R. R., Martin, S. R., Browne, J. P., J.-F., and Demange, P. (1998) Biochemistry37,
Bayley, P. M., and Feeney, J. (1998) Biochemis- 1403–1410
try37, 7617– 7629 128. Moss, S. E., and Crumpton, M. J. (1990) Trends
100. Drake, S. K., Zimmer, M. A., Miller, C. L., and Biochem. Sci.15, 11–12
Falke, J. J. (1997) Biochemistry36, 9917–9926 129. Shapiro, L., Fannon, A. M., Kwong, P. D.,
101. Akke, M., Forsén, S., and Chazin, W. J. (1995) Thompson, A., Lehmann, M. S., Grübel, G.,
J. Mol. Biol.252, 102–121 Legrand, J.-F., Als-Nielsen, J., Colman, D. R.,
102. Denisov, V. P., and Halle, B. (1995) J. Am. and Hendrickson, W. A. (1995) Nature
Chem. Soc.117, 8456–8465 (London)374, 327–336
103. Heizmann, C. W., and Hunziker, W. (1991) 130. Vyas, N. K., Vyas, M. N., and Quiocho, F. A.
Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 98–103 (1988)Science242, 1290–1295
104. Ikemoto, N., Ronjat, M., Mészáros, L. G., and 131. Stuart, D. I., Acharya, K. R., Walker, N. P. C.,
Koshita, M. (1989) Biochemistry28, 6764–6771 Smith, S. G., Lewis, M., and Phillips, D. C.
105. Meldolesi, J., and Pozzan, T. (1998) Trends (1986)Nature (London)324, 84–87
Biochem. Sci.23, 10–14 132. Williams, R. J. P. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16,
106. Randolph, J. T., McClure, K. F., and 206
Danishefsky, S. J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117,
5712–5719
107. Fliegel, L., Burns, K., MacLennan, D. H.,
Reithmeier, R. A. F., and Michalak, M. (1989)
J. Biol. Chem.264, 21522–21528
108. Cohen, P., and Klee, C. B., eds. (1988)
Calmodulin, Elsevier, Amsterdam
109. James, P., Vorherr, T., and Carafoli, E. (1995)
Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 38–42
110. Lafitte, D., Capony, J. P., Grassy, G., Haiech, J.,
and Calas, B. (1995) Biochemistry34, 13825–
13832
111. Chattopadhyaya, R., Meador, W. E., Means,
A. R., and Quiocho, F. A. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.
228, 1177–1192
112. Pedigo, S., and Shea, M. A. (1995) Biochemistry
34, 10676–10689
113. da Silva, A. C. R., and Reinach, F. C. (1991)
Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 53–57
114. Gagné, S. M., Li, M. X., and Sykes, B. D. (1997)
Biochemistry36, 4386–4392
115. Trigo-Gonzalez, G., Awang, G., Racher, K.,
Neden, K., and Borgford, T. (1993) Biochemis-
try32, 9826–9831
116. Spyracopoulos, L., Li, M. X., Sia, S. K., Gagné,
S. M., Chandra, M., Solaro, R. J., and Sykes, B.
D. (1997) Biochemistry36, 12138–12146
117. Travé, G., Lacombe, P.-J., Pfuhl, M., Saraste,
M., and Pastore, A. (1995) EMBO J.14, 4922–
4931
118. Näthke, I., Hill, B. L., Parham, P., and Brodsky,
F. M. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 18621–18627
119. Pley, U. M., Hill, B. L., Alibert, C., Brodsky, F.
M., and Parham, P. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
2395–2402
120. Engel, J., Taylor, W., Paulsson, M., Sage, H.,
and Hogan, B. (1987) Biochemistry26, 6958–
6965
121. Engel, E., Richter, K., Obermeyer, G., Briza, P.,
Kungl, A. J., Simon, B., Auer, M., Ebner, C.,
Rheinberger, H.-J., Breitenbach, M., and
Ferreira, F. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 28630–
28637
122. Schäfer, B. W., and Heizmann, C. W. (1996)
Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 134–140
123. Drohat, A. C., Baldisseri, D. M., Rustandi, R.
R., and Weber, D. J. (1998) Biochemistry37,
2729– 2740
123a.Gribenko, A. V., and Makhatadze, G. I. (1998)
J. Mol. Biol.283, 679– 694

--- Page 324 ---

321
Study Questions
1. a) From ∆G° for hydrolysis of sucrose (Table 6-6) 4. Using data of Table 6-4 calculate ∆G’ (pH 7) for the
calculate the equilibrium constant following reactions:
a) Glucose → 2 lactate– + 2 H+
Κ = [glucose][fructose] / [sucrose] b) 2 NH + + HCO – → urea + 2 H O + H+
4 3 2
c) 2-oxoglutarate2– + 1/ 2 O + CoA + H+ →
2
at 25°C. Call this hydrolysis reaction 1. succinyl-CoA + H O + CO
2 2
b) Is the sucrose in a 1Μ solution stable? Explain.
c) If acid is added to a 1Μsucrose solution to 5. What is the ionic strength of a 0.2 Msolution of
catalyze its hydrolysis, what will be the final NaCl? of 0.2M Na SO ?
2 4
sucrose concentration at equilibrium? (Assume
that concentrations equal activities for the 6. The [ATP] / [ADP] ratio in an actively respiring
purpose of these calculations.) yeast cell is about 10. What would be the intracel-
d) Reaction 2 is the hydrolysis of α-D-glucose lular [3-phosphoglycerate] / [1,3-bisphospho-
1-phosphate to glucose and inorganic phos- glycerate] ratio have to be to make the phospho-
phate (P). Using ∆G° for this reaction (Table glycerate kinase reaction (Fig. 9-7, reaction 7)
i
6-6) calculate the equilibrium constant. proceed toward 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate synthesis
e) Sucrose phosphorylase from the bacterium at 25°C, pH 7?
Pseudomonas saccharophila catalyzes the follow-
ing reaction (reaction 3): 7. a) Using data from Table 6-8 determine the equi-
librium constant for the reaction between
Sucrose + P → malate and methylene blue, assuming all
1
α-D-glucose 1-phosphate + fructose reactants present initially at the same concen-
tration. Indicate clearly the direction of the
Calculate the equilibrium constant and the reaction for which the Gibbs energy change is
standard Gibbs energy change at 25°C for written.
reaction 3 from the equilibrium constants b) Calculate the percentage of the reduced (leuco)
obtained above for reactions 1 and 2. Show form of methylene blue present at pH 7 and
that∆G° for reaction 3 = ∆G° of reaction 1 - ∆G° 25°C in a system for which the measured
of reaction 2. electrode potential is 0.065 V.
f) Could the bacterium carry out reaction 3 in the
following two consecutive steps? Explain. 8. NAD+ is a coenzyme for both pyruvate dehydro-
genase and ethanol dehydrogenase. Using the
Sucrose→ glucose + fructose values of Ε ’ from Table 6-8 calculate the Gibbs
o
Glucose + P→ glucose 1-phosphate energy change and the equilibrium constant for
i
the reaction.
2. For each of the following reactions, state whether
the equilibrium constant will be between 0.1 and Lactate–+ acetaldehyde → pyruvate– + ethanol
10 (i.e., about one), greater than 100, or less that
0.01. Assume that the pH is constant at 7.0. 9. Consider the oxidation of acetate at 25°C:
a) 2 ADP3– → ATP 4– + AMP2–
b) ATP3–+ glucose → glucose 6-phosphate2– + CH COO– (0.1 M) + 2 O (g, 0.2 atm) +
3 2
ADP2– + H+ H+ (10–7 M) → 2 H O (l) + 2 CO (g)
2 2
c) ADP2– + HPO 2– + H+ → ATP3–
4
d) Glucose 6-phosphate2– → a) What is the equilibrium pressure of CO if the
2
fructose 6-phosphate2– reaction is not coupled to any other reaction?
e) Phosphoenolpyruvate3–+ glucose → glucose b) What is the equilibrium pressure of CO if the
2
1-phosphate2– + pyruvate– reaction is coupled to the formation of 0.01 M
ATP from 0.02 MADP and 0.01 MHPO 2- in
4
3. The combustion of 1 mol of solid urea to liquid the citric acid cycle?
water and gaseous carbon dioxide and nitrogen c) What do the above calculations tell you about
(N ) in a bomb colorimeter at 25°C (constant the prospects of gaining 100% efficiency of
2
volume) liberated 666 kJ of heat energy. Calculate energy storage in ATP from the citric acid cycle?
∆H, the change in heat content (enthalpy), for this d) If the actual pressure of CO is 0.01 atm, what
2
reaction. is the efficiency of energy storage under the
conditions in (b)?

--- Page 325 ---

322 Chapter 6. Thermodynamics and Biochemical Equilibria
Study Questions
10. The equilibrium constant for the following reac- 12. Enthalpy and Gibbs energy changes for the
tion, which is catalyzed by creatine kinase, has following reaction at 25°C are given in Table 6-6.
been determined by chemical analysis. The data
are given below. [S. A. Kuby and E. A. Noltman, in ATP 4– (1 M) + H O →
2
The Enzymes, 2nd ed. (P. D. Boyer, H. Lardy, and K. ADP3– (1 M) + H+ (10–7 M) + HPO 2– (1 M)
4
Myrbäck, eds), Vol. VI, pp. 515 – 602. Academic
Press, New York, 1962] a) How much heat is evolved at constant tem-
perature and pressure if the reaction takes
ATP 4– + creatine → ADP3– + creatine phosphate2– + H+ place in a test tube without doing any work
other than p∆V work?
t(°C) K b) How much heat is evolved or absorbed by the
20 6.30 x 10–9 foregoing reaction if it is coupled with 100%
30 5.71 x 10–9 efficiency to an endergonic reaction?
38 5.47 x 10–9 c) What efficiency of coupling to an endergonic
reaction is required in order that the foregoing
a) What are ∆G°,∆H°, and ∆S° for the reaction at reaction neither evolve nor absorb heat?
25°C?
b) What are ∆G’,∆H‘, and ∆S‘ (pH 7) for the 13. Microorganisms use a great variety of fermenta-
tion reactions for obtaining energy. Could the
reaction at 25°C?
c) What are ∆G’,∆H‘, and ∆S‘ (pH 7) for the following reaction be used for such a purpose?
Explain the reasons for your answer.
hydrolysis of creatine phosphate at 25°C?
C H O (succinic acid) + H O→
11. The following reaction was carried out in a 4 6 4 2
C H O (glycerol) + CO
calorimeter at 25°C in 0.1 M phosphate buffer at 3 8 3 2
pH 7.4 in the presence of a particulate suspension
14. a) Calculate the work done in kJ and in kcal by a
containing the mitochondrial electron transport
70 kg person in climbing up stairs three stories
system [M. Poe, H. Gutfreund, and R. W.
(13 m).
Estabrook, ABB122, 204 – 211 (1967)]:
b) Calculate how much ATP (in mmol and in
NADH + H+ + 1/ 2 O (aq., sat.) → grams) will be needed for the climb if muscles
2
NAD+ + H O can use the ATP with 50% efficiency and if the
2
phosphorylation state R = [ATP] / [ADP] [P] is
p i
103 M–1. The standard value of ∆G °’ (pH 7) for
The oxygen consumption was monitored continu-
hydrolysis of MgATP to MgADP and P may be
ously with an oxygen electrode. The temperature i
taken as – 31 kJ/ mol at 37°C.
was monitored simultaneously with a thermo-
c) How much of this ATP could be provided by
couple immersed in the solution. At the start of
the reaction 96 µmol NADH was added to 29.0 ml transfer of phospho groups from the stored
creatine phosphate (Cr-P) to ADP in muscle?
buffer containing O . A nearly zero-order reaction
2
Assume that [Cr-P] = 20 mM and may fall to
was observed with the rate of O consumption of
6.87µmol/min and the rate of te 2 mperature rise of 10 mM during the climb. ∆G °’ (pH 7) for
hydrolysis of creatine phosphate is about
0.01171 K/ min. The heat capacity of the calorim-
eter and contents was 254.6 J/ K. What is ∆H for – 43 kJ/ mol. If the creatine kinase reaction
the above reaction? NOTE: The H+ is supplied by attains equilibrium what will the value of R p
the phosphate buffer, which has a ∆H of dissocia- be for the adenylate system?
tion of 5.4 kJ mol–1.
15. Acid – base titration gave the following three pK
a
values for cysteine: 1.70, 8.36, and 10.53. Spectro-
photometric data allowed H. B. F. Dixon and K. F
Tipton (1973, Biochem J.133, 837– 842) to estimate
the following ratio of tautomeric species at pH 9.4
[–OOC– C(NH +)– CH S–] / [–OOC– C(NH )–
3 2 2
CH SH] = 2.12, as is also shown in Fig. 6-5. Verify
2
and assign the four microscopic pK values.
a

--- Page 326 ---

323
Study Questions
16. The coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate (PLP; structure From 300 MHz 1H NMR spectra areas for the
on p. 740) has pK values of 3.62, 6.10, and 8.33, following hydrogen atoms were estimated by
a
as determined by acid – base titration or by spec- Robitaille.
trophotometric titration. The pK of 6.10 belongs pH 7 pH 12
a
primarily to the phosphate group and is nearly
4'-H aldehyde .86 .900
independent of the others. However, the pK
a 4'-H hydrate .14 .012
values of 3.62 and 8.33 are shared by the proto-
6-H, aldehyde .96 1.059
nated ring nitrogen and the phenolic – OH group.
6-H, hydrate .17 .014
PLP exists as an equilibrium mixture of aldehyde
2'-CH , aldehyde 2.49 2.96
3
together with its covalent hydrate (see Eq. 13-1).
2'-CH , hydrate .51 .038
3
The equilibrium constants for hydrate formation
(K = [hydrate] / [aldehyde]) are independent of
h Evaluate the tautomerization constants K and
T(A)
pH but differ for each ionization state of the ring.
K , the hydration constants K and K , and the
T(H) H H’
Consider only the equilibria in the pH range 7– 12.
microscopic pK values pK , pK , pK , and pK in
a A B C D
the foregoing scheme. Assume that the hydration
ratiosK and K are the same in H O (spectropho-
h h’ 2
HPLP– (aldehyde, ±) K A PLP2– (aldehyde) tometric data) and in D 2 O (NMR data).
K K
T(A) B
K K ’
H H
HPLP– (aldehyde, 0)
K
HPLP– (hydrate, ±) C PLP2– (hydrate)
K T(H) K D
HPLP– (hydrate, 0)
The UV-visible absorption spectrum of the
monoprotonated form of PLP was divided math-
ematically into individual bands for the aldehyde
with dipolar ionic ring (±), the aldehyde tautomer
with an uncharged ring (0) and the hydrate of the
dipolar ion. The following fractions were esti-
mated (Harris et al., 1976, Biochem. Biophys. Acta.
521, 181– 194.
Aldehyde (±) 52%
Aldehyde (0) 28%
Hydrate (±) 16%
Hydrate (0) 4%, estimated indirectly

--- Page 327 ---

324 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
Some ways in which protein subunits associate. (Left) The 3.66 MDa hemoglobin of the earthworm Lumbricus
terrestris contains 144 globin subunits organized as 12 cylindrical disulfide-linked dodecamers. Two 6-dodecamer
4.5 nm
layers, each a ring with 6-fold cyclic symmetry, lie back-to-back. This reconstructed particle also contains three
A A
14.6 nm I I E E E E I I t p y r p o e te s i o n f f l e in rr k it e i r n p i r s o f t o e r in m s e i d n f t r h o e m ce 2 n 4 t e 1 r 9 r - e t g o i o 2 n 1 . - k F D ro a m 4- L he a l m ix y -b e u t n al d . l ( e 2 0 s 0 u 0 b ) u J. n M its o l w . B it i h ol . c 2 u 9 b 8 ic , 6 s 3 y 8 m . m (C e e t n ry te . r A ) s T m he a i n ro y n a s s t 4 o 5 r 0 a 0 ge
A A
13.7 nm atoms of iron, as hydrated iron oxide, may be stored in the internal cavity. See Fig. 7-13. From Trikha et al. (1995)
Earthworm hemoglobin Ferritin shell GHp r a oyt EdchrLoe ps Chhobaipc ebrinodnining J. Mol. Biol. 248, 954. Courtesy of Elizabeth Theil. (Right) The 2 MDa molecular chaperone GroEL consists of two
back-to-back 7-subunit rings, each subunit formed from domains E, I and A. A 7-subunit cap of the smaller
GroES may cover either end to form a compartment in which polypeptides fold. See Box 7-A.
Contents
325 A. Describing Binding Equilibria Boxes
325 1. Analyzing Data 339 Box 7-A Life and Death for Proteins:
327 2. Multiple Binding Sites on a Single Molecule Chaperonins and Proteasomes
328 Microscopic binding constants and statistical effects 360 Box 7-B Sickle Cell Disease, Malaria, and
329 Electrostatic repulsion: anticooperativity Blood Substitutes
330 3. Cooperative Processes 363 Box 7-C The T-Even Bacteriophages
332 B. Complementarity and the Packing of 371 Box 7-D Mitosis, Tetraploid Plants, and
Macromolecules Anticancer Drugs
332 1. Rings and Helices
332 Molecules with cyclic symmetry Tables
334 Helical structures 329 Table 7-1 Binding Constants of Protons to Dianions
334 Filamentous bacteriophages of Dicarboxylic Acids
334 A rod-shaped plant virus 355 Table 7-2 Thermodynamic Functions for
335 Bacterial pili Oxygenation of Hemoglobin
336 The thin filaments of muscle 367 Table 7-3 A Few Well-Known Structural Domains
337 2. Oligomers with Twofold (Dyad) Axes
337 Paired interactions
338 Dihedral symmetry
342 Oligomers with cubic symmetry (polyhedra)
344 Asymmetry and quasi-equivalence in oligomers
345 Quasi-equivalence in virus coats
348 Regulatory subunits and multienzyme complexes
349 C. Cooperative Changes in Conformation
349 1. Unequal Binding of Substrate and “Induced Fit”
350 2. Binding Equilibria for a Dimerizing Protein
350 The Monod–Wyman–Changeux (MWC) model
351 The induced fit model
352 One conformational state dissociated
352 3. Higher Oligomers
353 D. The Oxygen-Carrying Proteins
353 1. Myoglobin and Hemoglobin
353 The binding of oxygen
355 Structural changes accompanying oxygen binding
357 The Bohr effect and allosteric regulators
358 Carbon monoxide, cyanide, and nitric oxide
359 2. Abnormal Human Hemoglobins
362 3. Comparative Biochemistry of Hemoglobin
362 E. Self-Assembly of Macromolecular Structures
362 1. Bacteriophages
367 2. “Kringles” and Other Recognition Domains and
Motifs
368 F. The Cytoskeleton
369 1. Intermediate Filaments
369 2. Microfilaments
370 3. Microtubules
373 References
377 Study Questions

--- Page 328 ---

325
7
How Macromolecules Associate
4.5 nm
A A
I I
E E
14.6 nm
E E
I I
A A
13.7 nm
Earthworm hemoglobin GroEL Chaperonin
Hydrophobic binding
Ferritin shell patches
The complicated shapes and internal structures association constants or, alternatively, by the Gibbs
of cells are determined to a large extent by the way in energy changes for the association reaction.1,2 The
which proteins and other macromolecules are bonded average kinetic energy of motion of a molecule in
one to another. In addition, intimate association of solution is about 3 / 2kT, where kT is Boltzmann’s
B B
macromolecules is essential to such biological processes constant. For one mole the kinetic energy is 3 / 2RT
as the motion of flagella, the contraction of muscle, the or 3.7 kJ (0.89 kcal) mol–1 at 25°C. Thus, if K = 10 M–1
f
action of antibodies, the transmission of nerve impulses, (∆G° = – 5.7 kJ mol–1or– 1.36 kcal mol–1) the binding
the replication of DNA, and the synthesis of proteins. energy is only slightly in excess of the thermal energy
Equally important is the binding of small molecules to of the molecules and the complex is weakly bound. In
large ones. In this chapter we will first examine methods this instance, if X and P are both present in 10– 4 molar
of measuring binding with an emphasis on protons concentrations (typical enough for biochemical systems),
and small molecules. Then we will consider the ways only 0.1% of the molecules will exist as the complex
in which macromolecules stick together as well as the ([complex] = K [X][P]). If the formation constant is
f
role of conformational changes within macromolecules. higher by a factor of 1000, i.e., K = 104 M–1 (∆G° = – 22.8
f
kJ mol–1), 38% of the molecules will exist as the com-
plex; while if K = 107 M–1 (extremely strong binding,
f
A. Describing Binding Equilibria ∆G° = – 40 kJ or – 9.55 kcal mol–1), 97% of the molecules
will be complexed.
In previous discussions of pH we have dealt with
dissociation constants, but in this section we will use
formation constants K, where K = 1/K . Measurement 1. Analyzing Data
f f d
of the strength of association of molecules is an every-
day aspect of modern biochemical research. It may be The extent of binding of a molecule X to another
important to know how strongly a hormone binds to molecule P (Eqs. 7-1, 7-2) is measured by varying the
a receptor in a cell membrane or how well a feedback concentrations of X and P and observing changes
inhibitor binds to an enzyme to determine whether the in the concentration of the complex [PX]. The first
interaction is significant physiologically. The binding
of O 2 to hemoglobin and other oxygen carriers is vitally X + P PX (7-1)
important, but the description of these oxygenation
reactions is mathematically complex. This is especially K f = [ PX ] / [ P ] [ X ]) (7-2)
so because we must consider effects of pH changes and
of changing concentrations of allosteric effectors on prerequisite is to find a measurable property that is
the binding equilibria. different for the complex than for either of the free
In considering such equilibria we must first exam- components. For example, the complex may be colored
ine the individual interactions of different domains of and the components colorless. More commonly, the
a protein, one with another. These can be described by complex simply has a different light absorbance (A) at

--- Page 329 ---

326 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
a certain wavelength than do the components. Like- that Y reaches a value of 0.5 when [X] is just equal to
wise, the circular dichroism or the chemical shift of a 1/K (or to K ). Note also that as [X] increases saturation
f d
peak in the NMR spectrum may change. If P is an is reached slowly and that even at the point represent-
enzyme, only the complex PX will undergo decompo- ing the highest concentration of X (8 /K in Fig. 7-1)
f
sition to products. Sometimes (but not always) the rate saturation is less than 90%. Since in the usual experi-
of breakdown of PX (the enzyme–substrate complex) mental situation, we do not know Y but only ∆A, it is
to form products will be relatively slow compared to difficult to estimate the limiting value ∆A from a
max
the rate at which the equilibrium between X, P, and PX plot of this type unless K is very high. However, we
f
is established. In this case the concentration of complex need to know ∆A to evaluate K. For this reason,
max f
PX will be proportional to the observed rate of forma- plots like that of Fig. 7-1 are seldom used, this one
tion of product. being included mainly to illustrate a point of nomen-
Whatever change of property is measured, its clature. The curve shown in Fig. 7-1 is a rectangular
value will increase with increasing concentrations of hyperbola, and the type of saturation curve shown is
X if the total concentration of the macromolecule P is frequently referred to as hyperbolic. This is in con-
kept constant. In the usual experimental design, the trast to certain other binding curves (Section 3) which,
molar concentration of P is small and it is possible to when plotted in this way, are sigmoidal (S-shaped).
increase the concentration of X to quite large values. A better type of plot is often that of Y against log
When this is done, it is usually observed that at high [X] (Fig. 7-2). It has the following features. (1) The
enough values of [X] almost all of the P is converted curve is symmetric about the midpoint at log [X] = log
to PX, and the change being measured (e.g., ∆A for K. (2) No matter how high or low the concentration
f
increased light absorption) no longer increases. This range used in the experiments, it is easy to choose a
effect is known as saturation and is observed in most scale that puts all the points on the same sheet of
binding studies and also in many physiological phe- paper. (3) Spacing between points tends to be more
nomena. uniform than in a plot against [X]; e.g., compare Figs.
The property being measured (∆A) reaches a 7-1 and 7-2 for which the experimental points repre-
maximum value ∆A at saturation and when all of sent the same data and for which values of [X] for
max
compound P has been converted to PX. The ratio of successive points are each twofold greater than the
[PX] to the total concentration of all forms of P present preceding one. (4) The same logarithmic scale can be
[P] is known as the saturation fraction and is often used for all compounds, no matter how strong or weak
t
given the symbol Y. If P has more than one binding the binding, and the same shape curve is obtained for
site for X, Y is defined as the fraction of the total bind- all 1:1 complexes. The midpoint slope, dY/dlog [X],
ing sites occupied. If n is the number of sites per is 0.576; the change in log [X] in going from 10 to 90%
molecule, the total number of sites is n[P]. The value saturation is 1.81. The curve is familiar to most chem-
of Y is often taken as ∆A/∆A , an equality that holds ists because it is frequently used for pH titration curves
max
for multisite macromolecules only if the change in A is in which pH substitutes for – log [X]. To represent a
the same for each successive molecule of X added. This complex with tighter binding, the curve is simply moved
is not always true, but when it is Eq. 7-3 is followed. to the left, and for weaker binding, it is moved to the
right.
[PXi] ∆A
∑ i = Y =
i
n[P]t ∆Amax
(7-3)
∆A
max
1.0
Here i represents the number of ligands X bound to P
0.5
and may vary from 0 to n. When n = 1 the saturation ∆A Y
fraction Y and ∆A are related to the concentration of
free unbound X and the formation constant as follows:
0
0 1 2 4 6 8
Kf[X] ∆Amax Kf[X] K f [x]
Y = ∆A = (in units of 1/K)
1 + Kf[X] 1 + Kf[X] f
(7-4)
A plot of Y or ∆A against [X] is shown in Fig. 7-1. Figure 7-1 An adsorption isotherm, a plot of the saturation
fraction Y or of some change in a measured property ∆A vs
This kind of plot is sometimes called an adsorption
[X], the concentration of a substance that binds reversibly to
isotherm because it describes binding only at a constant
a macromolecule. The curve is hyperbolic and [X] = 1/K
f
temperature. Notice, from both Fig. 7-1 and Eq. 7-4, when Y = 0.5.

--- Page 330 ---

A. Describing Binding Equilibria 327
∆A 1.0 deal with the binding of two or more ligands to a
max
single macromolecule.3– 5 If we let [X] represent the
b
concentration of bound X and [P] the total molar
t
concentration of the protein or other macromolecule
Tighter Looser and if there is only one binding site on the protein,
0.5
∆A Y binding binding [X] / [P] will equal Y. However, if there are n inde-
b t
pendent binding sites that have the same binding
constantK Eq. 7-5a will hold.
f
0
–logK – 1 –logK –logK + 1
f f f
log[X]
[X]b
.
1
=nK −
[X]b
K
[P]t [X] f [P]t f (7-5a)
Figure 7-2 A saturation curve plotted on a logarithmic scale
for [X]. The data points are the same as those used in Fig. 7-1. If [X] b / [P] t [X] is plotted against [X] b / [P] t the resulting
linear plot will have an intercept of K on the y axis and
f
n on the x axis. Thus, n is directly apparent, whereas
in Eq. 7-5 it is incorporated into Y. A problem arises if,
K ·∆A K as discussed in the next section, the multiple binding
f max f sites are not independent but interact. Curved Scat-
chard plots result and attempts to extract more than
one binding constant can lead to very large errors.
K f Before measuring saturation curves, the student should
∆A Y 2 read additional articles or books on the subject.2,6–10
[x] [x]
2. Multiple Binding Sites on a Single Molecule
0
0 0.5 1.0
Y A macromolecule may often be able to bind sever-
al molecules of a second compound X. Consider the
∆A ∆A
max case in which the macromolecule P binds successively
one molecule of X, then a second, and a third, up to a
total of n. We define the stepwise formation constants,
Figure 7-3 A Scatchard plot of the same data shown in Figs. K ,K , . . ., K , as follows:
1 2 n
7-1 and 7-2. This is the best of the linear plots for studying
binding.
K
1
P + X PX
Saturation data are often plotted in yet another form K
2
known as the Scatchard plot (Fig. 7-3). The value of PX + X PX . . .
2
∆ A/ [X] (or of Y/ [X]) is plotted against ∆ A (or Y) and
K
n
a straight line is fitted to the points, preferably using PX + X PX
n-1 n (7-6)
the“method of least squares.” The intercept on the
x axis and the slope of the fitted line give values of
∆A /K and K, respectively, as indicated by Eq. 7-5, Remember that these are reversible reactions even
max f f
which follows directly from Eq. 7-4. though unidirectional arrows are used. The general
expression for the ith stepwise formation constant is
given by Eq. 7-7.
Y/ [X] = K – YK
f f
∆ A/ [ X ] = ∆ A K –∆ AK
max f f (7-5) [PXi]
K =
i
[PXi−1][X] (7-7)
The Scatchard plot is the best of the various linear
transformations of the saturation equation and is pre-
ferred to “double reciprocal plots” analogous to that Remember that Y is the fraction of total binding sites
shown in Fig. 9-3. saturated. The number of moles of X bound per mole
Scatchard’s original equation was formulated to of P is nY and is obtained by summing the concentra-

--- Page 331 ---

328 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
tions [PX] + 2[PX ] + . . . and dividing the sum of all While Eq. 7-12, known as the Adair equation,11 might
2
the forms of P: seem to provide a complete description of the binding
process, it usually does not. In many cases, there is
more than one kind of binding site on a macromolecule
For two binding sites(n = 2)
and Eq. 7-12 tells us nothing about the distribution of
[PX]+2[PX2]
the ligand X among different sites in complex PX. To
2Y=
[P]+[PX]+[PX2]
(7-8)
consider this problem we must examine the microscopic
binding constants.
For the general case
Microscopic binding constants and statistical
 n   n 
nY=

 ∑i[PXi]



[P]+ ∑ [PXi]

 effects. As discussed in Chapter 6, Section E,2, micro-
i=1 i=1 scopic binding constants represent the constants for
binding to specific individual sites. Now, consider a
(7-9)
straight-chain dicarboxylic acid which has two identical
The summations are over all of the integral values binding sites for protons. If the chain connecting the
ofi from 1 to n. Now, by expressing each concentration, two carboxylate anions is long enough, the carboxylate
[PX], in terms of the concentrations [X] and [P] of free groups will be far enough apart that they do not influ-
i
X and P, together with the stepwise formation constants, ence each other through electrostatic interaction.
we obtain Eq. 7-10.
– –
OOC COO
Forn=2
2Y =
K1[X] + 2K1K2[X]2
K f * = 5 × 104 K f * = 5 × 104
1 + K1[X] + K1K2[X]2
(7-10)
Each group will have a microscopic binding constant
A similar equation can be written for the general (K *) of 5 x 104 M–1. The constant K * can also be called
f f
case. Note that the concentration of P does not appear anintrinsic binding constant, because it is character-
in Eq. 7-10 and that Y is a function only of [X] and the istic of a carboxylate group that is free of interactions
stepwise formation constants. Such equations define with other groups. Intuition tells us (correctly) that,
the isotherms for binding of two or more molecules of in its binding of protons, a solution of this dicarboxy-
X to P. From an experimental plot of Y (or of ∆A) vs lic acid dianion will behave exactly like a solution of
[X] or log [X], it is possible in favorable cases to deter- the monovalent anion R – COO– at twice the concentra-
mine the stepwise constants K ,K , ..., K . However, tion. A single intrinsic binding constant suffices to
1 2 n
this becomes quite complicated. To simplify Eq. 7-10 describe both binding sites. It may seem surprising
and the corresponding equation for the general case, then that the stepwise formation constants (also called
we can group the constants together and designate the stoichiometricormacroscopic formation constants)
products of constants (K ,K K ,K K K , etc.) as ψ ,ψ , . K and K differ: K = 10 x 104 M–1andK = 2.5 x 104
1 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 1 2 1 2
. ., ψ . Our equations are now as follows: M–1. This fact reflects the so-called statistical effect.
n
Either of the two carboxylate groups in the molecule
can bind a proton in the first step to give two indistin-
Forn=2 guishable molecules, PH:
2Y=
ψ 1[X]+2ψ 2[X] 2
COOH
1+ψ 1[X]+ψ 2[X] 2
(7-11) P
For the general case K* COO – K*
–
COO (A) COOH
n  n 
nY= ∑iψ i[X] i

1+ ∑ψ i[X] i

 P
–
P
i=1 i=1
(7-12)
COO COOH
–
K* COO K*
P
From experimental data, it is usually easiest to first
COOH
determine the ψ’s (there are n of them), and then to
(B)
calculate from the ψ’s the stepwise constants. For
example: P PH PH2
(7-14)
K 1 = ψ 1 K 2 = ψ 2 K1, etc. (7-13)

--- Page 332 ---

A. Describing Binding Equilibria 329
If we label the two forms of PH as A and B (Eq. 7-14) TABLE 7-1
and consider that each one of them is independently in Binding Constants of Protons to Dianions of
equilibrium with P through formation constant K *, we Dicarboxylic Acidsa
f
obtain Eq. 7-15 (which may be compared with Eqs. 6-75
and 6-76, which are written for dissociation constants).
No. of logK logK (association)
1 2
Acid dianion CH groups (pK) (pK) (dissociation)
2 2 1
K 1 = [PH]A + [ + PH]B = 2K* and K 2 = K* 2 Hypothetical ∞ 5.1 4.5
[P][H ] dianion with
(7-15) logK* = 4.8
This result is related to probability and arises for the Azelaic 7 5.41 4.55
same reason that if you reach into a barrel containing
Adipic 4 5.41 4.42
50% white balls and 50% black balls, you will pull out
one of each just twice as often as you will pull out a
Succinic 2 5.48 4.19
pair of white or a pair of black. In the general case of n
equivalent binding sites, the microscopic formation
Malonic 1 5.69 2.83
constantsK* are related12,13 to the stepwise constants
i
K i as follows: a From R. P. Bell, (1973) The Proton in Chemistry, 2nd ed., p. 96.
Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca, New York
(n + 1 − i)
K = K *
i i
i (7-16)
separated by the statistical distance (log 4 = 0.6).
It is also easy to show,14 using Eqs. 7-12 and 7-16 that Compare these values with the observed binding
forn completely equivalent and independent binding sites constants for protons with the dianions of acids con-
Eqs. 7-17 and 7-18 hold: taining 7, 4, 2, and 1 CH groups given in Table 7-1.
2
For the longest chain (that of azelaic acid) the log K
f
values are not very different from those of the hypo-
K*[X](1+K*[X])
n−1
thetical long-chain acid. However, as the groups come
Y=
(1+K*[X]) n (7-17) closer together, the first binding constant is increased
markedly because of the additional electrostatic attrac-
or tion and the second is decreased. The spread between
Y=
1+
K
K
*[
*
X
[X
]
] (7-18)
t
2
h
.9
e
a
tw
s a
o
r
l
e
o
s
g
u
K
lt
f
o
v
f
a
i
l
n
u
t
e
e
s
r a
in
ct
c
i
r
o
e
n
a s
b
e
e
s
t w
fro
ee
m
n
0
th
.6
e
t
b
o
i
a
n
s
d
m
in
u
g
c
s
h
it e
a
s
s
.
In malonic and succinic acids the first proton
bound can be shared by both carboxyl groups through
In this case the microscopic association constants are formation of a hydrogen bond. (See discussion in
all identical and represent a single intrinsic constant Chapter 9, Section D.) Additional factors operate in
applicable to all of the sites. In fact, Eq. 7-18 is identical oxalic acid where the carboxyl groups are connected
to that for association of a single proton (or other ligand) directly and for which pK values (pK = log K ) are
a a f
with a single binding site, satisfying our intuitive 4.19 and 1.23. In all of these examples the binding of
notion that a set of ncompletely independent binding the first proton makes it harder to bind a second proton.
sites should behave just like a solution of an n-fold Such negative interaction or anticooperativity between
more concentrated compound with a single binding binding sites is very common and always leads to a
site. Thus, our arithmetic has led us to a conclusion spread of the formation constants and a broadening of
that was already obvious. However, it is rarely true the curve of Y vs log [X]. This is shown graphically on
that binding sites on a single macromolecule are com- the right side of Fig. 7-4 where the binding curves for
pletely independent; there is almost always interaction protons with acetate ion and with succinic acid dianion
between them, and the equations that we have derived are compared. Notice that binding of protons increases
for evaluation of stepwise and intrinsic constants as log [H+] increases, giving the curves an unfamiliar
cannot be applied without modification. appearance when compared with the more familiar
curve of dissociation vs pH.
Electrostatic repulsion: anticooperativity. Can we predict the pK values in Table 7-1? With
a
As we have seen, a hypothetical acid with an infinite an appropriate dielectric constant chosen Eq. 2-8 can
distance between the carboxylate groups and log K * = be applied. The difference between the two successive
f
4.8 would have two macroscopic binding constants logK values reduced by 0.6 (the statistical factor) is a
f

--- Page 333 ---

330 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
1.0
Thiamin Succinate
anion dianon
pK = 4.19
1
0.5 Figure 7-4 Binding of protons to the
pK = 11.6 thiamin anion, the succinate dianion,
Acetate–, and the acetate anion. Acetate (dashed
pK 2 = 5.48 pK a = 4.76 line) binds a single proton with a normal
width binding curve. Succinate dianion
binds two protons with anticooperativity,
hence a broadening of the curve. The
0.0 thiamin anion (yellow form, see Eq. 7-19)
–13 –12 –11 –10 –8 –7 –6 –5 –4 –3 –2
binds two protons with complete coop-
log[H+] or – pH
erativity and a steep binding curve.
measure of the electrostatic effect. For malonic acid
this∆ pK is 2.25 and for succinic acid it is 0.69 (Table
a
7-1). In 1923, N. Bjerrum proposed that the value of
∆ pK could be equated directly with the work needed
a
to bring the two negative charges together to a distance
representing the charge separation in the malonate
dianion.
Thus, applying Eq. 6-31, ∆G = 5.708 ∆ pK kJ mol–1 =
a
12.84 kJ mol–1 for malonate. Equating this with W
in Eq. 2-8 and assuming a dielectric constant of 78.5
(that of water), the distance of charge separation r is
calculated to be 0.138 nm. This is much too small.
The computation was improved by Westheimer and
Kirkwood, who assumed a dielectric constant of 2.0
within the molecule. By approximating the molecule
as an ellipsoid of revolution, they were able to make
reasonably accurate calculations of electrostatic effects
on pK values.15 Thus, for malonic acid Westheimer
a
and Shookhoff16 predicted r = 0.41 nm for malonic acid
dianion. Recently more sophisticated calculations17
have been used to predict pK values for the com-
a
pounds in Table 7-1 and others.18
Electrostatic theory has also been used successfully
to interpret titration curves of proteins in which the
net negative or positive charge distributed over the
surface of the protein varies continuously from high
pH to low as more protons are added.19
Electrostatic effects can be transmitted extremely
effectively through aromatic ring systems, a fact that
explains some of the significance of heterocyclic aro-
matic systems in biochemical molecules. Consider the
Y
microscopic binding constant of the phenolate anion of
pyridoxine as influenced by the state of protonation of
the ring nitrogen. These are shown in Eq. 6-75, where
pK * = 4.94 and pK * = 8.20 define the binding constants
a d
for protonation of a phenolate ion when the ring nitrogen
is protonated or unprotonated, respectively. We see
that∆ pK = 3.26, even greater than that of malonic acid.
a
H H
3. Cooperative Processes
O O
C
C C
– – Can it ever happen that interaction between
O O
groups leads to a decrease from the statistical separa-
r≈ 0.4 nm
tion between values of the stepwise constants instead
of to an increase? At first glance, the answer seems to
be no. A decreased separation would imply that the
intrinsic binding constant for the second proton bound
is higher than that for the first, but common sense tells
us that the first proton ought to bind at the site with
the highest binding constant. However, look at the
experimental binding curve of protons with the anion
of thiamin shown in Fig. 7-4. Instead of being broad-
ened from the curve of acetate, it is just half as wide.
The explanation depends upon some rather amusing
chemistry of thiamine. Under suitable conditions, this
vitamin can be crystallized as a yellow sodium salt,
the structure of whose anion is shown in Eq. 7-19.
Weak binding of a proton to one of the nitrogens as
shown in Eq. 7-19 creates an electron deficiency at
the adjacent carbon and the – S–anion adds to the C=N
group, closing the ring to an unstable tricyclic form of
thiamin. This tricyclic form can be observed in methanol
and can be crystallized. It is unstable in water because
the central ring can open, with the electrons flowing as
indicated by the small arrows to create a strongly basic
site on the same nitrogen. A second proton combines
at this basic nitrogen with a high binding constant to
form a cation.
The key to the reversed order of strength of the binding

--- Page 334 ---

A. Describing Binding Equilibria 331
constants lies in the molecular rearrangements intervening when the binding of the first ligand enhances the
between the two binding steps.20,21 In this particular case, affinity of all other sites so much that no species other
we cannot measure the successive binding constants than P and PX are present in significant concentration.
n
K and K directly from the titration curve because It is easy to show that, for n binding sites with such
1 2
K is almost two orders of magnitude larger than K . completely cooperative binding, the saturation fraction is:
2 1
Consequently, the binding curve shown in Fig. 7-4 is
(within the experimental error) twice as steep at the Kn[X]n
Y =
center (the slope is 2 x 0.576) as that for acetate ion and 1 + Kn[X]n (7-21)
is accurately represented in Eq. 7-20. Comparison of
Eq. 7-20 with Eq. 7-10 shows how the latter has been
simplified because no significant concentration of the where K= (K . . . K )1/ n. The midpoint slope in the
1 n
form PX is present in the cooperative case. binding curve (Y vs log [X]) is 0.576n and the change,
∆log [X], between Y = 0.1 and Y = 0.9 is 1.81/ n.
K2[X]2 Equation 7-21 can be rewritten as
Y =
1 + K2[X]2 (7-20)
Y (1 − Y) = K n [X] n (7-22)
This is only part of the story about the acid–base
chemistry of thiamin. For the rest, see Chapter 14, Taking logarithms (Eq. 7-22)
Section D,1.
The binding of protons by the thiamin anion is an
example of a cooperative process, so named because log[Y (1 − Y)] = n logK + n log[X] (7-23)
binding of the first proton makes binding of the second
easier. Although relatively rare among small molecules, A plot of log [Y/ (1 – Y)] vs log [X] is known as a Hill
cooperative processes are very common and important plot. According to Eq. 7-22, it is linear with a slope of n.
in biochemistry.22,23 A cooperative binding curve is Remember that this equation was derived for an ideal
sometimes referred to as sigmoidal because the plot case of completely cooperative binding at n sites.24
of Y against [X] (the binding isotherm) is S shaped. However, Hill plots are often used to plot experimen-
The maximum possible cooperativity is observed tal data for systems in which cooperativity is incom-
plete. Thus, the experimentally measured
slope of a Hill plot (n ) is not an integer and
CH2CH2OH
OH is usually less than n,
H
t
i
h
ll
e number of binding
– S – S sites. A comparison of n Hill with n is often
used as a measure of the degree of cooperativ-
N N CH3 H + N N CH3 ity: n Hill /n = 1.00 for complete cooperativity
but is less than one if cooperativity, is incom-
plete. An example of a very high degree of
N H + N cooperativity is provided by the hexameric
enzyme glutamate dehydrogenase, whose
weak
H3C N binding H3C N saturation curve for substrate displays n Hill
approaching six.25 It is not necessary to make
Yellow anion of
thiamin (vitamin B1) a Hill plot to get n
Hill
. From the usual binding
curve of Y (or ∆A) vs log [X] the midpoint
A strongly basic slope can be measured with satisfactory preci-
OH s b i y te r i i n s g cr o e p at e e n d in h g ere OH sion. Alternatively, the difference, ∆log [X],
between 0.1 and 0.9 saturation can be evaluat-
S S
H ed and n calculated from Eq. 7-24.
Hill
H2N N+
CH3
+
H
N N
CH3
H
midpoint slope 1.81
strong n = =
N binding N Hill 0.576 ∆ log[X]
(7-24)
H3C
N
H3C
N
Binding curves sometimes show more than
Cation “Tricylic”
(colorless) unstable form one step; in such cases Hill plots are not linear
and no simple measure of cooperativity can be
(7-19)
defined.

--- Page 335 ---

332 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
A second example of cooperativity is provided by is catalyzed by an enzyme, which contains reactive
the reversible denaturation of coiled peptide chains. chemical groupings in the right places and in the right
Some proteins can be brought to a pH of 4 by addition orientations to interact with and promote a chemical
of acid but without protonation of buried groups with change in another molecule, the substrate. Specific
intrinsic pK values greater than four. When a little catalysis is one of the most basic characteristics of
a
more acid is added, some less basic group is protonated, living things. Enzymatic catalysis provides the basis
permitting the protein to unfold and to expose the more not only for the reactions of metabolism but also for
basic hidden groups. Thus, cooperative proton binding the movement of muscle fibers, the flowing of the cyto-
is observed. As in the case of thiamin the cooperativity plasm in the ameba, and virtually all other biological
depends upon the occurrence of a conformational responses. To understand these phenomena requires
change in the molecule linked to protonation of a an examination of the structures of the macromole-
particular group. cules involved and of the ways in which they can fit
The reversible transformation between an α helix together.
and a random coil conformation is also cooperative. Just as the amino acids, sugars, and nucleotides
In this case, once a helix is started, additional turns are the building blocks for formation of proteins,
form rapidly and the molecule is completely converted polysaccharides, and nucleic acids, these three kinds
into the helix. Likewise, once it unfolds it tends to of macromolecule are the units from which larger
unfold completely. Melting of DNA (Chapter 5) or, subcellular structures are assembled. Fibers, micro-
indeed, of any crystal is cooperative.8 The stacking of tubules, virus “coats,” and small symmetric groups of
nucleotides alongside a template polynucleotide can subunits in oligomeric proteins all result from the
also be cooperative. For example, the binding of an packing of macromolecules in well-defined ways,
adenylate residue to two strands of polyuridylic acid something that is often called quaternary structure.
leads to cooperative formation of a triple-helical
complex (Chapter 5, Section C,4). Here the stacking
interactions make helix growth energetically easier 1. Rings and Helices
than initiation of new helical regions.26
Consider first the aggregation of identical protein
subunits. While many protein molecules are nearly
B. Complementarity and the Packing of spherical, they are nevertheless asymmetric. In the
Macromolecules drawings that follow the asymmetry is exaggerated,
but the principles illustrated are valid. One easily
Because the forces acting between them are weak, observed lesson from nature is that even though living
two molecules will cling together tightly only if there things are made up of asymmetric materials, a great
is a close fit between their surfaces. For a firm bond to deal of symmetry is evident.28 At the molecular level
be formed many atoms must be in contact and the two the symmetry of crystalline arrays of atoms or mole-
molecular surfaces must be complementaryone to the cules is described mathematically by the elements of
other. If a “knob,” such as a – CH group, is present on symmetry present in space groups (p. 133). There
3
one surface, there must be an appropriate hollow in are 230 of these but only 65 accommodate asymmetric
the complementary surface. A positive charge in one objects (Chapter 3).29 Two of the natural ways for
surface is likely to be opposite a negative charge in the identical asymmetric subunits to interact lead to rings
other. A proton donor group can form a hydrogen and helices, respectively.
bond only if it is opposite a group with unshared
electrons; nonpolar (hydrophobic) groups must be Molecules with cyclic symmetry. Consider a
opposite each other if hydrophobic interaction is to subunit (protomer) of the shape shown in Eq. 7-25
occur. An important principle is that two molecules with and containing a region a that is complementary to the
complementary surfaces tend to join together and interact, surfacej on another part of the same molecule. Two
whereas molecules without complementary surfaces do not such protomers will tend to stick together to form a
interact. Watson called this “selective stickiness.”27 dimer, region a of one protomer sticking to region j of
Selective stickiness permits the self-assemblyof bio- the other. The dimer will still contain a free region a
logical macromolecules having surfaces of comple- at one end and a region j at the other which are not
mentary shape into fibers, tubes, membranes, and involved in bonding. Other protomers can stick to
polyhedra. It also provides the means for specific these free ends. In some instances long chains can be
pairing of purine and pyrimidine bases during the formed. However, if the geometry is just right, a third
replication of DNA and during the synthesis of RNA subunit can fit in to form a closed ring (a trimer).
and of proteins. Depending on the geometry of the subunits, the ring
Complementarity of surfaces is equally important can be even smaller (a dimer) or it can be larger (a
to the chemical reactions of cells. Each of these reactions tetramer, pentamer, etc.). The bonding involved is

--- Page 336 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 333
between two different regions (a and j) of a subunit a P
and is sometimes described as heterologous.30 To
obtain a closed ring of subunits, the angle between j
the bonding groups a and j must be correct or the ring
cannot be completed. Step 1
A ring formed using exclusively heterologous K = K ∆G° = ∆G°
f f
interactions possesses cyclic symmetry. The trimer
in Eq. 7-25 has a threefold axis: Each subunit can be
a
superimposed on the next by rotation through 360°/ 3. j
The oligomer is said to have C symmetry. Many real j
3 P
proteins, including all of those with 3, 5, or another 2
uneven number of identical protomers, appear to be
a
formed of subunits arranged with cyclic symmetry.
An example is the cholera toxin from Vibrio cholerae, Step 2
which forms a pentamer with an outer ring of subunits K ≈K2 ∆G°≈ 2∆G°
f f
with C symmetry (Fig. 7-5).
5
Now consider the quantitative aspects of heterolo-
a
gous interactions with ring formation. Let K be the j
f
formation constant and ∆G° the Gibbs energy change j
P
for the reaction of the j end of protomer P with the a end a 3
of a second protomer to form the dimer P (Eq. 7-25).
2 j a
In the second step (Eq. 7-25) a third protomer (7-25)
combines. It forms twonewaj interactions. If we assume
for this step that ∆G ° is 2 ∆G°,K will be equal to K2.
f f
The overall association constant for formation of a value of 10–5 M. Suppose that a value for a single aj
trimer from three protomers will be given by Eq. 7-26. interaction of K = 104 (and ∆G° = – 22.8 kJ mol–1) governs
aggregation to form dimers and trimeric rings. What
3 P → P concentration of dimers and of trimer rings will be
3
K = K3 present in the cell in equilibrium with the 10–5 concen-
f
∆G ° = 3 ∆G° (7-26) tration of P. Using Eq. 7-25 we see that the concentra-
f
tion of dimers [P ] is 104 x (10–5)2 = 10–6 M. (Note that
2
This will be true only if ∆G° for formation of both new the amount of material in this concentration of dimer
aj bonds in the trimers is exactly the same as that for is equivalent to 2 x 10–6 M of the monomer units.) The
formation of the aj bond in the dimer. The reader may concentration of rings [P ] is (104)3 x (10–5)3 = 10–3 M,
3
wish to criticize this assumption30a,b,c and to suggest equivalent to 3 x 10–3 M of the monomer units. Thus,
conditions that might lead to overestimation or under- of the totalPpresent in the cell (10–5 + 0.2 x 10–5 + 300 x
estimation of K for the trimer as calculated previously. 10–5 M), 99.6% is associated with trimers, 0.33% is still
f
Now consider a hypothetical example: Protomer P monomers, and only 0.07% exists as dimers. Thus, the
is continuously synthesized by a cell. At the same time formation of two heterologous bonds simultaneously to
some subunits are degraded to a nonaggregating form complete a ring imparts a high degree of cooperativity
via a second metabolic reaction. The two reactions are to the association reaction of Eq. 7-25. We will find in
balanced so that [P] is always present at a steady state a cell mostly either rings or monomer but little dimer.
Figure 7-5 Stereoscopic view
of the B pentamer of cholera
5
toxin B. The pentamer, known
ascholeragenoid, has a central
hole of ~ 1.5 nm diameter into
which a helix from the A subunit
is inserted. As viewed here, the
front surface of the pentamer has
binding sites for the oligosaccha-
ride chains of ganglioside GM ,
1
which serves as the toxin receptor.
The back side binds the A sub-
unit. See also Box 11-A. From
Zhanget al.31

--- Page 337 ---

334 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
Now consider what will happen to the little rings a j a
j
within the cell if the process that removes P to a non- j
associating form suddenly becomes more active so that a
l j a
[P] falls to 10–6 M. If K is still 104, what will be the c j
k
percentages of P, P , and P at equilibrium? Here we
2 3
b
note a characteristic of cooperative processes: A higher
than first power dependence on a concentration. (A)
Helical structures. If the angle at the interface aj
is slightly different, instead of a closed ring, we obtain
a helix as shown in Fig. 7-6A. The helix may have an l k
integral number of subunits per turn or it may have a j a c j a b (cid:1) pitch
nonintegral number, as in the figure. The same type of
heterologous interaction aj is involved in joining each (B)
subunit to the preceding one, but in addition other
interactions occur. If the surfaces involved in these
Figure 7-6 (A) Heterologous bonding of subunits to form a
additional interactions are complementary and the
helix. (B) Radial projection of subunits arranged as in helix
geometry is correct, groups from two different parts
A. Different bonding regions of the subunit are designated
of the molecule (e.g., b and k) may fit together to form
a, b, c, j, k, andl.
another heterologous bond. Still a third heterologous
interactioncl may be formed between two other parts
of the subunit surfaces. If interactions aj,bk, and cl are
strong (i.e., if the surfaces are highly complementary which is held in an elongated double-stranded form
over large areas), extremely strong microtubular struc- by a helical sheath of about 2700 subunits of a 50-
tures may be formed, such as those in the flagella of residue protein. The rod is about 6 nm in diameter
eukaryotic organisms (Fig. 1-8). If the interactions are and 880 nm long and it is capped by two specialized
weaker, labile microfilaments and microtubules, such proteins at one end and a different pair of proteins at
as are often observed to form and dissociate within the other end. The five coat proteins are encoded by
cells, may arise. five of the 11 genes present in these little viruses.37,38
The geometry of subunits within a helix is often Each coat subunit in the Ff viruses is coiled into an
advantageously displayed by imagining that the sur- α-helical rod of 7 nm length. These are arranged in the
face of the structure can be unfolded to give a radial virus in a right-handed helical pattern with a pitch of
projection (Fig. 7-6B). Here subunits corresponding to 1.5 nm and with 4.4 subunits per turn (Fig. 7-7). The
those in the helix in Fig. 7-6A are laid out on a plane protein rods are inclined to the helix axis and extend
obtained by slitting the cylinder representing the sur- inward. This arrangement permits a “knobs-in-holes”
face of the helix and laying it out flat. In the example hydrophobic bonding between subunits. The helix of
shown, the number of subunits per turn is about 4.8 pitch 1.5 nm is the primary or one-start helix. How-
but it can be an integral number. The interactions bk ever, in every regular helical structure we can also
between subunits along the direction of the fiber axis trace a two-start helix, a three-start helix, etc. In this
may sometimes be stronger than those (aj) between instance the five-start helix is easiest to see.
adjacent subunits around the spiral. In such cases The protein coat of these viruses provides an
the microtubule becomes frayed at the ends through elongated cylindrical cavity to protect the circular,
breaking of the aj interactions. This phenomenon can single-stranded DNA molecule that is the genome.
be observed under the electron microscope for the Although there are two antiparallel strands of DNA,
microtubules from flagella of eukaryotic organisms. a regular base-paired structure is impossible and the
Figures 7-7 to 7-10 show four helical structures from the DNA is probably not present in a highly ordered
molecular domain. They are a filamentous bacterio- form.38a There are about 2.4 nucleotides in the DNA
phage, a plant virus, a bacterial pilus, and an actin per protein subunit. However, there are related viruses
microfibril. Each is composed largely of a single kind with ratios as low as one nucleotide per protein sub-
of protomer. A larger and more complex helical struc- unit and containing more highly extended DNA.34,39
ture, the microtubule, is shown in Fig. 7-34.
A rod-shaped plant virus. The tobacco mosaic
Filamentous bacteriophages. Bacteriophages of virus (Figs. 5-41, 7-8) is a 300-nm-long rod constructed
the Ff family include the fd, f1, and M13 strains.31a,32– 36 from 2140 identical wedge-shaped subunits whose
Phage M13 is widely used in cloning genes and for detailed molecular structure is known.40 Each 158-
many other purposes (Chapter 26). The genome is a residue subunit contains five helices and a small β
circular, single-stranded DNA of ~ 6400 nucleotides sheet. A single strand of RNA containing 6395 nucle-

--- Page 338 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 335
otides (~ 3 per protein subunit) lies A
coiled in a groove where it interacts
with side chains from two of the heli-
ces (Fig. 7-8B).41–44a The virus is as-
sembled by the binding of a region of
the RNA 800 – 1000 nucleotides from
the 3' end to a two-turn helix of sub-
units that appears to form spontane-
ously. Additional subunits then add at
each end, binding to the RNA as well
as the adjacent protein subunits.42,44,45
A relative with a very similar struc-
ture is cucumber green mottle mosaic
virus.46
Bacterial pili. The adhesion pili,
or fimbriae,48 of bacteria are also helical
arrays of subunits. The P pili of E. coli
are encoded by a cluster of 11 genes in
thepap (pilus associated with pyelo-
nephritis) cluster. They are needed
to allow the bacteria to colonize the
human urinary tract. The bulk of the
~1-µm-long pilus is made up of about
B
1000 subunits of a 185-residue protein
encoded by gene PapA. They form a
right-handed helix of ~ 7 nm diameter
with 3.28 subunits per turn and a
pitch of ~ 2.5 nm (Fig. 7-9A).49– 51 The
rod is anchored to the bacterial outer
membrane by a protein encoded by
genePapH, while subunits encoded
byPapE and PapF fasten the adhesin
protein (PapG) to the tips of the
pili.49,52,53,53a The adhesin binds to the
Galα1→ 4Gal ends of glycolipids in
C
Figure 7-7 Structure of the virus fd
protein sheath. (A) Left. A single coat
subunit, with its N terminus towards
the top, as if moved from the left side of
the sheath. The dark circles represent
charged atoms of Asp, Glu, and Lys side
chains. The backbone of the protein is
a Cα diagram. The positively charged
atoms near the C terminus line the inner
surface of the sheath neutralizing the
negative charge of the DNA core. Right.
Each subunit is represented by a helical
tube through successive Cα atoms.
Three nearest neighbors, indexed as 0, 6, and 11, are indicated. The axial slab shown represents ~1% of the total length of the
virion. From Marvin.31a (B) A 2.0 nm section through the virus coat with the helices shown as curved cylinders. The view is
down the axis from the N-terminal ends of the rods. The rods extend upward and outward. The rods with indices 0 to – 4
start at the same level, forming a five-start helical array. The rods with more negative indices start at lower levels and are
therefore further out when they are cut in this section. (C) The same view but with “wire models” of the atomic structure of
the rods. From Marvin et al.32

--- Page 339 ---

336 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
A the kidney.51,54 The PapE, F, and
G subunits form a thin ~ 2.5-nm-
thick by 15 nm “fibrillum” which
is attached by an adapter protein
encoded by gene PapK. A special
chaperonin (PapD gene) is also
required for pilus assembly in E.
coli53a as well as other bacteria.55
AnotherE. coli pilus adheres to
mannose oligosaccharides.53b
Similar pili of Neisseria gonno-
rheae are used by that bacterium.
The three-dimensional structure of
the 158-residue pilin subunit is that
of a globular subunit with an 8.5 nm
α-helical spine at one end.56,57 A
proposed model of the intact pilus
shaft is shown in Fig. 7-9B,C. Notice
the similarity of the packing of the
α-helical spines in the center to the
B packing arrangement in the bacterio-
phage coat in Fig. 7-7. Similar features
may be present in the P pilus rod
shown in Fig. 7-9A. However, there
is uncertainty about the packing
arrangement. The E. coli type 1 pilus
subunits contain immunoglobulin
folds that are completed by donation
of an N-terminal strand from a
neighboring subunit.53a In thin
fimbriae of Salmonella extended,
parallelβ helices may be formed
(see Fig. 2-17)53e,53f
Other types of pili are also well-
known.53c,d F pili or conjugative pili
C are essential for sexual transfer of
C DNA between bacterial cells (Chapter
26). F+ strains of E. coli form hollow
pili of 8.5 nm diameter with a 2.0-nm
central hole.58,59 Their 90-residue
subunits apparently form rotationally
symmetric pentamers which stack to
form the pili.59 These pili are essen-
tial to establishing the initial contact
between conjugating bacterial cells.
The thin filaments of muscle.
An essential component of skeletal
muscle (discussed further in Chapter
Figure 7-8 (A) Electron micrograph of the rod-shaped particles of tobacco 19) is filamentous actin (F-actin). It
mosaic virus. © Omikron, Photo Researchers. See also Butler and Klug.42 is composed of 375-residue globular
(B) A stereoscopic computer graphics image of a segment of the 300 nm long subunits of a single type and with a
tobacco mosaic virus. The diameter of the rod is 18 nm, the pitch of the helix is highly conserved sequence.60,61 It is
2.3 nm, and there are 16 1\ 3 subunits per turn. The coat is formed from ~ 2140
found not only in muscle but also in
identical 17.5-kDa subunits. The 6395-nucleotide genomic RNA is represented
other cells where it is a component
by the dark chain exposed at the top of the segment. The resolution is 0.4 nm.
From Namba, Caspar, and Stubbs.47 (C) A MolScript ribbon drawing of two of the cytoskeleton. The actin micro-
stacked subunits. From Wang and Stubbs.46 filament has the geometry of a left-

--- Page 340 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 337
A 15 nm length Pap G B
Pap F
Pap E
2.5 nm
Pap K
d≈ 7 nm
~1µm
C
Pap A rod
2.5 nm pitch
PapH
Figure 7-9 (A) Schematic diagram of a bacterial P pilus. The ~1-µm-long helical rod is anchored to the outer cell membrane
by protein Pap H. The adhesion Pap G binds to galactosyl glycolipids of the host. (B, C) The structure of pilus fiber from
Neisseria gonnorrheae modeled from the atomic structure of the 54-residue pilin subunit. The exact structure of the fiber is
uncertain, but the model generated here by trying various possible helical packings matches the dimensions obtained from
fiber diffraction patterns and electron microscopic images. (B) Cross section. (C) Stereoscopic view. The experimental dimensions
of 4.1-nm pitch and 6.0-nm diameters are shown by the “transparent” ring in (B). From Parge et al.57
handed one-start or primary helix with a pitch of
2. Oligomers with Twofold (Dyad) Axes
only 0.54 nm and with approximately two subunits
per turn (Fig. 7-10).62,63
Paired interactions. If two subunits are held
It can also be described as a right-handed two-start
together with interactions ajand are related by a two-
helix in which two chains of subunits coil around one
fold axis of rotation as shown in Fig. 7-11, we obtain an
another with a long pitch (Fig. 7-10).
isologous dimer. Each point such as a in one subunit
is related to the same point in the other subunit by
reflection through the axis of rotation. In the center,
along the twofold axis, points c and c’ are directly
opposite the same points in the other subunit. Figure 7-11

--- Page 341 ---

338 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
A B
3
2
1
4
Figure 7-10 (A) Model of the
F-actin helix composed of eight
monomeric subunits. The model
was constructed from the known
structure of the actin monomer
with bound ADP using X-ray data
from oriented gels of fibrous actin
to deduce the helical arrangement
of subunits. The main interactions
appear to be along the two-start
helix. See also Holmes et al.62
(B) Ribbon drawing of an actin
monomer with the four domains
labeled. Courtesy of Ivan Rayment.
is drawn with a hole in the center so that groups c and “hydrophobic spots” on the surface of the subunits
c’ do not actually touch, and it is the paired interactions came together in a nonspecific association.64 Later in
such as aj of groups not adjacent to the axis that con- evolution the more specific paired interactions could
tribute most to the bonding. However, a real protein have been added.
dimer may or may not have such a hole. The pair of
identical interactions in an isologous dimer may be Dihedral symmetry. Isologous dimers can serve
referred to as a single isologous bond. Such a bond as subunits in the formation of larger closed oligomers
always contains the paired interactions between and helices; for example, an isologous pair of the sort
complementary groups (aj) and has pairs of identical shown in Fig. 7-11A can be flipped over onto the top of
groups along the axis. However, because they are another similar pair as shown in Figs. 7-11B and 7-11C.
identical those groups usually cannot interact in a Again, if the proper complementary surfaces exist,
specific complementary manner. bonds can form as shown (bk in Fig. 7-11B and bk and
Isologous bonding is very important in oligomeric cl in Fig. 7-11C). Both structures in Figs. 7-11B and 7-11C
enzymes, and it has been suggested that isologous possess dihedral (D ) symmetry.65 In addition to the
2
interactions evolved early. Initially there may not have twofold axis of rotation lying perpendicular to the two
been much complementarity in the bonding but two rings, there are two other twofold axes of rotation as

--- Page 342 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 339
BOX 7-A LIFE AND DEATH FOR PROTEINS: CHAPERONINS AND PROTEASOMES
In 1968, a tiny cylindrical particle, which appeared (labeled A, I, and E , respectively, in the drawing).m
to be a stack of 11-nm rings, was observed by electron After a protein, whether correctly, incorrectly, or
microscopy of an extract of erythrocytes.a,b Later, a only partially folded, enters a cavity in GroEL, a
similar particle was found in both the nucleus and second protein GroES of smaller size (~10 kDa)
the cytoplasm of other cells of many organisms. The but with seven-fold symmetry binds to one end of
particles were soon recognized as a new type of the chaperonin.p Seven molecules of ATP also bind
protein-hydrolyzing enzyme, a large 700-kDa particle to sites on the GroEL ring to which GroES binds (the
consisting of 20–30 subunits of several different types cis ring). The binding of the ATP and GroES evi-
which came to be known as the multicatalytic pro- dently induces a major conformational change in
tease or 20S proteasome.c,d Electron microscopy the GroEL subunitsl,m,n,q which causes the binding
and X-ray diffraction showed that the particle is cavity to expand to over twice the original volume.
formed from four stacked rings, each of which con- This change (see drawing) also causes hydrophobic
sists of seven subunits whose molecular masses surfaces of the cavity to become buried and hydro-
range from 21 to 31 kDa.e– j philic side chains to be exposed. The cavity surface
Proteasomes are strikingly similar in architecture, was initially largely hydrophobic and able to bind
though not in peptide sequences, to another particle many proteins nonspecifically, but upon expansion
found in both bacteria and eukaryotes: a molecular it becomes hydrophilic and less likely to bind. This
“chaperone” or chaperonin. The chaperonins, of releases the encased protein to complete its folding
which there are several types, protect proteins while or to partially unfold and refold without interference
they fold or undergo translocation within cells.k from other proteins.
One of the best studied members is the E. coli protein While a protein is adjusting its folding in the cis
GroEL,which is also composed of double rings of compartment another protein molecule may become
14 subunits with seven-fold rotational symmetry trapped in the trans compartment. After some time
and with two of these assemblies associated back- the bound ATP molecules are hydrolyzed. As in the
to-back with dihedral symmetry.l The dimensions contraction of muscle, which is discussed in Chapter
of GroEL and 20S proteasomes are nearly the same. 19, the loss of inorganic phosphate (P) and ADP
i
However, GroEL has only two rings of ~ 60-kDa from the active site can be accompanied by move-
subunits, more than twice the size of proteosomal ment. In the chapenonin this involves a conforma-
subunits. The accompanying sketch illustrates this tional switch so that the ES heptamer is released and
fact and also the basic structural similarity of 20S the conformation of the trans ring of EL is switched
proteosomes with GroEL. The αβ pairs of the pro- to that of the initial cis ring and vice versa. The new
teosome, correspond to single subunits of the chap- cis ring is ready to receive an ES cap and the new
eronin, but these subunits have three distinct trans ring can release the folded protein.r A variety
domains–apical, intermediate, and equatorial of experimental approaches are being used in an
1.3 nm 4.5 nm 1.0 nm
α α A A
2.7 nm
I I
β β
E E
14.8 nm 14.6 nm
β β E E
I I
α α
A A
11.3 nm 13.7 nm
20S Proteasome GroEL Chaperonin
Catalytic sites Hydrophobic binding
patches
Expanded GroEL-GroES
From Weissman, Sigler and Horwichg. Illustrations by K. Sutliff. complex with enclosed
Right: From Mayhew and Hartlo folding polypeptideo

--- Page 343 ---

340 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
BOX 7-A LIFE AND DEATH FOR PROTEINS: CHAPERONINS AND PROTEASOMES (continued)
effort to further understand the action of GroEL.s– x twoβ rings. A channel only 1.3 nm in diameter
7
The chaperonin may function repeatedly before a permits the entrance of peptide chains into the
protein becomes properly folded.t compartments.
While chaperonins assist proteins to fold cor- The active sites of the enzymesff are located in
rectly proteasomes destroy unfolded chains by theβ subunits in the central cavity.dd While the
partial hydrolysis, cutting the chains into a random yeast and human proteasomes are similar to those
assortment of pieces from 3 to 30 residues in length ofThermoplasma, the β subunits consist of seven
with an average length of ~ 8 residues.y Proteasomes different protein-hydrolyzing enzymes whose cata-
destroy not only unfolded and improperly folded lytic activities and mechanisms are considered in
proteins but also proteins marked for destruction by Chapter 12. There are also seven different α sub-
the ubiquitin system described in Box 10-C. It has units, all of whose sequences are known.i,gg To make
been hard to locate true proteosomes in most bacteria. the story more complex, additional subunits, some
However, they do contain protease particles with of which catalyze ATP hydrolysis, form a 600- to
similar characteristicsz– bb and archaeons, such as 700-kDa cap which adds to one or both ends of a 20S
Thermoplasma acidophilum, have proteasomes similar proteosome to give a larger 26S proteasome.b,d,e,w
to those of eukaryotes.cc These larger proteasomes carry out an ATP-depen-
TheThermoplasma proteasome contains only two dent cleavage of proteins selected for degradation
kinds of subunits, α and β, which have similar amino by the ubiquitin system (Box 10-C; Chapter 12).
acid sequences. These form α and β rings which Some of the short peptide segments formed by pro-
7 7
associate in α β pairs with two of these double rings teasomes may leave cells and participate in intercel-
7 7
stacked back-to-back with dihedral D7 symmetry: lular communication. For example, pieces of antigenic
α β β α . The crystal structure has been determined peptides are used by cells of the immune system for
7 7 7 7
for this 20S proteasome from T. acidophilumg,dd and “antigen presentation” (Chapter 31),hh an important
for the corresponding proteasome from yeast (Sac- process by which the immune system recognizes
charomyces cerevisiae).f,ee The accompanying drawings which cells are “self” and which are foreign or malig-
illustrate top and side views of the T. acidophilum nant and must be killed.
proteasome. The particle contains three internal The structure of the caps on the 26S proteasome
cavities. The outer two are formed between the α ends is complex. At least 20 different regulatory
7
andβ rings and the inner is formed between the subunits have been identified.ii,jj
7
A
(A) Electron micrograph of 26S
100 nm
proteasomes from Xenopus oocytes
negatively stained with 2% uranyl
B
acetate. (B) Image of the 26S
proteasome (left) and a 20S protea-
some with only one end cap. These
views were obtained by correlation
averaging of 527 individual images
of the 26S proteasome and 395
images of the single-ended form.
From Peters et al.e Courtesy of
10 nm Wolfgang Baumeister.

--- Page 344 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 341
BOX 7-A (continued)
A
B
(A) Top view of the 20S protea-
some as an α-carbon plot showing
the seven-fold symmetry. The α
subunits are in front of the β sub-
units. (B) Side view showing the
proteasome cut open along its
seven-fold axis. From Löweet al.dd
Courtesy of Robert Huber.
a Harris, J. R. (1968) Biochim. Biophys. Acta.150, 534–537 t Nieba-Axmann, S. E., Ottiger, M., Wüthrich, K., and Plückthun,
b Peters, J.-M. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 377–382 A. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.271, 803–818
c Bosch, G., Baumeister, W., and Essen, L.-O. (2000) J. Mol. Biol. u Gervasoni, P., Gehrig, P., and Plückthun, A. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.
301, 19–25 275, 663–675
d Ferrell, K., Wilkinson, C. R. M., Dubiel, W., and Gordon, C. v Torella, C., Mattingly, J. R., Jr., Artigues, A., Iriarte, A., and
(2000)Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 83–88 Martinez-Carrion, M. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 3915–3925
e Peters, J.-M., Cejka, Z., Harris, J. R., Kleinschmidt, J. A., and wHorwich, A. L., Weber-Ban, E. U., and Finley, D. (1999) Proc.
Baumeister, W. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.234, 932–937 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 11033–11040
f Groll, M., Ditzel, L., Löwe, J., Stock, D., Bochtler, M., Bartunik, x Buckle, A. M., Zahn, R., and Fersht, A. R. (1997) Proc. Natl.
H. D., and Huber, R. (1997) Nature (London)386, 463–471 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 3571–3575
g Weissman, J. S., Sigler, P. B., and Horwich, A. L. (1995) Science y Kisselev, A. F., Akopian, T. N., and Goldberg, A. L. (1998) J. Biol.
268, 523–524 Chem.273, 1982–1989
h DeMartino, G. N., and Slaughter, C. A. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, z Kessel, M., Maurizi, M. R., Kim, B., Kocsis, E., Trus, B. L., Singh,
22123–22126 S. K., and Steven, A. C. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.250, 587–594
i Gerards, W. L. H., de Jong, W. W., Bloemendal, H., and Boelens, aaShin, D. H., Lee, C. S., Chung, C. H., and Suh, S. W. (1996) J.
W. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.275, 113–121 Mol. Biol.262, 71– 76
j Schmidtke, G., Schmidt, M., and Kloetzel, P.-M. (1997) J. Mol. bbTamura, T., Tamura, N., Cejka, Z., Hegerl, R., Lottspeich, F., and
Biol.268, 95–106 Baumeister, W. (1996) Science274, 1385–1389
k Netzer, W. J., and Hartl, F. U. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.23, ccMaupin-Furlow, J. A., and Ferry, J. G. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
68–73 28617–28622
l Sigler, P. B., Xu, Z., Rye, H. S., Burston, S. G., Fenton, W. A., and ddLöwe, J., Stock, D., Jap, B., Zwickl, P., Baumeister, W., and
Horwich, A. L. (1998) Ann. Rev. Biochem.67, 581–608 Huber, R. (1995) Science268, 533–539
mKawata, Y., Kawagoe, M., Hongo, K., Miyazaki, T., Higurashi, eeStuart, D. I., and Jones, E. Y. (1997) Nature (London)386, 437–
T., Mizobata, T., and Nagai, J. (1999) Biochemistry38, 15731–15740 438
n Betancourt, M. R., and Thirumalai, D. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.287, ff Voges, D., Zwickl, P., and Baumeister, W. (1999) Ann. Rev.
627–644 Biochem.68, 1015–1068
o Mayhew, M., and Hartl, F. U. (1996) Science271, 161–162 ggSchmidt, M., and Kloetzel, P.-M. (1997) FASEB J.11, 1235–1243
p Hunt, J. F., Weaver, A. J., Landry, S. J., Gierasch, L., and hhGoldberg, A. L., and Rock, K. L. (1992) Nature (London)357,
Deisenhofer, J. (1996) Nature (London)379, 37–45 375–379
q Cliff, M. J., Kad, N. M., Hay, N., Lund, P. A., Webb, M. R., ii Adams, G. M., Falke, S., Goldberg, A. L., Slaughter, C. A.,
Burston, S. G., and Clarke, A. R. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.293, 667–684 DeMartino, G. N., and Gogol, E. P. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.273,
r Rye, H. S., Burston, S. G., Fenton, W. A., Beechem, J. M., Xu, Z., 646–657
Sigler, P. B., and Horwich, A. L. (1997) Nature (London)388, jj Knowlton, J. R., Johnston, S. C., Whitby, F. G., Realini, C.,
792–798 Zhang, Z., Rechsteiner, M., and Hill, C. P. (1997) Nature
s Chatellier, J., Buckle, A. M., and Fersht, A. R. (1999) J. Mol. Biol. (London)390, 639–643
292, 163–172

--- Page 345 ---

342 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
indicated in the drawings. Again,
A
the interactions are paired and iso-
logous; of many possible contacts
B
twobk interactions and two cl inter-
actions are marked for each pair of a
C
c
subunits in Fig. 7-11. There are a
total of six pairs of these interac- c'
j j j' a'
tions, one between each combina-
c
tion of two subunits. This may be a b k j' a'
little more difficult to see in Fig. 7-11B a
than in Fig. 7-11C because in the c b
l k
former the subunits are arranged in
b j a k
a more or less square configuration.
Nevertheless, a pair of interactions
k a j b
between the left-hand subunit in j
the top ring and the subunit in the a a
lower ring at the right does exist, k
l j
c b
even if it is only electrostatic and at
a distance. An example of a tetra-
meric enzyme with perfect dihedral
symmetry of the type shown in Fig.
7-11B is lactate dehydrogenase
Figure 7-11 (A) Isologous bonding between pairs of subunits; (B) an “isologous
(Chapter 15). The plant agglutinin
square” arrangement of subunits; (C) an apparently “tetrahedral” arrangement of
concanavalin A has a quaternary subunits. Note the three twofold axes.
structure resembling that in Fig. 7-11C.
Square arrays of four subunits
can be formed using either heterolo-
gous or isologous interactions. Both types of bonding
can occur in larger aggregates. For example, two
trimers such as that shown in Eq. 7-25 can associate to
a hexamer having dihedral (D ) symmetry; a heterolo-
3
gous“square tetramer” can dimerize to give a dihedral
(D ) octamer.65 The enzymes ornithine decarboxylase
4
(Fig. 7-12)66 and glutamine synthetase (Chapter 24)67
each consist of double rings of six subunits each. The
upper ring is flipped over onto the lower giving dihe-
dral symmetry (D ) with one 6-fold axis and six 2-fold
6
axes at right angles to it.
Oligomers with cubic symmetry (polyhedra).
Symmetrical arrangements containing more than one
axis of rotation of order higher than 2-fold are said to
have cubic symmetry. The tetrahedron is the simplest
example. It contains four 3-fold axes which pass through
the vertices and the centers of the faces and three 2-fold
axes which pass through the midpoints of the six edges.
Since protein subunits are always asymmetric, a tetrameric
protein cannot possess cubic symmetry. As we have already
seen, tetrameric enzymes have dihedral symmetry.
However, a heterologous trimer with 3-fold symmetry
Figure 7-12 A ribbon representation of the ornithine decar-
can form a face of a tetrahedron containing a total of boxylase dodecamer. Six dimers of the 730-residue subunits
12 asymmetric subunits. Twenty-four subunits can are related by C crystallographic symmetry. MolScript
6
interact to form a cube. Three 4-fold axes pass through drawing from Momany et al.66 Courtesy of Marvin Hackert.
the centers of the faces, four 3-fold axes pass through
the vertices, and six 2-fold axes pass through the edges
(see Figs. 7-13 and 16-3).
The largest structure of cubic symmetry that can

--- Page 346 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 343
A B Figure 7-13 (A) MolScript
ribbon drawing of a subunit of
the iron oxide storage proteins
L-ferritin from amphibian red
cells. This 4-helix bundle is
represented by cylinders of 1.3
nm diameter in the oligomer.
(B) Helices A and C of the mono-
mer are on the outer surfaces of
the oligomer and helices B and
D are on the inner surface. The
oligomer consists of a shell of 24
subunits and is viewed down a
4-fold axis illustrating its 423 (cubic)
symmetry. The molecule is
illustrated further in Fig. 16-3.
From Trikha et al.74 Courtesy of
Elizabeth Theil.
A B
C 5 D
2
3
5
P
D
T
Figure 7-14 (A) Schematic drawing illustrating an icosahedrally symmetric structure with sixty identical asymmetric sub-
units all in equivalent positions. The 5-fold axes are located at the vertices of the icosohedron and the 2-fold and 3-fold axes
can readily be seen. (B) Ribbon drawing of the 195-residue polypeptide chain of the coat subunit of satellite tobacco necrosis
virus. The protein folds into an inwardly projecting N-terminal segment and a “β-jellyroll” domain. The packing of this
subunit in the virus particle is shown schematically in (C). The symmetry axes drawn next to the subunit diagram (B) can be
used to position it in the structure. Contacts between subunits are labeled D, T, and P (‘dimer’,‘trimer’,‘pentamer’). Diagrams
courtesy of Drs. Strandberg, Liljas, and Harrison.68 (D) The distribution of RNA helical segments in a hemisphere of a virion
of a similar small virus, the satellite tobacco mosaic virus. The virion viewed down a 3-fold axis from the virus exterior. The
helical axes of the RNA segments are along icosahedral edges. From Larson et al.75

--- Page 347 ---

344 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
be made is the icosahedron, a regular solid with 20 1239-nucleotide molecule of RNA. The structure of
triangular faces. Sixty subunits, or some multiple of the coat has been determined to 0.25-nm resolution.73
60, are required and at each vertex they form a heterol- Many virus coats have 180 subunits or a number
ogous pentamer. As with the tetrahedron, each face that is some other multiple of 60. However, in these
contains a heterologous trimer, while isologous bonds coats the subunits cannot all be in identical environ-
across the edges form dimers (Fig. 7-14C). Many ments. Two cases may be distinguished. If all of the
viruses consist of roughly spherical protein shells subunits have identical amino acid sequences they
(coats) containing DNA or RNA inside.68– 70 As with probably exist in more than one distinct conformation
the filamentous viruses, the protein coats consist of that permit them to pack efficiently. (Next section)
many identical subunits, a fact that can be rationalized Alternatively, two or more subunits of differing sequence
in terms of economy from the genetic viewpoint. Only and structure may associate to form 60 larger subunits
one gene is needed to specify the structure of a large number that do pack with icosahedral symmetry. For example,
of subunits.70,71 Under the electron microscope the viruses the polioviruses (diameter 25 nm) contain three major
often have an icosahedral appearance (Figs. 5-41A, 7-14), coat proteins (α,β, and γ or VP1, VP2, and VP3). These
and chemical studies show that the number of the are formed by cleavage of a large precursor protein
most abundant subunits is usually a multiple of 60. into at least four pieces.76,77 The three largest pieces of
An example is the tiny satellite tobacco necrosis ~ 33-, 30-, and 25-kDa mass (306, 272, and 238 residues,
virus,72 diameter ~ 18 nm, whose coat contains just respectively) aggregate as (αβγ) . Sixty copies of a
60
60 subunits of a 195-residue protein. Its genome is a fourth subunit of 60 residues are found within the shell.
Related picorna viruses such as
human rhinoviruses (Fig. 7-15),69,78,79
foot-and-mouth disease virus, parvo-
A
virus,80 and Mengo virus81 have
similar architectures. The small
(diameter 25 nm) single-stranded
DNA bacteriophages such as φX174
also have three different coat pro-
teins, one of which forms small
hollow spikes at the vertices of the
icosahedral shell (Fig. 5-41A).82
Asymmetry and quasi-equiva-
lence in oligomers. It is natural to
think about association of subunits
in symmetric ways. Consequently
B the observation of square, pentagonal,
and hexagonal arrangements of sub-
units directly with the electron micro-
scope led to a ready acceptance of
the idea that protomers tend to
associate symmetrically. However,
consider the predicament of the two
molecules shown in Fig. 7-16. They
might get together to form an isolo-
gous dimer if it were not for the fact
that their “noses” are in the way.
Despite the obvious steric hindrance,
50 nm an isologous dimer can be formed
in this case if one subunit is able to
undergo a small change in confor-
mation (Fig. 7-16). In the resulting
Figure 7-15 (A) Schematic diagram of the icosahedral shell of a human dimer the two subunits are only
rhinovirus showing the arrangement of the three subunits VP1, VP2, and quasi-equivalent.
VP3, each present as 60 copies. (B) Stereoscopic view of an image of the
Unsymmetrical dimerization of
virus “decorated” by the binding of two immunoglobulinlike domains of the
proteins appears to be a common
intercellular adhesion molecule ICAM-1, a natural receptor for the virus.
phenomenon that is often observed
Part of this receptor binds into a groove or “canyon,” which in marked in (A)
by the dark bands. From Olson et al.78 Courtesy of Michael Rossmann. in protein crystals. For example, the

--- Page 348 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 345
A B
1 2 1 2
Figure 7-16 Nonsymmetric bonding in a
dimer. (A) Two molecules which cannot
dimerize because of a bad fit at the center.
(B) A solution: Molecule 1 has refolded its
peptide chain a little, changing shape enough
to fit to molecule 2.
enzymes malic dehydrogenase and glyceraldehyde where the Phe 25 from the right-hand chain projects
phosphate dehydrogenase (Chapter 15) are both tetra- upward and to the left. If the symmetry were perfect
mers of approximate dihedral symmetry but X-ray the corresponding side chain from the left-hand chain
crystallography revealed distinct asymmetries83,84 would project upward and to the right and the two
which include a weaker binding of the coenzyme phenylalanines would collide, exactly as do the “noses”
NAD+ in one subunit. This may simply reflect differ- in Fig. 7-16. In insulin one phenylalanine side chain
ences in environment within the crystal lattice. How- has been flipped back out of the way.
ever, negative cooperativity in coenzyme binds has also Under proper conditions, three insulin dimers
been revealed by kinetic experiments.85 associate to form a hexamer of approximate dihedral
The polypeptide hormone insulin is a small protein (D ) symmetry that is stabilized by the presence of
3
made up of two chains (designated A and B) which are two zinc ions. Figure 7-17D is a crude sketch of the
held together by disulfide bridges (Fig. 7-17A). Figure hexamer showing the three dimers, the 3-fold axis of
7-17B is a sketch of the structure as revealed by X-ray symmetry, and the two pseudo 2-fold axes, one passing
crystallography,86,87 with only the backbone of the between the two subunits of the dimer and the other
peptide chains and a few side chains shown. In the between two adjacent dimers. Figure 7-18 is a stereo-
drawing, the B chain lies behind the A chain. Beginning scopic ribbon diagram of the atomic structure, with the
with the N-terminal Phe 1 of the B chain the peptide A chains omitted, as obtained by X-ray diffraction.87
backbone makes a broad curve, and then falls into an The structure has also been obtained by NMR spectro-
helix of three turns lying more or less in the center of scopy.88 Note that each of the two zinc atoms lies on
the molecule. After a sharp turn, it continues upward the threefold axis and is bound by three imidazole
on the left side of the drawing in a nearly completely rings from histidines B-10. The significance of the zinc
extendedβ structure. The A chain has an overall U binding is uncertain but these hexamers readily form
shape with two roughly helical portions. The U shape rhombohedral crystals, even within the pancreatic cells
is partly maintained by a disulfide bridge running that synthesize insulin. The structure illustrates a
between two parts of the A chain. Two disulfide bridges feature that is common to many oligomers of circular
hold the A and B chains together, and hydrophobic or dihedral symmetry. A central “channel” is often
bonding of internal side chain groups helps to stabilize quite open and protruding side chain groups, such as
the molecule. the imidazole groups in insulin, form handy nests into
Insulin in solution dimerizes readily, the subunits which ions or molecules regulating activity of proteins
occupying quasi-equivalent positions. Figure 7-17C can fit. Conformational differences in insulin are in-
shows some details of the bonding between the sub- duced by the binding of phenol. In Fig. 7-18A the
units in the insulin dimer with a view from the outside C-terminal ends of the chains are extended but in the
of the molecule down the 2-fold axis (marked by the X phenol complex (B) they have coiled to extend the α
in the center of the Phe 25 ring in the right-hand chain) helices.
through the dimer. The C-terminal ends of the B chains
are seen in an extended conformation. The two anti- Quasi-equivalence in virus coats. A large
parallel chains form a β structure with two pairs of number of icosahedral viruses have coats consisting
hydrogen bonds. If there were perfect isologous bond- of 180 identical subunits. For example, the small
ing, the two pairs would be entirely equivalent and RNA-containing bacteriophage MS 2 consists of an
symmetrically related one to the other. A straight line eicosahedral shell of 180 copies of a 129-residue pro-
drawn from a position in one chain and passing through tein that encloses one molecule of a 3569-residue
the twofold axis (X) would also pass approximately RNA.89 The virus also contains a single molecule of a
through the corresponding position in the other chain. 44-kDa protein, the A protein, which binds the virus
However, there are many deviations from perfect to a bacterial pilus to initiate infection. Related bacte-
symmetry, the most striking of which is at the center riophages GA, fr, f2, and Qβ90,91 have a similar

--- Page 349 ---

346 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
architecture. Many RNA-containing viruses of plants according to which the distances between the centers
also have 180 subunits in their coats.68 Much studied of subunits are preserved in a family of icosadeltahedra
are the tomatobushy stunt virus (diameter ~ 33 nm, containing subunits in multiples of 20. However, the
40-kDa subunits),68 and the related southern bean angles must vary somewhat from those in a regular
mosaic virus.92 The human wart virus (diameter icosahedron (compare with geodesic shells in which
~ 56 nm) contains 420 subunits, seven times the number the angles are constant but the distances are not all the
in a regular icosahedron. Adenoviruses (diameter same). The resulting polyhedra contain hexamers as
~100 nm) have 1500 subunits, 25 times more than the well as pentamers at vertices; for example, the shells
60 in a regular icosahedron.93,94 Caspar and Klug95 of the 180-subunit viruses contain clusters of subunits
proposed a theory of quasi-equivalence of subunits forming 12 pentamers and 20 hexamers. There are
A B
S S
1
A. Gly Ile Val Glu Gln Cys Cys Ser Leu Tyr Gln Leu
Ile
Cys Tyr Ser
Gln
Ala Leu
S
Gln Tyr Asn
S Val Leu
1
Tyr
B. Phe Val Asn Gln His Leu Cys Leu Val S S
Gly Ser His Cys Cys
Gly Asn 21
Gln
Arg
Gly
Phe
Phe
Tyr Thr Pro Lys Ala30
C D
3-fold axis
Zn
3.5 nm
Local 2-fold Zn
axis through
dimer
Dimer-dimer
5.0 nm axis
Figure 7-17 The structure of insulin. (A) The amino acid
sequence of the A and B chains linked by disulfide bridges. (B)
Sketch showing the backbone structure of the insulin molecule
as revealed by X-ray analysis. The A and B chains have been
labeled. Positions and orientations of aromatic side chains are
also shown. (C) View of the paired N-terminal ends of the B
chains in the insulin dimer. View is approximately down the
pseudo-twofold axis toward the center of the hexamer. (D)
Schematic drawing showing packing of six insulin molecules in
the zinc-stabilized hexamer.

--- Page 350 ---

B. Complementarity and the Packing of Macromolecules 347
also 60 trimers (on the faces) and 90 A
dimers (across the edges) (Fig. 7-19).
Such structures can be formed only
for certain values of T where the
number of subunits is 60T and
there are 12 pentamers (pentons)
and 10 (T-1) hexamers hexons. T
can assume values of h2 + hk + k2
where h and k may be positive
integers or zero. Some allowed T
values are 1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 13, 25.68,70,96,97
The subunits in virus coats
withT greater than one are not all
in equivalent positions. For example,
the three subunits labeled A, B,
and C in Fig. 7-19 are each slightly
B
differently positioned with respect
to neighboring subunits. Since
virus coats are usually tightly
packed the subunits must assume
more than one conformation. One
kind of conformational change that
allows quasi-equivalence of sub-
units is observed in the tomato
bushy stunt virus. Two structural
domains are connected by a hinge
which allows an outer protruding
domain to move slightly to pre-
serve good isologous interactions
with a corresponding domain in
Figure 7-18 Stereoscopic MolScript ribbon drawings of the B chains (A chains
another subunit.68 omitted) of (A) hexameric 2-zinc pig insulin. (B) A phenol complex of the same
The southern bean mosaic protein. Within each dimer the B chains are shaded differently. The Zn2+ ions
virus has an eight-stranded anti- are represented by white spheres and the coordinating histidine side chains are
parallelβ-barrel structure closely shown. Six noncovalently bound phenol molecules can be seen, as can several
similar to that of the major domain conformational differences. From Whittingham et al.87 Courtesy of Peter C. E.
Moody.
of the bushy stunt viruses but
lacking the second hinged domain.
The problem of quasi-equivalence
is resolved by the presence of an N-
terminal extension that binds onto
a subunit across the quasi-six-fold
axis to give a set of three subunits
(labeled C in Fig. 7-19) that associate
with true three-fold symmetry and
A
another set (B) with a slightly differ-
ent conformation fitting between B
them.68,92 The subunits A, which C
Figure 7-19 Schematic
have a third conformation, fit to- icosahedrally symmetric
gether around the five-fold axis in structure with 180 sub-
true cyclic symmetry. units. The quasi-equivalent
A surprising finding is that the units A, B, and C are
polyoma virus coat, which was necessarily somewhat
differently positioned with
expected to contain 420 (7 x 60)
respect to their neighbors
subunits, apparently contains only
and must therefore assume
360. The result is that the hexavalent
different conformations in
morphological unit is a pentamer
order to fit together tightly.
and that quasi-eqivalence appears From Harrison.68

--- Page 351 ---

348 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
to be violated.98,99 Flexible arms tie the pentamers Many other oligomeric enzymes and other complex
together. assemblies of more than one kind of protein subunit are
Quasi-equivalence of subunits also provides the known. For example, the 2-oxoacid dehydrogenases
supercoil in bacterial flagella (Chapter 19) and accounts are huge 2000- to 4000-kDa complexes containing three
for some interesting aspects of the structure of tobacco different proteins with different enzymatic activities in
mosaic virus. The protein subunits of the virus can a cubic array (Fig. 15-14). The filaments of striated
exist either as a helix with 16.3 subunits per turn (Fig. muscle (Chapter 19), antibodies and complement of
7-8) or as a flat ring of 17 subunits.100 A very small blood (Chapter 31), and the tailed bacteriophages
conformational difference is involved. These rings (Box 7-C ) all have complex molecular architectures.
dimerize but do not form larger aggregates. What is
surprising is that the dimeric rings do not have dihe-
dral symmetry, all of the subunits in the dimeric disk
A
being oriented in one direction but with two different
conformations. The disk may serve as an intermediate
in virus assembly. The inner portions of the quasi-
equivalent disk subunits have a jawlike appearance
as if awaiting the incorporation of RNA. As the RNA
becomes bound, the disks could dislocate to a “lock-
washer” conformation to initiate and to propagate Asp
growth of the helical virus particle.100,44a However,
there is uncertainty about this interpretation.45,101 CP
Some enzymes, such as yeast hexokinase and Zn
creatine kinase (Chapter 12), associate in extremely
Allo
asymmetric ways.102 A dimer is formed by means of
heterologous interactions but steric hindrance prevents
the unsatisfied sets of interacting groups from joining
with additional monomers to form higher polymers.
As Galloway pointed out, many biological structures
are not completely ordered but nevertheless possess
B
well-defined and functionally important local relation- H8 H10
ships.103
H9 H11
Regulatory subunits and multienzyme complexes.
Proteins are often organized into large complexes, H7
H12
sometimes for the purpose of regulating metabolism. H6 H5
An example is aspartate carbamoyltransferase H3’
H1
which catalyzes the first step in the synthesis of the
pyrimidine rings of DNA and RNA (Chapter 25). The
H2’
310-kDa enzyme from E. coli can be dissociated into H1’ H2
two 100-kDa trimers, referred to as catalytic subunits, H4
Zinc domain
and three 34-kDa dimers, the regulatory subunits
H3
which alter their conformations in response to changes
in the ATP, UTP, and CTP concentrations.104– 107 The
Allosteric domain Carbamoylphosphate domain
molecule is roughly triangular in shape47,108 with a
thickness of 9.2 nm and a length of the triangular side
of 10.5 nm (Fig. 7-20). The symmetry is 3:2, i.e., it is
dihedral with one 3-fold axis of rotation and three 2- Figure 7-20 (A) Subunit assembly of two C catalytic
3
fold axes. The two trimers of catalytic subunits lie trimers (green) and three R regulatory dimers around the
2
face-to-face with the dimeric regulatory subunits fitting periphery in aspartate carbamoyltransferase. After Krause
et al.109 Courtesy of William N. Lipscomb. The aspartate-
between them into the grooves around the edges of the
and carbamoylphosphate-binding domains of the catalytic
trimers (Fig. 7-20). The dimers are not aligned exactly
subunits are labeled Asp and CP, respectivley, while the zinc
parallel with the 3-fold axis, but to avoid eclipsing, the
and allosteric domains of the regulatory subunits are labeled
upper half of the array is rotated around the 3-fold
Allo and Zn, respectively. (B) Ribbon drawing of a single
axis with respect to the lower half. In the center is an pair of regulatory (left) and catalytic (right) subunits with
aqueous cavity of dimensions ~ 2.5 x 5.0 x 5.0 nm. The the structural domains labeled. MolScript drawing from
active sites of the enzyme are inside this cavity which is Thomaset al.110
reached through six ~1.5-nm opening around the sides.

--- Page 352 ---

C. Cooperative Changes in Conformation 349
C. Cooperative Changes in Conformation 1. Unequal Binding of Substrate and
“Induced Fit”
A substrate will bind better to some conformations
of a protein than it will to others. This simple fact, Assume that conformer B binds X more strongly
together with the tendency for protein monomers to than does conformer A (as is suggested by the shapes
associate into clusters, allows for cooperative changes of the binding sites in Eq. 7-27). The intrinsic binding
in conformation within oligomeric proteins. These constants to the A and B conformers K and K (or
AX BX
changes provide the basis for important aspects of the K and K ) are defined by Eq. 7-29:
T R
regulation of enzymes and of metabolism. They im-
part cooperativity to the binding of small molecules K = [AX] / [A] [X]
AX
such as that of oxygen to hemoglobin and of substrates K = [BX] / [B] [X]) (7-29)
BX
and regulating molecules to enzymes. Many of the
most fundamental and seemingly mysterious properties The entire set of equilibria for this system are shown in
of living things are linked directly to cooperative changes Eq. 7-30. Note that the constant relating
within the fibrils, membranes, and other structures of
the cell.
K
In 1965 a simple, appealing mathematical descrip- t
A B
tion of cooperative phenomena was suggested by X
X
Monod, Wyman, and Changeux30,110a,110b and focused K
AX K
new attention on the phenomenon. They suggested BX
that conformational changes in protein subunits,
which could be associated with altered binding charac- AX BX
teristics, occur cooperatively within an oligomer. For KK /K
t BX AX (7-30)
example, binding of phenol to hexameric 2-zinc insulin
(Fig. 7-18) could induce all six individual subunits to
change their conformation together, preserving the D BX to AX is not independent of the other three constants
6
symmetry of the complex. (In fact, it is more complex but is given by the expression KK /K . Now con-
t BX AX
than this.111) The four subunits of hemoglobin could sider the following situation. Suppose that A predom-
likewise change their conformation and affinity for O inates in the absence of X but that X binds more tightly
2
synchronously. This is very nearly true and is of major to B than to A. There will be largely either free A or BX
physiological significance. in the equilibrium mixture with smaller amounts of
Consider an equilibrium (Eqs. 7-27 and 7-28) AX and B. An interesting kinetic question arises. By
between protein molecules in two different conforma- which of the two possible pathways from A to BX (Eq.
tions A and B (T and R in the MWC terminology) and 7-30) will the reaction take place? The first possibility,
containing a single binding site for molecule X. In the assumed in the MWC model, is that X binds only to
Monod–Wyman–Changeux (MWC) model the con- preformed B, which is present in a small amount in
formations are designated T (tense) and R (relaxed) equilibrium with A. The second possibility is that X
but in the interest of providing a more general treat- can bind to A but that AX is then rapidly converted to BX.
ment the terminology used in this book is that of We could say that X induces a conformational change that
Koshlandet al.13,112 – 115 leads to a better fit. This is the basis for the induced fit
theory of Koshland. Bear in mind that the equilibrium
constants can give us the equilibrium concentrations
X X of all four forms in Eq. 7-30. However, rates of reaction
are often important in metabolism and we cannot say
K
t a priori which of the two pathways will be followed.
IfK /K is very large, an insignificant amount
BX AX
of AX will be present at equilibrium. In such a case
there is no way experimentally to determine K . The
AX
A (or T) conformer B (or R) conformer two constants K and K are sufficient to describe the
(7-27) t BX
equilibria but an induced fit mechanism may still hold.
Now consider the association of A and B to form
K t = [B] / [A] (7-28) oligomers in which the intrinsic binding constants K AX
andK have the same values as in the monomers.
BX
If the equilibrium constant K is approximately 1, the Since more enzymes apparently exist as isologous
t
twoconformers have equal energies, but if K < 1, A dimers than as any other oligomeric form,116 it is
t
is more stable than B. appropriate to consider the behavior of such dimers
in some detail. Monod et al. emphasized that both

--- Page 353 ---

350 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
conformers A and B (T and R) can associate to form constant associated with that step is shown multiplied
isologous dimers in which symmetry is preserved (Eq. by an appropriate statistical factor. The fractional
7-31). saturation Y is given by Eq. 7-35. Each of the nine
terms in the numerator gives the concentration of
K = 1/L (in MWC terminology)
2Y (based on dimer) =
A A B B [AX] + [BX] + [A X] + 2[A X ] + [ABX]
2 2 2
+ [AXB] + 2[ABX ] + [B X] + 2[B X ]
2 2 2 2
1 ([A] + [AX] + [B] + [BX]) + [A ] + [A X]
2 2 2
(7-31) + [A X ] + [AB] + [ABX] + [AXB]
2 2
+ [ABX ] + [B ] + [[B X] + [B X ]
2 2 2 2 2
On the other hand, association of B and A would lead
(7-35)
to an unsymmetric dimer in which bonding between
subunits might be poor:
bound X represented by one of the nine forms contain-
ing X in Fig. 7-21. The 14 terms in the denominator
represent the concentration of protein in each form
including those containing no bound X. Protein con-
A B centrations are given in terms of the molecular mass
of the dimer; hence, some of the terms in the denomi-
nator are multiplied by 1/ 2.
All of the terms in both the numerator and the
Mixed AB dimer denominator of Eq. 7-35 can be related back to [X],
which associates weakly
using the microscopic constants from Fig. 7-21 to give
an equation (comparable to Eq. 7-8) which presents Y
In the MWC treatment, the assumption is made in terms of [X], K and K ,K, and the interaction
AX BX t
that the mixed dimer AB can be neglected entirely. constantsK ,K , and K . Since the equation is too
AA AB BB
However, a more general treatment requires that we complex to grasp immediately, let us consider several
consider all dimeric forms. The formation constants specific cases in which it can be simplified.
K ,K , and K are defined as follows13,113 (Eqs. 7-32
AA BB AB
to 7-34; note the statistical factor of 2 relating K to The Monod-Wyman-Changeux (MWC) model.
AB
the association constant K): If both K and K are large enough, there will be no
f AA BB
dissociation into monomers. The transition between
conformation A and conformation B can occur cooper-
[A ]
2A A K = 2 atively within the dimer or higher oligomer, and the
2 AA [A]2 (7-32)
mathematical relationships shown in Fig. 7-21 are still
appropriate. One further restriction is needed to describe
the MWC model. Only symmetric dimers are allowed.
[B ] [B ] That is, K and K >> K (see Eq. 7-31), and only
2B B K = 2 = 2 AA BB AB
2 BB [B]2 K 2[A]2 (7-33) those equilibria indicated with green arrows in Fig. 7-21
t
need be considered.30 In the absence of ligand X, the
ratio [B ] / [A ] is a constant, 1/ L in the MWC termi-
2 2
nology (Eq. 7-36; see also Eq. 7-31).
[AB] [AB]
A + B AB K = 2K = =
f AB [A][B] K [A]2
t
(7-34)
[B 2 ] = 1 = K BB K 2
t
[A ] L K
2 AA (7-36)
2. Binding Equilibria for a Dimerizing Protein
Both of the association constants K and K and the
AA BB
All of the equilibria of Eqs. 7-28 through 7-34 transformation constant K affect the position of the
t
involved in formation of dimers A , AB, and B and in equilibrium. Thus, a low ratio of [B ] to [A ] could
2 2 2 2
the binding of one or two molecules of X per dimer are result if K and K were similar but K was small.
BB AA t
depicted in Fig. 7-21. Above each arrow the microscopic IfK were ~ 1 a low ratio could still arise because K >
t AA

--- Page 354 ---

351
X For an oligomer with n subunits Monod et al. assumed
AX that all sites in either conformer are independent and
equivalent. The equation for Y (based on Eq. 7-17) is
K
X AX X X
K 2K K /2
AA AX AX
+ X X X
A A AX AX 2 2 2 2
2K KK /K L BX t AB AA
2K AB AXB
We assume initially that B binds X more strongly
2
K X X X
t AB X K BX ABX X K AX ABX than does A 2 . Hence, if the equilibrium in Eq. 7-36
2 favors B strongly (L is small), the addition of X to the 2
system will not shift the equilibrium between the two
conformations and binding will be noncooperative
(Eq. 7-39 will reduce to Eq. 7-18). However, if the
K equilibrium favors A (L is large), addition of X will
+ BB X X X 2
2K K /2 shift the equilibrium in favor of B (which binds X
B B X BX BX X BX BX 2
2 2 2 2 more tightly). Furthermore, since the expression for Y
X (Eq. 7-39) contains a term in K2 [X]2 in the numerator,
BX
binding will tend to be cooperative. In the extreme
case that L is large and K ~ 0, most of the terms in
AX
Eq. 7-39 drop out and it approaches the equation
previously given for completely cooperative binding
(Eq. 7-21) with K = K 2L. With other values of K ,
BX AX
K , and L incomplete cooperativity is observed.112
BX
Further development of the MWC theory as it applies
to enzyme kinetics is given in Chapter 9, Section B.
The induced fit model. In this model, only A , 2
ABX, and B X are considered (heavy arrows in Fig.
2 2
7-15).13,114 The expression for 2Y is:
K , i.e., because the subunits are associated more BB
tightly in A than in B . For this case Eq. 7-35 simplifies
2 2
to Eq. 7-37.
The constants used here are defined by Eqs. 7-8 through
7-10 and differ from those of Koshland, who sometimes
arbitrarily set K = 1 and redefined K as an interac- AA BB
tion constant equal to K /K . Although this simplifies
BB AA
the algebra it is appropriate only for completely asso-
ciated systems and might prove confusing.
WhenK is small (no “mixed” dimer) Eq. 7-16
AB
Substituting from Eq. 7-36 into Eq. 7-37 we obtain (Eq. also simplifies to Eq. 7-45 for completely cooperative
7-38): binding with the value K given by Eq. 7-17. On the
other hand, if K is large compared to K and K ,
AB AA BB
anticooperativity (negative cooperativity) will be
observed. The saturation curve will contain two sepa-
rate steps just as in the binding of protons by succinate
dianion (Fig. 7-5).
K
C. Cooperative Changes in Conformation
X L⋅ K [X](1 + K [X])n−1 + K [X](1 + K [X])n−1 Y = AX AX BX BX
L(1 + K [X])n + (1 + K [X])n AX BX
X X (7-39)
X K AX K BX
X
K KK /2K
BX t BB AB
BX
X
BX
Figure 7-21 Possible forms of a dimerizing protein existing
in two conformations with a single binding site per protomer
for X. Green arrows indicate equilibria considered by MWC.
Solid arrows indicate equilibria considered by Koshland et
al.13,114 Heavy gray arrows are for the simplest induced fit
model with no dissociation of the dimer. Note that all equilibria
are regarded as reversible (despite the unidirectional arrows).
K and K are assumed the same for subunits in monomeric
AX BX
and dimeric forms.
[ABX] + 2 [B X ]
2Y = 2 2
[A ] + [ABX] + [B X ]
2 2 2
K K
2 K K AB [X] + 2(K K )2 BB [X]2
BX t BX t
K K
= AA AA
K K
[A X] + 2[A X ] + [B X] + 2[B X ] 1 + 2 K K AB [X] + (K K )2 BB [X]2
2Y = 2 2 2 2 2 2 BX t K BX t K
[A ] + [A X] + [A X ] + [B ] + [B X] + [B X ] AA AA
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
(7-40)
2K K [X] + 2K K 2[X]2
AA AX AA AX
+ 2K K K 2[X] + 2K K K 2[X]2
= BB BX t BB BX t
K + 2K K [X] + K KK 2[X]2 + K K 2 AA AA AX AA AX BB t
+ 2K K K 2[X] + K K 2K 2[X]2
BB BX t BB BX t
(7-37)
Y (for dimer)
L ⋅ K [X](1 + K [X]) + K [X](1 + K [X])
= AX AX BX BX
L(1 + K [X])2 + (1 + K [X])2 AX BX
(7-38)

--- Page 355 ---

352 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
K K 2 aj Each interface contains
K = K 2K 2 BB = BX a pair of aj interactions
BX t
K AA L (7-41) These
subunits a j
k b
face in bk bk
b k
One conformational state dissociated. It may opposite j a
directions
happen that A is a dimer but that B dissociates into
2 2
monomers because K is very small. In such a case aj
BB
binding of X leads to dissociation of the protein. A Isologous square
well-known example is provided by hemoglobin of the
lamprey which is a dimer and which dissociates to a
monomer upon binding of oxygen.117 Equation 7-11
j’ a’ j’
simplifies to Eq. 7-42. The reader may wish to consider
a’
whether the weakly cooperative binding of oxygen by
Each interface contains
lamprey hemoglobin is predicted by this equation.
a pair of a’j’ interactions
a’
[BX] j’ a’ j’
2Y =
[A ] + 1 [BX] (7-42)
2 2 Heterologous square
Look again at the expression for L, the constant
determining the relative amounts of a protein in con- Figure 7-22 Comparison of the interactions in isologous
formations A and B in the absence of ligand. From (dihedral) and heterologous (cyclic) square configurations of
Eq. 7-36 we see that a large value of L (conformer A subunits.
favored) can result either because K is very small or
t
becauseK << K . Thus, if K ~ 1 and L is large, the
BB AA t
subunits must associate much more weakly in B than
2
in A and the chances are that binding of X will disso- Since Gibbs energies are additive, the formation constant
2
ciate the molecule as in the case of lamprey hemoglobin. will be the product of formation constants representing
On the other hand, if K is very small, implying that the individual interactions; thus, K represents the
t ajAA
the molecule is held in conformation A because of formation constant of a dimer in which only the aj pair
some intrinsically more stable folding pattern in that of bonds is formed.
conformation,K might exceed K very much; if K In the isologous tetrahedron (Fig. 7-5) the third set
BB AA AA
were low enough A could be completely dissociated. of paired interactions cl must be taken into account.
2
Binding of ligand would lead to association and to (However, the third interaction constant will not be an
cooperative binding. This can be verified by writing association constant of the type represented by K
ajAA
down the appropriate terms from Eq. 7-35. andK but a dimensionless number.) On the other
bkAA
hand, the heterologous square has only a single inter-
action constant.
3. Higher Oligomers Now consider the binding of one molecule of X to
the isologous tetramer with a conformational change
Mathematical treatment of binding curves for in one subunit (Eq. 7-44). We see that one pair of aj
oligomers containing more than two subunits is com- interactions and one pair of bk interactions have been
plex, but the algebra is straightforward. A computer
can be programmed to do necessary calculations.
Avoid picking an equation from the literature and
X
assuming that it will be satisfactory. Consider the two
A + X
tetrameric structures in Fig. 7-22. In the isologous 4
square (also shown in Fig. 7-11) separate contributions
ABX (7-44)
to the free energy of binding can be assigned to the 3
individual pairs of interactions aj and bk.
Thus, following Cornish-Bowden and Koshland114 altered. The equilibrium constant for the binding of X
for assembly of the tetramer (Eq. 7-43): to the tetramer will be (Eq. 7-45) in which the 4 is a
∆G = 2 ∆G + 2 ∆G K K
f ajAA bkAA K = 4 ajAB bkAB K K
BX t
K f = K a 2 jAA K b 2 kAA (7-43) K ajAA K bkAA (7-45)

--- Page 356 ---

D. The Oxygen-Carrying Proteins 353
statistical factor arising from the fact that there are four ring structure called heme (Fig. 7-23). The folding is
different ways in which to form A BX. When a second essentially the same in all hemoglobins, both in the α
3
molecule of X is added three geometrical arrangements andβ subunits and in the monomeric muscle oxygen
are possible: storage protein, myoglobin. Amino acid residues are
customerily designated by their position in one of the
eight helices A – H. The imidazole group of histidine
X X X X X F-8 is coordinated with the iron in the center of the
2 2 2 heme on the “proximal” side. The other side of the
X X iron atom (the “distal” side) is the site of binding of
a single molecule of O .
2
X binds on the back side Although the folding of the peptide chain is al-
most the same in both subunits, and almost identical
Each one can be formed in two ways. It is a simple to that of myoglobin,118,121,122 there are numerous
matter to write down the microscopic constants for differences in the amino acid sequence. If it were not
addition of the second molecule of X as the sum of for these differences, hemoglobin would be a highly
three terms. Because values of the constants for aj and symmetric molecule with the bonding pattern indicated
bk differ, it will be clear that the three ways of adding in Fig. 7-5 with three 2-fold axes of rotation. In fact,
the second molecule of X are not equally probable. hemoglobin has one true axis of rotation and two
Thus, the oligomer will show preferred orders of pseudo-twofold axes. There are two sets of true isolo-
“loading” with ligand X. gous interactions (those between the two α subunits
Two different geometries for the heterologous and between the two β subunits) and two pairs of
tetramer are possible in form A B X . Again, the dif- unsymmetrical interactions (between α and β subunits).
2 2 2
ferent arrangements need not be equally probable and The nearly symmetric orientation of different portions
the relative distribution of each will be determined by of the peptide backbone is clearly seen in the beautiful
the specific values of the interaction constants. In the drawings of Geis.119
heterologous tetramer A only one type of an interac- The contact region involved in one pair of interac-
4
tion is present between subunits. However, as soon tions in hemoglobin (α β ) is more extensive than the
1 1
as a single molecule of X is bound and one subunit of other. There is close contact between 34 different amino
conformation B is present, two kinds of aj interactions acid side chains and 110 atoms lie within 0.4 nm of
exist. (One in which group a is present in conformation each other.118 Hydrophobic bonding is the principal
A and the other in which it is present in conformation force holding the two subunits together, and only a
B.) Since these interactions always occur in equal few reciprocal contacts of the type found in a true isolo-
numbers they can be lumped together. gous bond remain. The second contact designated
While the foregoing may seem like an unnecessarily α β involves only 19 residues and a total of 80 atoms.
1 2
long exercise, it should provide a basic approach which Because this interaction is weaker, hemoglobin disso-
can be applied to specific problems. However, remem- ciates relatively easily into αβ dimers held together
ber that mathematical models require simplification. by the α β contacts and motion occurs along the α β
1 1 1 2
Real proteins often have more than two stable confor- contacts during oxygenation. The truly isologous
mations.117 The entire outside surface of a protein is interactions (i.e., αα and ββ ) are weak because the
made up of potential binding sites for a number of identical protomers hardly touch each other.
different molecules, both small and large. Filling of
almost any of these sites can affect the functioning of The binding of oxygen. Curves of percentage
a protein. oxygenation (Y) vs the partial pressure of O are given
2
in Fig. 7-24 and illustrate the high degree of cooperat-
ivity. Depending upon conditions, values of n (Eq.
Hill
D. The Oxygen-Carrying Proteins 7-24) may be as high as 3. As a result of this cooperat-
ivity the hemoglobin, in the capillaries of the lungs at a
1. Myoglobin and Hemoglobin partial pressure of oxygen of ~ 100 mm of mercury, is
nearly saturated with oxygen. However, when the red
The most studied example of a conformational cells pass through the capillaries of tissues in which
change in a multisubunit protein induced by binding oxygen is utilized the partial pressure of oxygen falls
of a small molecule is provided by the cooperative to about 5 mm of mercury. The cooperativity means
binding of oxygen to hemoglobin.118 – 120 Mammalian that the oxygen is more completely “unloaded” than it
hemoglobin is an α β tetramer of ~ 16-kDa subunits, would be if all four heme groups acted independently.
2 2
each containing 140 – 150 residues. Within each sub- Deoxyhemoglobin has a low affinity for O , but
2
unit the peptide chain folds in a characteristic largely the observed cooperativity in binding implies that in
α-helical pattern around a single large flat iron-containing the fully oxygenated state the O is held with a high
2

--- Page 357 ---

354 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
affinity. The monomeric myoglobin also has a high pressure PO2 required for 50 % oxygenation in the first
affinity for oxygen, as does the abnormal hemoglobin H, step will be at PO2 = 1/ K
f
or log PO2 = log (1/.004) = 2.4.
which is made up of four β subunits. The latter also This is a high oxygen pressure, far to the right side of
completely lacks cooperativity in binding.123 These the oxygenation curve in Fig. 7-24A. However, log K
4
results can be interpreted according to the MWC model is about 0.02, well to the left on the oxygenation curve.
to indicate that deoxyhemoglobin exists in the T (A) From these formation constants we can say that after
conformation, whereas oxyhemoglobin is in the R (B) three of the subunits have become oxygenated the
conformation. Myoglobin stays in the R conformation affinity of the remaining subunit has increased about
inbothstates of oxygenation as do the separated α and 300-fold when the concentration of the effector 2,3-
β chains of hemoglobin. The subunits of hemoglobin bisphosphoglycerate is present at the normal physio-
H also appear to be frozen in the R conformation, even logical concentraton (see Section 4).125– 127
though the quaternary structure is similar to that of However, we must ask what uncertainties are
deoxyhemoglobin.123,124 present in the data used to obtain these constants. To
Oxygenation curves of hemoglobin are often fitted extract four successive binding constants from a curve
with the Adair equation (Eq. 7-12). Thus, at pH 7.4 like that in Fig. 7-24A is extremely difficult.129,130 This
under the conditions given in Table 7-2, Imai125 found fact has encouraged the widespread use of the simpler
for the successive formation constants K = 0.004, K = MWC model.30a,127a When the same data were treated
1 2
0.009,K = 0.002 and K = 0.95 in units of mm Hg–1. by Imai131 using the MWC model it was found that L =
3 4
From the definition of a formation constant the oxygen 2.8 x 106 and c = K /K = 0.0038. Changes in
f (T) f (R)
HC-2 Tyr
F8 His
CD-1 Phe
C-4 Thr
F-4 Leu
Figure 7-23 Folding pattern of the hemoglobin monomers. The pattern shown is for the β chain of human hemoglobin.
Some of the differences between this and the α chain and myoglobin are indicated. Evolutionarily conserved residues are
indicated by boxes, highly conserved, invariant. Other markings show substitutions observed in some abnormal
human hemoglobins. Conserved residues are numbered according to their location in one of the helices A – H, while mutant
hemoglobins are indicated by the position of the substitution in the entire α and β chain.

--- Page 358 ---

355
enthalpy, entropy, and Gibbs energy are given in Table 7-2. Kinetic
data131a as well as O -binding measurements with single crystals132 are
2
partially consistent with the MWC model.133 However, the discovery
of a third quaternary structure of hemoglobin, similar to the R state but
distinct from it,134–136a emphasizes the complexity of this allosteric
molecule.
Hemoglobin tetramers tend to stay tightly associated but some
dissociation of oxyhemoglobin into dimers does occur (K = 7 x 105 M).137,138
f
Deoxyhemoglobin is about 40,000 times more tightly associated. All of
noitanegyxo
tnecreP
Myoglobin 1.0
Hemoglobin free of
biphosphoglycerate 0.8
Hemoglobin in 0.6
whole blood
0.4
0.2
0.0
–2 –1 0 1 2 0 0.4 0.8 1.0
logpO(mm Hg) logpO(mm Hg) 2 2
Y
D. The Oxygen-Carrying Proteins
A B the equilibria involved are strongly
affected by pH and by the presence
of salts such as NaCl.126,139 This is
in part a reflection of the strong
role of ionic interactions in holding
together the subunits in the T state
as is discussed in the following
sections.127
Structural changes accompa-
nying oxygen binding. Perutz and
associates, using X-ray crystallogra-
phy, found smallbut real differences
in the conformation of the subunits
Figure 7-24 Cooperative binding of oxygen by hemoglobins. (A) Binding of deoxy- and oxy- hemoglobin.140,141
curve for myoglobin (noncooperative) and for hemoglobin in the absence
More striking is the fact that upon
and presence (in whole blood) of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Oxygen affinity oxygenation, both α and β subunits
is decreased by bisphosphoglycerate. (B) Saturation curve for hemoglobin
undergo substantial amounts of
(erythrocruorin) of Arenicola, a spiny annelid worm. The molecule contains
192 subunits and 96 hemes. It shows very strong cooperativity with n ∼ 6. rotation, the net result being that the
From (A) Benesch and Benesch,123 and (B) Waxman.128 Hill hemes of the two β subunits move
about 0.07 nm closer together in the
oxy form than in the deoxy form.
Within the α β contacts (Fig. 7-25)
1 1
little change is seen. On the other
hand, contact α β , the “allosteric
1 2
interface,” is altered drastically. As
Perutz expressed it, there is a “jump
in the dovetailing” of the CD region
of the subunit relative to the FG
region of the β subunit. The hydro-
gen-bonding pattern is also changed.
A major difference is seen in the
hydrogen-bonded salt bridges
present at the ends of the molecules
TABLE 7-2 of deoxyhemoglobin. The – NH +
3
Thermodynamic Functions for Oxygenation of Hemoglobina group of Lys H-10 in each α subunit
is hydrogen bonded to the carboxyl
∆H ∆S ∆G group of the C-terminal arginine of
Reaction (kJ mol-1) (J°K-1 mol-1) (kJ mol-1) K the opposite αchain. The guani-
f
dinium group of each C-terminal
T → T (O 2 ) 4 – 51 ± 1 – 154 ± 4 – 5.0 ± 1.7 7.5 arginine is hydrogen bonded to the
carboxyl group of Asp H-9 in the
R → R (O 2 ) 4 – 62 ± 2 – 146 ± 6 – 19 ± 2 2.0 x 103 oppositeα chain. It is also hydro-
gen bonded to an inorganic anion
T→ R – 70 ± 7 – 111 ± 25 – 37 ± 10 3.6 x 10–7
(phosphate or Cl–), which in turn is
(unoxygenated)
hydrogen-bonded to the α amino
T (O ) → R (O ) – 19 2.1 x 103 group of Val 1 of the opposite α
24 24
(oxygenated) chain142 forming a pair of isologous
interactions.
Parameters for MWC model At the other end of the molecule,
L = (3.6 x 10–7)–1= 2.8 x 106 the C-terminal group of His 146 of
eachβ chain binds to the amino
c = K f (T) /K f (R) = 0.0038 group of Lys C-6 of the α chain,
while the imidazole side chain binds
a From Imai, K. (1979) J. Mol. Biol.133, 233 – 247. The measurements were made at pH to Asp FG-1 of the same β chain
7.4 in the presence of 0.1 M chloride ion and 2 mM 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate to mimic
physiological conditions. The values of ∆H,∆S, and ∆G given are per mole of heme, (Fig. 7-25). These salt bridges
i.e., per monomer unit. They must be multiplied by 4 to correspond to the reactions as appear to provide extra stability to
shown for the tetramer.

--- Page 359 ---

356 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
A Binding site for 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate
in deoxyhemoglobin
α
β
αβ contact changes
1 1
little upon oxygenation
A
H But a large change
F occurs in the αβ contact
1 2
E
Salt bridge between
β C-terminal—COO –
ofβ chain and C-6 Lys
α —NH of α chain B
3
Upon oxygenation this
Tyrosines HC-2 present in salt bridge is broken and
pocket in deoxyhemoglobin the proton of His HC-3
come out in oxyhemoglobin dissociates (Bohr effect)
C
O
β His 146
(cid:1)2 FG corner C
–
O
β Tyr 145 H + H
N H
N H
O H O + N (cid:2)1
H
β Val 98 – O
α Lys 40
O
α Asp 94
Valβ34 C
O
(cid:2)2 O (cid:2)1 FG corner α Val 93
H
NH
C – H + O H O
α 2 Asp 126 O H N α1 Arg 141 Figure 7-25 (A) Structural changes
H H N occurring upon oxygenation of
α 2 Val 1 N H H+ Cl – α Try 140 h P e e m ru o tz g . l 1 o 43 b i ( n B . ) A “ f R te o r t a D ti i o ck n e a r t s o th n e 14 c 4 o a n n - d
tactα β causes a jump in the dove-
α 2 Lys 127 O C tailing 1 o 2 f the CD region of α relative
H – to the FG region of β and a switch
N+ H O of hydrogen bonds as shown”.143
(C) Some details of the salt bridges.

--- Page 360 ---

D. The Oxygen-Carrying Proteins 357
deoxyhemoglobin and account for the high value of The Bohr effect and allosteric regulators. The
the constant L. In deoxyhemoglobin the side chain of breaking of the salt bridges at the ends of the hemo-
the highly conserved Tyr HC-2 lies tucked into a pocket globin molecule upon oxygenation has another impor-
between the H and F helices and is hydrogen bonded tant result. The pK values of the N-terminal valines
a
to the main chain carbonyl of residue FG-5 (Figs. 7-23 of the α subunits and of His HC-3 of the β subunits are
and 7-25). Upon oxygenation this tyrosine in each abnormally high in the deoxy form because they are
subunit is released from its pocket; the salt bridges at tied up in the salt bridges. In the oxy form in which
the ends of the molecules are broken and the subunit the groups are free, the pK values are lower. If hemo-
a
shifts into the new bonding pattern characteristic of globin is held at a constant pH of 7, these protons disso-
oxyhemoglobin.143,144 Cooperativity in O binding is ciate upon oxygenation. This Bohr effect, described
2
absent or greatly decreased in mutant hemoglobins in 1904,153– 156 is important because acidification of hemo-
with substitutions in the residues involved in these globin stabilizes the deoxy form. In capillaries in which
salt bridges145– 147 or in residues lying in the α β oxygen pressure is low and in which carbon dioxide
1 2
interface.148,149 and lactic acid may have accumulated, the lowering of
How does the binding of O to the iron of heme the pH causes oxyhemoglobin to release oxygen more
2
trigger the conformational change in hemoglobin? An efficiently. These effects are also strongly dependent
enormous amount of effort by many people has been on the presence of chloride ions.139,142,143,157,158
expended in trying to answer this question. As is Just as the conformational equilibria in hemoglobin
pointed out in Chapter 16, the iron atom in deoxyhe- can be shifted by attachment of oxygen to the heme
moglobin lies a little outside the plane of the heme rings. groups, so the binding of certain other molecules at
When oxygenation occurs the iron atom moves toward different sites can also affect the conformation. Such
the oxygen and into the plane of the heme.150,151 This compounds are called allosteric effectors or regulators
movement probably amounts to only about 0.05 nm. because they bind at a site other than the “active site.”
Nevertheless, this small displacement evidently induces They are considered in more detail in Chapter 9. An
the other structural changes that are observed. The important allosteric effector for human hemoglobin is
iron pulls the side chain of histidine F-8 with it and 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, a compound found in
moves helix F which is also hydrogen bonded to this human red blood cells in a high concentration approxi-
imidazole ring. Because of the tight packing of the mately equimolar with that of hemoglobin. One mole-
various groups this motion cannot occur freely but is cule of bisphosphoglycerate binds to a hemoglobin
accompanied by a movement of the F helix by 0.1 nm tetramer in the deoxy form with K = 1.4 x 105 but
f
across the heme plane. These movements may induce has only half this affinity for oxyhemoglobin.159 X-ray
additional structural changes in the irregularly folded crystallography shows that bisphosphoglycerate binds
FG corners that allow the subunits to shift to the new between the two β chains of deoxyhemoglobin directly
stable position of the R state. All four subunits appear on the twofold axis (Fig. 7-26).159 Because of the presence
to change conformation together. This conformational
change must also cause the affinity for oxygen of any – –
O O O
unoxygenated subunits to rise dramatically, presum- H
P
ably by shifting the iron atoms into the planes of the C
O O O –
heme rings. This ensures the cooperative loading of
the protein by O .
2 – O O
While there is no doubt that the iron atom moves
H
P H
upon oxygenation, it is not obvious that this will lead
–
to the observed cooperativity. Oxygenated heme has O O
some of the characteristics of an Fe(III)–peroxide anion 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
complex.152 The iron atom acquires an increased
positive charge upon oxygenation by donating an of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate in erythrocytes the affinity
electron for bond formation. of oxygen for hemoglobin in whole blood is less than
that for isolated hemoglobin160,161 (Fig. 7-24). This is
Fe2+
(deoxy) + O 2
Fe3+
– O 2
–
(7-46)
i
o
m
xy
p
g
o
e
r
n
ta
c
n
a
t
r
b
ri
e
e
c
d
a u
to
se
b
i
e
t
u
al
n
lo
lo
w
a
s
d e
a
d
la
f
r
r
g
o
e
m
r f
r
r
e
a
d
c t
c
i
o
o
r
n
p
o
u
f
s
t
c
h
le
e
s in
body tissues. The bisphosphoglycerate level of red cells
This may transmit an electronic effect through either varies with physiological conditions, e.g., people living
His F-8 or the heme ring to the nearby α β interface at higher elevations have a higher concentration.161
1 2
and also affect the subunit interactions. The reaction It has been suggested that artificial manipulation of
of various heme proteins with oxygen is discussed the level of this regulatory substance in erythrocytes
further in Chapter 16. may be of clinical usefulness for disorders in oxygen
transport.

--- Page 361 ---

358 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
Residue 6
His 2
BPG
A—Helix
Val 1
α—NH +
3 Figure 7-26 The allosteric
Lys
effects of 2,3-bisphosphogly-
82
cerate (BPG) bound to the β
His chains of human deoxyhemo-
143 E—Helix globin. The phosphate groups
of the BPG form salt bridges
with valines 1 and histidines 2
1.0 nm and 143 of both β chains and
F—Helix
with lysine 82 of one chain.
This binding pulls the A helix
and residue 6 toward the E
helix. From Arnone.159
Not all species contain 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate in the CO -rich respiring tissues. Hemoglobin carries
2
in their erythrocytes. In birds and turtles its function a significant fraction of CO to the lungs, and there the
2
appears to be served by inositol pentaphosphate. In oxygenation of hemoglobin facilitates the dissociation
crocodiles the site between the two β chains that binds of CO from the carbamino groups. Hemoglobin is
2
organic phosphates in other species has been modified also one of the major pH buffers of blood.
so that it binds bicarbonate ion, HCO –, specifically.
3
This ion, which accumulates in tissues as crocodiles Carbon monoxide, cyanide, and nitric oxide.
lie under water, acts as an allosteric regulator in these A danger to hemoglobin and other heme proteins is
animals.162,163 It allows the animals to more completely posed by competing ligands such as CO, CN–, and
utilize the O from the hemoglobin and to remain under NO. All of these are present within organisms and
2
water longer. The Bohr effect, which was considered both CO and NO act as hormones. Hemoglobin and
in the preceding section, can be viewed as resulting myoglobin are partially protected from carbon monox-
from the action of protons as allosteric effectors that ide by the design of the binding site for O . The distal
2
bind to the amino and imidazole groups of the salt imidazole of histidine E7 hydrogen bonds to O but
2
linkages. Carbon dioxide also acts as a physiological not to the nonpolar CO. The site also accommodates
effector in mammalian blood by combining reversibly the geometry of the bound O better than that of CO.165
2
with NH -terminal groups of the α and β subunits to Bound CO can be released from hemes by the action of
2
formcarbamino (– NH – COO –) groups (Eq. 7-47).119,164 light. Using X-ray diffraction166,166a and X-ray absorp-
It is the N-terminal amino groups rather than lysyl tion measurements167 at cryogenic temperatures, it has
side chain groups that undergo this reaction. Because been possible to observe the motions of both the released
of their relatively low pK values there is a significant CO and the heme in myoglobin, motions which may
a
shed light on the normal oxygen transport cycle. Co-
operativity in the binding of CO to hemoglobins has
O
been studied extensively,158,168,169 as has binding to
C O – model heme compounds.170 Cyanide ions bind most
Protein —NH2 + CO2 N + H + tightly and also cooperatively171– 173 to the oxidized
Fe3+ form, which is called methemoglobin.
H (7-47)
Nitric oxide is a reactive, paramagnetic gaseous
free radical which is formed in the human body and
fraction of unprotonated – NH groups at the pH of in other organisms by an enzymatic oxidation of
2
blood. The affinity for CO
2
is highest in deoxygenated L-arginine (Eq. 18-65). Since about 1980, NO has been
hemoglobin. Consequently, unloading of O is facilitated recognized as a hormone with a broad range of effects
2

--- Page 362 ---

D. The Oxygen-Carrying Proteins 359
A
Figure 7-27 “Fingerprints” of human hemoglobins. The
1 denatured hemoglobin was digested with trypsin and the 28
resulting peptides were separated on a sheet of paper by
electrophoresis in one direction (horizontal in the figures;
anode to the left) and by chromatography in the other direc-
B
tion (vertical in the figure). The peptides were visualized by
spraying with ninhydrin or with specific reagents for histi-
dine or tyrosine residues. Since trypsin cuts only next to
lysine, which occurs infrequently, the petide pattern provides
a fingerprint, characteristic for any pure protein. (A) The
fingerprint of normal adult hemoglobin A. (B) Fingerprint of
hemoglobin S (sickle cell hemoglobin). One histidine-con-
taining peptide (1) is missing and a new one (2) is present.
2
This altered peptide contains the first eight residues of the N-
1 terminal chain of the subunit of the protein. From H. Leh-
mann and R. G. Huntsman, Man’s Haemoglobin.187
(Chapters 11, 18). It binds to the iron of heme groups gote.183 There are also many unrecognized and harm-
in either the Fe2+ or Fe3+ form and also reacts with less substitutions of one amino acid for another. How-
thiol groups of proteins and small molecules to form ever, substitutions near the heme group often adversely
S-nitrosothiols (R – S – N= O).174– 176 It reacts with the affect the binding of oxygen and substitutions in the
heme iron of myoglobin and hemoglobin and, by interfaces between subunits may decrease the coop-
transfer of one electron, can oxidize the iron of hemo- erative interaction between subunits.184 One of the
globin to the Fe3+ methemoglobin with formation of most common and serious abnormal hemoglobins is
the nitroxyl ion NO–.177,178 This reaction may be a hemoglobin S, which is present in individuals suffering
major cause of methemoglobin formation. from sickle cell disease (see Box 7-B). In Hb S, glutamic
One of the major effects of NO is to induce the acid 6 of the β chain is replaced by valine. Replacement
relaxation of smooth muscle of blood vessels, an im- of the same amino acid by lysine leads to Hb C185 and
portant factor in the regulation of blood pressure. is associated with a mild disease condition . A few of
Hemoglobin can carry NO both on its heme and on the the many other substitutions that have been studied
thiol group of cysteine β93.174,175 The affinity for NO is are indicated in Fig. 7-23. The locations of the defects
high in the T state and low in the R state. This allows in the hemoglobin structure have been established
hemoglobin to carry NO from the lungs to tissues, where with the aid of protein “fingerprinting” (Fig. 7-27).
it can be released and participate in the regulation of A group of serious defects are represented by the
blood pressure.174,179 hemoglobins M. Only heterozygotic individuals
A cytoplasmic hemoglobin of the clam Lucina survive. Their blood is dark because in Hb M the iron
pectinata has evolved to carry oxygen to symbiotic in half of the subunits is oxidized irreversibly to the
chemoautotrophic bacteria located within cells of ferric state. The resulting methemoglobin is present in
the host’s gills. It is also readily oxidized to the Fe3+ normal blood to the extent of about 1%. While normal
methemoglobin form which binds sulfide ions methemoglobin is reduced by a methemoglobin
extremely tightly180– 182 and is thought to transport reductase system (Box 15-H), methemoglobins M
sulfide to the bacteria. cannot be reduced. All of the five hemoglobins M result
from substitutions near the heme group. In four of
them, one of the heme-linked histidines (either F-8 or
2. Abnormal Human Hemoglobins E-7) of either the α or the β subunits is substituted by
tyrosine. In the fifth, valine 67 of the β chains is substi-
Many alterations in the structure of hemoglobin tuted by glutamate. The two hemoglobins M that carry
have arisen by mutations in the human population. substitutions in the α subunits (M and M ) are
Boston Iwate
It is estimated that one person in 20 carries a mutation frozen in the T (deoxy) conformation and therefore have
that will cause a hemoglobin disorder in a homozy- low oxygen affinities and lack cooperativity.

--- Page 363 ---

360 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
BOX 7-B SICKLE CELL DISEASE, MALARIA, AND BLOOD SUBSTITUTES
Red cells that contain Hb S as well as
Hb A are apparently less suitable than
cells containing only Hb A for growth
of the malaria organism. Thus, het-
erozygotic carriers of the sickle cell
gene survived epidemics of malaria
but at the price of seeing one-fourth
of their offspring die of sickle cell
disease.
Left: Normal erythrocytes, © Biophoto Associates, Photo Researchers.
What is the outlook for the many
Right: Sickled erythrocytes, © Nigel Calder.
(50,000 in the United States alone)
Many persons, especially if they are of west sufferers of sickle cell disease today? Careful medi-
African descent, suffer from the crippling and often cal care, including blood transfusion, can prolong
lethal sickle cell disease.a,b In 1949, Pauling, Itano, life greatlyh and intense efforts are under way to
and associates discovered that hemoglobin from find drugs that will prevent Hb S from crystallizing.i
such individuals migrated unusually rapidly upon The problem arises from a hydrophobic interaction
electrophoresis.c Later, Ingram devised the method of valine B6 with phenylalanine B85 and leucine B88
of protein fingerprinting illustrated in Fig. 7-27 and of another molecule in the filaments of Hb S. The
applied it to hemoglobin.d He split the hemoglobin latter two residues are on the outside surface of
molecule into 15 tryptic peptides which he separated helix F (see Fig. 7-23). It is difficult to modify one
by electrophoresis and chromatography. From these of these residues chemically but various alterations
experiments the abnormality in sickle cell hemoglobin at the nearby N-termini of the β chains do inhibit
(hemoglobin S; Hb S) was located at position 6 in sickling. Cyanate does so by specifically carbamoy-
theβ chain (see Fig. 7-23). The glutamic acid present lating these amino groups. However, although it
in this position in hemoglobin A was replaced by was tested in humans, cyanate is too toxic for use.j
valine in Hb S. This was the first instance in which Another approach employs an aldehyde that will
a genetic disease was traced directly to the presence
of a single amino acid substitution in a specific
protein. The DNA of the normal gene for the β globin H3C H N
H
chain has since been sequenced and found to have H3C C C
the glutamic acid codon GAG at position 6. A single C NH2 O–
base change to GTG (see Table 5-5) causes the sickle β Chain C Cyanate
cell mutation. Persons homozygous for this altered O
gene have sickle cell disease, while the much more
numerous heterozygotes have, at most, minor prob-
H O
lems. H3C
H
When HbS is deoxygenated it tends to “crystal- H3C C C NH2
C N
lize” in red blood cells, which contain 33% by weight
H
β Chain C
hemoglobin. The crystallization (actually gel forma-
O
tion) distorts the cells into a sickle shape and these
distorted corpuscles are easily destroyed, leading to
anemia. The introduction of the hydrophobic valine form Schiff bases (Eq. 13-4)k with the same amino
residue in Hb S at position 6 near the end of the groups.k,l A third approach is to use an acylating
molecule helps form a new bonding domain by reagent. For example, methylacetyl phosphatem
which the hemoglobin tetramers associate to form acetylates the same β Lys 82 amino groups that react
long semicrystalline microfilamentous arrays.b,e– g with bisphosphoglycerate and with cyanate.
Why is there such a high incidence of the sickle
cell gene, estimated to be present in three million
O O
Americans? The occurrence and spread of the gene O–
in Africa was apparently the result of a balance C P
between its harmful effects and a beneficial effect
H3C O O CH3
under circumstances existing there. The malaria
parasite, the greatest killer of all time, lives in red Aspirin (2-acetoxybenzoic acid) is also a mild
blood cells during part of its life cycle (see Fig. 1-9). acetylating reagent and “two-headed” aspirins such

--- Page 364 ---

D. The Oxygen-Carrying Proteins 361
BOX 7-B (continued)
as the following react specifically to crosslink the erythrocyte the hemoglobin tetramers tend to disso-
hemoglobinβ chains. ciate to dimers, losing cooperativity and escaping
through kidneys. Suitable crosslinking helps to
solve this problem.x,y,z Both α and β chains can be
Br COO–
O Br produced from cloned genes and reassembled to
form hemoglobin.aa,bb This will probably allow
C O
genetic engineering to form more stable but suitably
O
cooperative hemoglobins that can be used to avoid
Br O
–OOC Br hazards of transmission of viruses by transfusion.
Lys 82 (β 1)—NH2 H2N—Lys 82(β 2) a Weatherall, D. J., Clegg, J. B., Higgs, D. R., and Wood, W. G.
(1995) in The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease,
Br COO– 7th ed., Vol. 1 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and
Valle, D., eds), pp. 3417–3484, McGraw-Hill, New York
2 b Harrington, D. J., Adachi, K., and Royer, W. E., Jr. (1998) J. Biol.
Chem.273, 32690–32696
OH c Strasser, B. J. (1999) Science286, 1488–1490
d Ingram, V. M. (1957) Nature (London)180, 326–328
Br e Cretegny, I., and Edelstein, S. J. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.230, 733–738
O H
f Padlan, E. A., and Love, W. E. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 8272–8279
Lys 82 (β 1) N g Cao, Z., and Ferrone, F. A. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.256, 219–222
N Lys 82(β 2) h Acquaye, C., Wilchek, M., and Gorecki, M. (1981) Trends
Biochem. Sci.6, 146–149
H O i Klotz, I. M., Haney, D. N., and King, L. C. (1981) Science213,
724–731
j Harkness, D. R. (1976) Trends Biochem. Sci.1, 73–
These compounds bind into the bisphospho- k Acharya, A. S., Sussman, L. G., and Manning, J. M. (1983) J.
glycerate binding site (Fig. 7-26) and prevent the Biol. Chem.258, 2296–2302
l San George, R. C., and Hoberman, H. D. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.
chains from spreading apart as far as they normally
261, 6811–6821
do in the deoxy (T) state. Since it is only the latter mUeno, H., Pospischil, M. A., and Manning, J. M. (1989) J. Biol.
that crystallizes, the compounds have a powerful Chem.264, 12344–12351
antisickling action.n,o Various other crosslinking n Walder, J. A., Walder, R. Y., and Arnone, A. (1980) J. Mol. Biol.
141, 195–216
reagents have been developed and more than one
o Chatterjee, R., Welty, E. V., Walder, R. Y., Pruitt, S. L., Rogers, P.
could be used together.p– r New drugs that serve as H., Arnone, A., and Walder, J. A. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 9929–
allosteric modifiers in the same fashion as bisphos- 9937
phoglycerate may also be useful.s p Benesch, R. E., and Kwong, S. (1988) Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun.156, 9–14
A fouth approach to treatment of sickle cell
q Kluger, R., Wodzinska, J., Jones, R. T., Head, C., Fujita, T. S., and
disease is gene therapy. This might allow patients Shih, D. T. (1992) Biochemistry31, 7551–7559
to produce, in addition to Hb S, an engineered r Jones, R. T., Shih, D. T., Fujita, T. S., Song, Y., Xiao, H., Head, C.,
hemoglobin with compensating mutations that and Kluger, R. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 675–680
s Abraham, D. J., Wireko, F. C., Randad, R. S., Poyart, C., Kister,
would mix with the Hb S and prevent gelling.t,u,v
J., Bohn, B., Liard, J.-F., and Kunert, M. P. (1992) Biochemistry31,
This is impractical at present but there is another 9141–9149
approach. Persons with sickle cell disease some- t McCune, S. L., Reilly, M. P., Chomo, M. J., Asakura, T., and
times also have the disorder of hereditary persis- Townes, T. M. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 9852–9856
u Cole-Strauss, A., Yoon, K., Xiang, Y., Byrne, B. C., Rice, M. C.,
tence of fetal hemoglobin. They continue to make
Gryn, J., Holloman, W. K., and Kmiec, E. B. (1996) Science273,
Hb F into adulthood. Great amelioration of sickle 1386–1388
cell disease is observed in patients with 20 – 25 % Hb v May, C., Rivella, S., Callegari, J., Heller, G., Gaensler, K. M. L.,
F.t Hydroxyurea stimulates a greater production of Luzzatto, L., and Sadelain, M. (2000) Nature (London)406, 82–86
wEaton, W. A., and Hofrichter, J. (1995) Science268, 1142–1143
Hb F and in patients with hereditary persistence of
x Snyder, S. R., Welty, E. V., Walder, R. Y., Williams, L. A., and
Hb F hydroxyurea may raise its level in erythocytes Walder, J. A. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 7280–7284
to ~ 50% of the total hemoglobin.w y Dick, L. A., Heibel, G., Moore, E. G., and Spiro, T. G. (1999)
Crosslinking of the alpha chains of normal Biochemistry38, 6406–6410
z Manjula, B. N., Malavalli, A., Smith, P. K., Chan, N.-L., Arnone,
deoxyhemoglobin through lysines 99 yields a hemo-
A., Friedman, J. M., and Acharya, A. S. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275,
globin with normal oxygen-binding behavior and 5527–5534
an increased stability.o It makes a practical emer- aaYamaguchi, T., Pang, J., Reddy, K. S., Witkowska, H. E., Surrey,
gency blood substitute, whereas unmodified hemo- S., and Adachi, K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 26677–26683
bbJeong, S. T., Ho, N. T., Hendrich, M. P., and Ho, C. (1999)
globin is unsatisfactory.v Unless encapsulated in an
Biochemistry38, 13433–13442

--- Page 365 ---

362 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
In hemoglobins Rainier and Nancy the usually Earthworms,207 polychaete worms,208,209 and
invariant C-terminal tyrosine 145 of the β chains is leeches210 have enormous hemoglobin molecules
substituted by cysteine and by aspartate, respectively. consisting of as many as 144 globin chains arranged into
Oxygen affinity is high and cooperativity is lacking.186 12 dodecamers and held together by 36–42 linker chains.
Hemoglobin Kansas, in which the β102asparagine is These hemoglobins are often called erythrocruorins.
substituted by threonine, also lacks cooperativity and In a few families of polychaetes chloroheme (Fig. 16-5)
has a very low oxygen affinity, while hemoglobin Rich- substitutes for heme and the proteins are called
mond, in which the same amino acid is substituted by chlorocruorins.208
lysine, functions normally. In hemoglobin Creteil the What is common to all of the hemoglobins? The
β89 serine is replaced by asparagine with the result that same folding pattern of the peptide chain is always
the adjacent C-terminal peptide carrying tyrosine 145 present. The protein is always wrapped around the
becomes disordered. In hemoglobin Hiroshima the heme group in an identical or very similar manner. In
C-terminal histidine in the β chain is replaced by aspar- spite of this striking conservation of overall structure,
tic acid. This histidine is one that donates a Bohr proton when animal hemoglobins are compared, there are only
and in the mutant hemoglobin the oxygen affinity is ten residuesthat arehighly conserved. They are indicated
increased 3-fold and the Bohr effect is halved.188 In in Fig. 7-23 by the boxes. The two glycines (or alanine)
hemoglobin Suresnes the C-terminal arginines 141 of at B-6 and E-8 are conserved because the close contact
theα chains are replaced by histidine with loss of one between the B and E helices does not permit a larger
of the anion-binding sites mentioned in Section 3.189 side chain. Proline C-2 helps the molecule turn a corner.
Four of the other conserved residues are directly asso-
ciated with the heme group. Histidine E-7 and His F-8
3. Comparative Biochemistry of Hemoglobin are the “heme-linked” histidines. Tyrosine HC-2, as
previously mentioned, plays a role in the cooperativity
Even within human beings there are several hemo- of oxygen binding. Only Lys H-9 is on the outside of
globins. In addition to myoglobin, a brain protein neuro- the molecule. The reasons for its conservation are
globin,189a and adult hemoglobin A (Hb A,α β ), there is unclear.211 When sequences from a broader range of
2 2
a minor hemoglobin A (α δ ). Prior to birth the blood organisms were determined five residues (see Fig. 7-23)
2 2 2
containsfetal hemoglobin, also called hemoglobin F were found to be highly conserved; only two are com-
(Hb F,α γ ). In the presence of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate pletely conserved. These are His F-8 and Phe CD-1,
2 2
Hb F has a 6-fold higher oxygen affinity than Hb A as which binds the heme noncovalently.212 Hemoglobins
befits its role in obtaining oxygen from the mother’s are not the only biological oxygen carriers. The two-
blood.190– 192 Hemoglobin F disappears a few months iron hemerythrins (Fig. 16-20) are used by a few
after birth and is replaced by Hb A. Each of the hemo- phyla of marine invertebrates, while the copper con-
globins differs from the others in amino acid sequence. taininghemocyanins (Chapter 16, Section D,4) are
In other species the amino acid composition of used by many molluscs and arthropods.
hemoglobins varies more, as do the interactions
between subunits. Hemoglobins and myoglobins are
found throughout the animal kingdom and even in E. Self-Assembly of Macromolecular
plants.192a The leghemoglobins193–195 are formed in Structures
root nodules of legumes and are involved in nitrogen
fixation by symbiotic bacteria. Other hemoglobins While it is easy to visualize the assembly of oligo-
apparently function in the roots of plants.196–197 meric proteins, it is not as easy to imagine how complex
Hemoglobins or myoglobins are found in some cyano- objects such as eukaryotic cilia (Fig. 1-8) or the sarco-
bacteria198 and in many other bacteria.197,199 The globin meres of muscle (Fig. 19-6) are formed. However, study
fold of the polypeptide is recognizable in all of these.200 of the assembly of bacteriophage particles and other
The quaternary structure of hemoglobin also varies. small biological objects has led to the concepts of self-
Myoglobin is a monomer, as is the leghemoglobin. Hemo- assembly and assembly pathways, concepts that are
globin of the sea lamprey dissociates to monomers upon now applied to every aspect of the architecture of cells.
oxygenation.201,201a The clam Scapharca inaequivalvis has
a dimeric hemoglobin that binds O cooperatively even
2
though the interactions between subunits are very differ- 1. Bacteriophages
ent from those in mammalian hemoglobins.202–204
Hemoglobin of the nematode Ascaris is an octamer.205,206 A remarkable example of self-assembly is that of
It has puzzling properties, including a very high affinity the T-even phage (Box 7-C).213– 215 From genetic analysis
for O and a slow dissociation rate. The distal His E-7 (Chapter 26) at least 22 genes are known to be required
2
is replaced by glutamine, which has a hydrogen- for formation of the heads, 21 genes for the tails, and 7
bonding ability closely similar to that of histidine. genes for the tail fibers. Many of these genes encode

--- Page 366 ---

E. Self-Assembly of Macromolecular Structures 363
BOX 7-C THE T-EVEN BACTERIOPHAGES
Penton
Hexon
Head
Neck Collar
200 nm
Whiskers
Internal tube
200 nm
Sheath
Tail fibers
Adhesin Bacteriophage T4. × 240,000
Micrograph courtesy of Tom Moninger.
Baseplate Drawing courtesy of F. Eiserling and the
American Society for Microbiology.a
Among the most remarkable objects made the virus has become properly attached to the host it
visible by the electron microscope are the T-even shortens from ~ 80 to ~ 30 nm, forcing the inner tube
bacteriophage (T2, T4, and T6) which attack E. coli.a– e through a hole etched in the wall of the bacterium.
While it is not often evident how a virus gains access At the end of the tail is a baseplate, a hexagonal
to a cell, these “molecular syringes” literally inject structure bearing six short pins, each a trimer of a
their DNA through a hole dissolved in the cell wall 55 kDa zinc metalloprotein.j One of the ten proteins
of the host bacterium. The viruses, of length ~ 200 known to be present in the baseplate is the enzyme T4
nm and mass ~ 225 x 106 Da each, contain 130 x 106 lysozyme (Chapter 12). The baseplate also contains
Da of DNA in a 100 x 70 nm head of elongated six molecules of the coenzyme 7,8-dihydropteroyl-
icosahedral shape. The head surface appears to hexaglutamate (Chapter 15, Section D).
be formed from ~ 840 copies of a 45-kDa protein Six elongated, “jointed”tail fibers are attached
known as gp23 (gene product 23; it is encoded by to the baseplate. The proximal segment of each
gene 23; see map in Fig. 26-2). These protein mole- fiber is a trimer of the 1140-kDa protein gp34. A
cules are arranged as 140 hexamers (hexons) and globular domain attaches it to the baseplate. The
together with ~ 55 copies of protein gp24, arranged distal segment is composed of three subunits of
as 11 pentamers (pentons), make up the bulk of the the 109-kDa gp37, three subunits of the 23-kDa
shell.f The head also contains at least nine other gp36, and a single copy of the 30-kDa gp35.k The
proteins, including three internal, basic proteins C-terminal ~140 residues of the 1026-residue gp37
that enter the bacterium along with the DNA. Addi- are the specific adhesin that binds to a lipopolysac-
tional proteins form the neck,collar, and whiskers. charide of E. coli type B cells or to the outer mem-
The phage tail, which fastens to the collar via a brane protein OmpC (Chapter 8).l Among the
connector protein,g contains an internal tube with smaller molecules present in the virus are the poly-
a 2.5-nm hole, barely wide enough to accommodate aminesputrescine and spermidine (Chapter 24),
the flow of the DNA molecule into the bacterium. which neutralize about 30% of the basic groups of
The tube is made up of 144 subunits of gp19. The 8 the DNA.
x 106-Dasheath that surrounds the tail tube is made How is infection by a T-even virus initiated?
up of 144 subunits of gp18, each of mass 55 kDa, Binding of the tail fibers to specific receptor sites on
arranged in the form of 24 rings of six subunits the bacterial surface triggers a sequence of confor-
each.h,i The sheath has contractile properties. After mational changes in the fibers, baseplate, and

--- Page 367 ---

364 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
BOX 7-C THE T-EVEN BACTERIOPHAGES (continued)
sheath. The lysozyme is released from the baseplate a Mathews, C. K., Kutter, E. M., Mosig, G., and Berget, P. B., eds.
and etches a hole in the bacterial cell wall. Contrac- (1983)Bacteriophage T 4 , Am. Soc. Microbiology, Washington, D.C.
b Wood, W. B., and Edgar, R. S. (1967) Sci. Am.217(Jul), 60–74
tion of the sheath is initiated at the baseplate and
c Mathews, C. K. (1971) Bacteriophage Biochemistry, Van Nostrand-
continues to the upper end of the sheath. The tail Reinhold, Princeton, New Jersey
tube is forced into the bacterium and the DNA d Voyles, B. A. (1993) The Biology of Viruses, Mosby, St. Louis,
rapidly flows through the narrow hole into the host Missouri
e Tikhonenko, A. S. (1970) Ultrastructure of Bacterial Viruses,
cell.
Plenum, New York
During contraction the subunits of the sheath f Branton, D., and Klug, A. (1975) J. Mol. Biol.92, 559–565
undergo a remarkable rearrangement into a struc- g Cerritelli, M. E., and Studier, F. W. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.258,
ture containing 12 larger rings of 12 subunits each.h 299–307
h Moody, M. F., and Makowski, L. (1981) J. Mol. Biol.150,
Thus, a kind of mutual “intercalation” of subunits
217–244
occurs. In its unidirectional and irreversible nature i Müller, D. J., Engel, A., Carrascosa, J. L., and Vélez, M. (1997)
the shortening of the phage tail differs from the EMBO J.16, 2547–2553
contraction of muscle. The protein subunits of the j Zorzopulos, J., and Kozloff, L. M. (1978) J. Biol. Chem.253,
5543–5547
sheath seem to be in an unstable high energy state
k Cerritelli, M. E., Wall, J. S., Simon, M. N., Conway, J. F., and
when the tail sheath of the phage is assembled. The Steven, A. C. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.260, 767–780
stored energy remains available for later contraction. l Tétart, F., Repoila, F., Monod, C., and Krisch, H. M. (1996) J.
Mol. Biol.258, 726 – 731
sequences of proteins that are incorporated into the the inner and outer membrane of the host bacterium
mature virus, but several specify enzymes needed in are close together.220 It isn’t clear how the process is
the assembly process. Several mutant strains of the initiated, but it is likely that each subunit of the viral
viruses are able to promote synthesis of all but one of coat contains a nucleotide binding site that interacts
the structural proteins of the virion. Proteins accumu- with the DNA. Adjacent sides of the subunits are
lating within these defective bacterial hosts have no hydrophobic and interact with other subunits to spon-
tendency to aggregate spontaneously. However, when taneously coat the DNA. As the rod is assembled, the
the missing protein (synthesized by bacteria infected hydrophobic groups become “buried.” It is postulated
with another strain of virus) is added complete virus that the remaining side chain groups on the outer surface
particles are formed rapidly. Investigations resulting of the virus are hydrophilic and that the formation of
from this and other observations have led to the con- this hydrophilic rod provides a driving force for auto-
clusion that during assembly each different protein is matic extrusion of the phage from the membrane.216
added to the growing aggregate in a strictly specified se- Bacterial pili appear to be extruded in a similar
quence or assembly pathway. The addition of each protein manner. They arise rapidly and may possibly be
creates a binding site for the next protein. In some retracted again into the bacterial membrane. The P
cases the protein that binds is an enzyme that cuts off pilus in Fig. 7-9A is made up of subunits PapA, G, F,
a piece from the growing assembly of subunits and E, and K which must be assembled in the correct
thereby creates a site for the next protein to bind. sequence. A chaperonin PapD is also required as is
Before considering this complex process further, an“usher protein,” PapC,50 and also the disulfide
let’s look at the assembly of simpler filamentous bacte- exchange protein DsbA (Chapter 10). DsbA helps
riophages (Fig. 7-7) and bacterial pili (Fig. 7-9). The PapD to form the correct disulfide bridges as it folds
filamentous bacteriophages are put together from and PapD binds and protects the various pilus sub-
hydrophobic protein subunits and DNA. After their units as they accumulate in the periplasmic space of
synthesis the protein subunits are stored within the the host. The usher protein displaces the chaperonin
cytoplasmic membrane of the infected bacteria.216,217 PapD and “escorts” the subunits into the membrane
These small, largely α-helical rods can easily fit within where the extrusion occurs.50,55
the membrane and remain there until a DNA molecule Because eicosahedra are regular geometric solids
also enters the membrane.218,219 Two additional pro- and the faces can be made up of hexons and pentons
teins (gene I proteins) also enter the membrane. One of identical subunits, it might seem that self-assembly
has a 348-residue length, while the second is a 107- of eicosahedral viruses would occur easily. However,
residue protein formed by translational initiation at the subunits usually must be able to assume three or
a later point in the DNA sequence of the gene. These more different conformations and the shells can easily
proteins help to create an assembly site at a place where be assembled incorrectly. Several stategies are em-

--- Page 368 ---

E. Self-Assembly of Macromolecular Structures 365
ployed to avert this problem.221,222 Some viruses proteases. This is a feature of the small φX phage (Fig.
assemble an empty shell into which the DNA flows, 7-28),225,226,230 the tailed phages,227,228 and double-
but many others first form an internal scaffolding or stranded RNA viruses including human reoviruses.229
assembly core around which the shell is assembled. Bacteriophage PRD1, another virus of E. coli and
An external scaffold may also be needed.223 The RNA Salmonella typhimurium, has a membrane inside the
virus MS2 forms its T = 3 capsid by using the RNA capsid apparently playing a role in assembly.232
molecule as the assembly core.224 Other viruses may A general concept that seems to hold in all cases
have one or more core proteins which dissociate from is one of “local rule.” Several conformers of a virus
the completed shell or are removed by the action of subunit may equilibrate within a cell. However, they
A
Figure 7-28 (A) Stereoscop-
ic view of the φX174 114 S
mature virion viewed down a
twofold axis after a cryoelec-
tron microscopy reconstruc-
tion. From McKenna et al.225
(B) Morphogenesis of φX174
(based on a report of Hayashi
et al.231). Proteins A and C are
required for DNA synthesis.
Drawing from McKenna et
al.225 Courtesy of Michael G. 15 nm
Rossmann.
B Stage III
DNA
F A synthesis
C
9S
B D J D
6S
H B
DNA packaging
G
12S 108S“Prohead” 132S 114S Mature virion
Protein Copies/particle Protein Copies/particle Protein Copies/particle Protein Copies/particle
F 5 F 60 F 60 F 60
G 5 G 60 G 60 G 60
H 12 J 60 J 60
B 60 (internal scaffold) H 12 H 12
D 240 (external scaffold) D 240
Key
F capsid protein J DNA packaging protein
G capsid protein B scaffolding protein
H“pilot” protein D tetrameric scaffolding unit

--- Page 369 ---

366 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
can associate only through surfaces that are complementary. Assembly of the tailed bacteriophages (Box 7-C)
A conformer that allows pentons to form cannot as- is even more complex. The genome of the viruses is
semble into a hexon and only certain combinations large. The 166-kb circular dsDNA of phage T4 contains
of other conformers can give rise to hexons, etc.233 If ~ 250 genes, many of which encode proteins of the
there is only one conformation and the shape is right a virion or enzymes or chaperonins needed in assembly.
T=1 shell will be formed. If there are three conformers The assembly pathway for the bacteriophage heads
a T= 3 shell may arise. Another generalization is that requires at least 22 gene products.235 Seven of these
in most cases the procapsid or prohead that is formed form the assembly core which serves as a scaffolding
initially is fragile. Subunits may still be undergoing around which the 840 copies of gp23 and 55 copies of
conformational changes. However, a final conforma- gp24 (see Box 7-C) are added to give the elongated
tional alteration, which may include chain cleavage icosahedral prohead I. Most of the internal proteins
by a protease, usually occurs. This often expands the are then dissolved by proteases, one of which is the
overall dimensions of the capsid and creates new phage-specified gp21. A protease also cuts a piece
intersubunit interactions which greatly strengthen the from each molecule of gp23 to form the smaller gp23*,
mature capsid.234 Scaffolding proteins are then removed the major protein of the mature prohead II. This
and DNA or RNA enters the capsid, again in a precise cleavage also triggers the conformational change leading
sequence. There are many variations and the detail to head expansion. The empty proheads are now filled
that is known about virus assembly is far too great to with DNA in a process which is assisted by another
describe here. series of catalytic proteins.
Figure 7-29 illustrates the assembly pathway for The T4 phage tail is assembled in a separate se-
the very small φX174, a T=1 virus. The major capsid quence. Six copies of each of three different proteins
protein F is a 426-residue eight-stranded β-barrel. The form a “hub” with hexagonal symmetry (Fig. 7-29).
175-residue G protein forms pentameric spikes while In another assembly sequence, seven different proteins
60 copies of the internal scaffolding protein and 240 form wedge-shaped pieces, six of which are then joined
copies of the external scaffolding protein D and 12 to the hub to form the hexagonal baseplate. Two more
copies of the pilot protein are required to form the proteins then add to the surface of the base plate and
prohead. The single-stranded DNA enters along with activate it for the growth of the internal tail tube. Only
60 copies of a DNA packaging protein J. after assembly of the internal tube begins does the sheath
5P 29P 10P
27P 11P
26
7P
28 80 nm Assembly of
8P head and neck
51
6P
53P 110 nm
25P
Hub
6 copies Neck
Wedge
9P Head
Connector
12P
Collar
Whisker
2× 45 nm
15P
Sheath
Figure 7-29 Assembly se-
Inner quence for bacteriophage T4
Sheath
48 tube 19P with details for the tail. The
69nm
54 numbers refer to the genes in
19P 18P 156° the T4 chromosome map (Fig.
69nm 26-2). A “P” after the number
indicates that the protein gene
product is incorporated into
57
34P the phage tail. Other numbers
Tail fiber
57.38 35 assembly indicate gene products that are
37P 36P thought to have essential cata-
lytic functions in the assembly
process. Adapted from King
Tail and Mykolajewycz236 and
fiber Kikuchi and King.214

--- Page 370 ---

E. Self-Assembly of Macromolecular Structures 367
begin to grow, and only when both of these tubular (Table 11-3).239 The SH2 and SH3 domains are found
structures have reached the correct length, is a cap near the N terminus of this 60-kDa protein. They are
protein placed on top. The DNA-filled head is then also found in many other proteins. An adapter protein
attached by a special connector and only then do the called Grb2, important in cell signaling, consists of
tail fibers, which have been assembled separately, join nothing but one SH2 domain and two SH3 domains
at the opposite end. (Figs. 11-13, 11-14).240 The SH2 domains bind to phos-
How can each step in this complex assembly photyrosyl side chains of various proteins, while SH3
process set the stage for the next step? Apparently the domains bind to a polyproline motif. Another phos-
structure of each newly synthesized protein monomer photyrosyl binding domain, the plekstrin homology or
is stable only until a specific interaction with another PH domain, is named for the protein in which it was
protein takes place. The binding energy of this inter- discovered. Kringle and apple describe the appear-
action is sufficient to induce a conformational alteration ances of the folded proteins in those domains. Struc-
that affects a distant part of the protein surface and tural domains often function to hold two proteins
generates complementarity toward a binding site on together or to help anchor them at a membrane surface
the next protein that is to be added. Every one of the by binding to specific protein groups, such as phos-
baseplate proteins must have such self-activating photyrosyl, or calcium ions. Table 7-3 lists a few well-
properties! Sometimes proteolytic cleavage of a sub- known folding domains and Fig. 7-30 shows three-
unit is required. If it occurs at an appropriate point in dimensional structures of two of them.
the sequence it provides thermodynamic drive for the Recognition domains often function transiently.
assembly process. For example, SH2 domains are often found in proteins
The induction of a change in one protein by inter- that interact with phosphotyrosyl groups of “activated”
action with another protein is a phenomenon that is cell surface receptors. The receptors become activated
met also in the construction of micro-
tubules, ribosomes, cilia, and myo-
fibrillar assemblies of muscle. It is
TABLE 7-3
basic to the assembly of the many
A Few Well-Known Structural Domains
labile but equally real cascade sys-
tems of protein–protein interactions
Length in Specific
such as that involved in the clotting
Name amino acid residues ligands
of blood (Chapter 12) and signaling
at membrane surfaces. EGF-like241– 244 ~ 45 Ca2+
SH2238,245– 247 ~ 100 Phosphotyrosine
2. “Kringles” and Other
Structure248– 253
Recognition Domains and SH3239,246,254 ~ 60 Polyproline, PXXP
Motifs Structure255– 257
PTB238,258,259 Proline-rich sequence
The assemble of either transient
or long lasting complexes of pro- PH (plekstrin homology)260,261 Phosphotyrosine
teins is often dependent upon the Structure262,263
presence of conserved structural PDZ264– 266 80– 100 C-terminal XS / TXV– COO–
domains of 30–100 residues. A
Immunoglobulin repeat ~ 100
similar domain may occur in many
different proteins and often two or (Fig. 2-16)267
more times within a single protein. Kringles, blood clotting
The sequences within such a domain proteins268– 270 80-85 Calcium binding
are homologous, allowing it to be
Apple, Blood clotting
recognized from protein or gene
sequences alone.237,238 Domains Factor X271 90 Calcium binding
are often named after the protein WW (Trp–Trp)272 ~ 38 Proline
in which they were first discovered. Serine protease273
For example, EGF-like domains
P (Trefoil)274 ~ 50
resemble the 53-residue epidermal
growth factor. SH2 and SH3 do- TPR (Tetratrico peptide repeat)247,275,276
mains are src-homology domains, ZBD (Zinc-binding domains)
named after Src (c-src), the protein Zinc finger (Fig. 5-37)277
encoded by the src protooncogene
Others277– 280

--- Page 371 ---

368 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
by conformational alteration resulting from the binding.
F. The Cytoskeleton
The src protein is a tyrosine kinase and, when activated,
uses ATP to phosphorylate tyrosyl groups of other
The cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells contains a com-
proteins, and using its SH2 domains it will bind to such
plex network of slender rods and filaments that serve
groups forming and passing an intracellular message
as a kind of internal skeleton. The properties of this
to them.249
cytoskeleton affect the shape and mechanical proper-
ties of cells. For example, the cytoskeleton is responsible
A
B
Figure 7-30 (A) Stereoscopic
MolScript view showing 30 super-
posed solution structures of the
SH2 / phosphopeptide complex
from protein Shc calculated from
C
NMR data. The N and C termini of
the protein as well as the phospho-
tyrosine (pY) and (pY + 3) residues
of the phosphopeptide are indicat-
ed. From Zhou et al.252 Courtesy
of Stephen W. Fesik. (B) View of
the phosphotyrosine side chain of
the peptide pYEEI bound to a
high-affinity SH2 domain from the
humansrc tyrosine kinase called
p56lck. The phosphate group forms
a series of hydrogen bonds with
groups in the protein and with
water molecules (small dots) and
an ion pair with the guanidinium
group of R134. From Tong et al.248
Courtesy of Liang Tong. (C) Struc-
ture of kringle 2 from human tissue
plasminogen activator (see Chapter
12). From de Vos et al.269 Courtesy
of Abraham M. de Vos.

--- Page 372 ---

F. The Cytoskeleton 369
for the biconcave disc shape of erythrocytes and for A common architecture of intermediate filaments
the ameba’s ability to rapidly interconvert gel-like and is a staggered head-to-tail and side-by-side association
fluid regions of the cytoplasm.281– 283 of pairs of the coiled-coil dimers into 2- to 3-nm proto-
Three principal components of the cytoskeleton filaments and further association of about eight
are microfilaments of ~ 6 nm diameter, microtubules protofilaments to form the 10-nm intermediate
of 23 – 25 nm diameter, and intermediate filaments filaments.286,290,296
of ~10 nm diameter. A large number of associated
proteins provide for interconnections, for assembly,
and for disassembly of the cytoskeleton. Other pro- 2. Microfilaments
teins act as motors that provide motion. One of these
motors is present in myosin of muscle. This protein is The most abundant microfilaments are composed
not only the motor for muscular work but also forms of fibrous actin (F-actin; Fig. 7-10). The thin filaments
thick filaments of 12 – 16 nm diameter, which are a of F-actin are also one of the two major components
major structural component of muscle (see Fig. 19-6). of the contractile fibers of skeletal muscle. There is
actually a group of closely related actins encoded by
a multigene family. At least four vertebrate actins are
1. Intermediate Filaments specific to various types of muscle, while two (β- and
γ-actins) are cytosolic.298,299 Actins are present in all
In most cells the intermediate filaments provide animal cells and also in fungi and plants as part of the
the scaffolding for the cytoskeleton284– 286 They may cytoskeleton. The microfilaments can associate to
account for only 1% of the protein in a cell but provide
up to 85% of the protein in the tough outer layers of
skin. Intermediate filament proteins are encoded by
A Dimer B Protofilament
over 50 human genes286 which specify proteins of
various sizes, structures, and properties. However,
all of them have central 300- to 330-residue α-helical Heads
regions through which the molecules associate in
parallel pairs to form coiled-coil rods with globular
domains at the ends (Fig. 7-31). Some of these proteins,
such as the keratin of skin, are insoluble. Others, including
the nuclear lamins (Chapter 27)287 and vimentin,288–289a
dissociate and reform filaments reversibly.
Vimentin is found in most cells and predominates
in fibroblasts and other cells of mesenchymal origin. Linker
Desmin (55-kDa monomer) is found in both smooth and regions
skeletal muscle.289b,290,290a In the latter, it apparently
45 nm
ties the contractile myofibrils to the rest of the cyto-
skeletal network and the individual myofibrils to each
other at Z disc (see Fig. 19-6). The glial filaments
from the astroglial cells of the brain are composed
mainly of a single type of 55-kDa subunits of the
glial fibrillar acidic protein but the neurofilaments
of mammalian neurons are composed of three distinct
subunits of 68-, 150-, and 200-kDa mass.291– 293 The
larger subunits have C-terminal tails that are not
required for filament formation but which can be
phosphorylated and form bridges to neighboring
neurofilaments and other cytoskeletal components Tails
and organelles. Keratin filaments, which eventually
nearly fill the highly differentiated epidermal cells, are
also made up of several different subunits.294 Extensions Figure 7-31 A model for the structure of keratin microfibrils
of the keratin chains are rich in cysteine side chains of intermediate filaments. (A) A coiled-coil dimer, 45-nm in
which form disulfide crosslinkages to adjacent mole- length. The helical segments of the rod domains are inter-
cules to provide a network that can be dehydrated to rupted by three linker regions. The conformations of the
form hair and the tough outer layers of skin.286 head and tail domains are unknown but are thought to be
flexible. (B) Probable organization of a protofilament, in-
Elastin-associated microfibrils are important constituents
volving staggered antiparallel rows of dimers. From Jeffrey
of elastic tissues of blood vessels, lungs, and skin.295
A. Cohlberg297

--- Page 373 ---

370 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
form larger arrays and actin often exists as thicker consists largely of microtubules which function in the
“cables,” some of which form the stress fibers seen in movement of chromosomes in a dividing cell (Box 7-D
cultured cells adhering to a glass surface. In the red and Chapter 26).
blood cells the spectrin–actinmeshwork (Fig. 8-14), Microtubules in the long axons of nerve cells
which lies directly beneath the plasma membrane, function as “rails” for the “fast transport” of proteins
together with the proteins that anchor it to the mem- and other materials from the cell body down the axons.
brane, form the cytoskeleton.284,300,301 Its mechanical In fact, microtubules appear to be present throughout
properties appear to be responsible for the biconcave the cytoplasm of virtually all eukaryotic cells (Fig. 7-32)
disc shape of the cell. and also in spirochetes.311 Motion in microtubular
Theacrosomal process of some invertebrate sperm systems depends upon motor proteins such as kinesin,
cells is an actin cable that sometimes forms almost which moves bound materials toward what is known
instantaneously by polymerization of the actin mono- as the “negative” end of the microtubule,312dyneins
mers and shoots out to penetrate the outer layers of the which move toward the positive end.310 These motor
egg during fertilization (Chapter 32). The stereocilia, proteins are driven by the Gibbs energy of hydrolysis
the“hairs” of the hair cells in the inner ear, contain of ATP or GTP and in this respect, as well as in some
bundles of actin filaments.302 Motion of the stereocilia structural details (Chapter 19), resemble the muscle
caused by sound produces changes in the membrane protein myosin. Dyneinis present in the arms of the
potential of the cells initiating a nerve impulse. In certain microtubules of cilia (Fig. 1-8) whose motion results
lizards each hair cell contains about 75 stereocilia of from the sliding of the microtubules driven by the action
lengths up to 30 µm and diameter 0.8 µm and contain- of this protein (Chapter 19).
ing more than 3000 actin filaments in a semicrystalline Microtubules are assembled from ~ 55-kDa tubulins,
array. Microvilli (Fig. 1-6) contain longitudinal arrays which are mixed dimers of α subunits (450 residues)
of actin filaments. andβ subunits (445 residues) with 40% sequence
In every instance, groups of microfilaments are identity. The αβ dimers, whose structure is shown in
held together by other proteins. Stress fibers of higher
eukaryotes contain the “muscle proteins”tropomyosin,
(cid:2)-actinin, and myosin (Chapter 19), although the
latter is usually not in fibrillar form. Filamin (250-
kDa) and a 235-kDa protein are associated with actin
in platelets.303 The high-molecular-weight synemin
crosslinks vimentin and desmin filaments,304 while
the smaller, highly polar filaggrin provides a matrix
around the keratin filaments in the external layers of
the skin.305
Postsynthetic modifications of cytoskeletal micro-
filaments can also occur. For example, epidermal
keratin has been found to contain lanthionine, (γ-gluta-
myllysine) and lysinoalanine, both presumably arising
from crosslinkages.306
3. Microtubules
A prominent component of cytoplasm consists of
microtubules which appear under the electron micro-
scope to have a diameter of 24 ± 2 nm and a 13 - to 15-nm
hollow core.307– 310 However, the true diameter of a
hydrated microtubule is about 30 nm and the micro-
tubule may be further surrounded by a 5–20 nm low
density layer of associated proteins. Microtubules are
present in the most striking form in the flagella and cilia Figure 7-32 Micrograph of a mouse embryo fibroblast was
of eukaryotic cells (Fig. 1-8). The stable microtubules obtained using indirect immunofluorescence techniques.313
The cells were fixed with formaldehyde, dehydrated, and
of cilia are integral components of the machinery caus-
treated with antibodies (formed in a rabbit) to microtubule
ing their motion (Chapter 19). Labile microtubules,
protein. The cells were then treated with fluorescent goat
which form and then disappear, are often found in antibodies to rabbit γ-globulins (see Chapter 31) and the
cytoplasm in which motion is taking place, for example, in
photograph was taken by fluorescent light emission. Cour-
the pseudopodia of the ameba. The mitotic spindle tesy of Klaus Weber.

--- Page 374 ---

F. The Cytoskeleton 371
BOX 7-D MITOSIS, TETRAPLOID PLANTS, AND ANTICANCER DRUGS
Microtubules in cells undergoing mitosis are in treatment of breast, ovarian, and other cancers.f
the target of several important drugs. One of these Binding sites for the compound have been located
is the alkaloid colchicine which is produced by inβ tubulin subunits (Fig. 7-33).h,i Attempts are
various members of the lily family and has been used being made to develop “taxoids” and other drugs
since ancient Egyptian times for the alleviation of more effective than taxol against cancer cells.j,k
the symptoms of gout.a,b
O
O
O O OH
H C CH3 CH3
H3C O N
H3C
H3C CH3
H H
O NH
O CH3
H3C O O
O
O OH O O
H3C
CH3
OH
O
O O
O
CH3
Taxol (paclitaxel)
Colchicine
This compound, with its tropolone ring system, binds
specifically and tightly and prevents assembly of
microtubules, including those of the mitotic spindle.b
Colchicine forms a complex with soluble tubulin,c
perhaps a dimeric αβ complex of the two subunits.d
Dividing cells treated with colchicine appear to be
blocked at metaphase (Chapter 26) and daughter
cells with a high degree of polyploidy are formed.
This has led to the widespread use of colchicine in
inducing formation of tetraploid varieties of flower-
Laser scanning confocal micrograph of chromosomes
ing plants. Similar effects upon microtubules are
at metaphase. Courtesy of Tom Moninger
produced by the antitumor agents vincristine and
vinblastine, alkaloids formed by the common plant
Vinca (periwinkle), and also by a variety of other Another group of drugs that bind to microtu-
drugs.e bules are benzimidazole and related compounds.
The more recently discovered Taxol (paclitaxel) These have been used widely to treat infection by
was extracted from the bark of the Pacific yew.f It parasitic nematodes in both humans and animals.
stabilizes microtubules, inhibiting their disassembly.g Unfortunately resistance has developed rapidly.
Taxol also blocks mitosis and causes the cells which In a nematode that infects sheep a single tyrosine
fail to complete mitosis to die. Taxol has been syn- to phenylalanine mutation at position 200 in the
thesizedf and is a promising drug that is being used β-tubulin subunit confers resistance.l
a Margulis, T. N. (1974) J. Am. Chem. Soc.96, 899 – 902 g Derry, W. B., Wilson, L., and Jordan, M. A. (1995) Biochemistry
b Chakrabarti, G., Sengupta, S., and Bhattacharyya, B. (1996) 34, 2203 – 2211
J. Biol. Chem.271, 2897 – 2901 h Rao, S., He, L., Chakravarty, S., Ojima, I., Orr, G. A., and
c Panda, D., Daijo, J. E., Jordan, M. A., and Wilson, L. (1995) Horwitz, S. B. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 37990–37994
Biochemistry34, 9921– 9929 i Makowski, L. (1995) Nature (London)375, 361– 362
d Shearwin, K. E., and Timasheff, S. N. (1994) Biochemistry33, j Nicolaou, K. C., Guy, R. K., and Potier, P. (1996) Sci. Am.
894– 901 274(Jun), 94 – 98
e Hastie, S. B., Williams, R. C., Jr., Puett, D., and Macdonald, T. L. k Kowalski, R. J., Giannakakou, P., and Hamel, E. (1997) J. Biol.
(1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 6682 – 6688 Chem.272, 2534 – 2541
f Nicolaou, K. C., Nantermet, P. G., Ueno, H., Guy, R. K., l Kwa, M. S. G., Veenstra, J. G., Van Dijk, M., and Roos, M. H.
Couladouros, E. A., and Sorensen, E. J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc. (1995)J. Mol. Biol.246, 500 – 510
117, 624 – 633

--- Page 375 ---

372 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
Fig. 7-33314– 316 are thought to be packed into an imper- at the other. Such “treadmilling” may be important in
fect helix as indicated in Fig. 7-34. The structure can movement of chromosomes in neuronal migration322
also be regarded as an array of longitudinal protofila- and in fast axonal transport of macromolecules (Chapter
ments. Naturally formed microtubules usually have 30).323 During mitosis the minus ends of the microtu-
precisely 13 protofilaments and a discontinuity in the bules are believed to be tightly anchored at the centro-
helical stacking of subunits as shown in Fig. 7-34. When some while subunit exchanges can occur at the plus
grown in a laboratory the microtubules usually have ends323,324 where the β subunits are exposed. Using a
14 protofilaments317 and rarely 10 or 16 protofilaments phage display system (see Fig. 3-16) it could be shown
with regular helical packing.318 Microtubules of some that the N termini of the α subunits are exposed at
moths and also of male germ cells of Drosophila have the minus ends.325 Kinesin can bind to the β sub-
16-protofilament microtubules without a discontinuity, units all along the microtubule.326 Microtubules are
an architecture that is specified by the geometry of a formed by growth from microtubule nucleation sites
specificβ-tubulin isoform.319 inmicrotubule organizing centers found in centro-
Each tubulin dimer binds one molecule of GTP somes, spindle poles, and other locations.327 Several
strongly in the α subunit and a second molecule of proteins, including (cid:3)-tubulin,are required.317,328,329 A
GTP or GDP more loosely in the β subunit. In this proposed assembly pathway is illustrated in Fig. 7-34.
respect, tubulin resembles actin, whose subunits are Isolated microtubules always contain small amounts
about the same size. However, there is little sequence of larger ~ 300-kDa microtubule-associated proteins
similarity. Labile microtubules of cytoplasm can be (MAPS).330 These elongated molecules may in part lie
formed or disassembled very rapidly. GTP is essential in the grooves between the tubulin subunits and in part
for the fast growth of these microtubules and is hydro- be extended outward to form a low-density layer around
lyzed to GDP in the process.320 However, nonhydro- the tubule.283,309 Nerve cells that contain stable microtu-
lyzable analogs of GTP, such as the one containing the bules have associated stabilizing proteins.331 A family
linkage P– CH –P between the terminal and central of proteins formed by differential splicing of mRNA are
2
phosphorus atoms of the GTP, also support polymer- known as tau. The tau proteins are prominent compo-
ization.321 Since microtubules have a distinct polarity, nents of the cytoskeleton of neurons. They not only
the two ends have different tubulin surfaces exposed, interact with microtubules but also undergo reversible
and polymerization and depolymerization can occur phosphorylation. Hyperphosphorylated tau is the
at different rates at the two ends. As a consequence, primary component of the paired helical filaments found
microtubules often grow at one end and disassemble in the brains of persons with Alzheimer disease.330
Figure 7-33 Stereoscopic
ribbon diagram of the tubulin
dimer with α-tubulin with
bound GTP at the top and
β-tubulin with bound GDP
at the bottom. The β-tubulin
subunit also contains a bound
molecule of taxotere (see Box
7-D) which is labeled TAX.
This model is based upon
electron crystallography of
zinc-induced tubulin sheets
at 0.37-nm resolution and is
thought to approximate
closely the packing of the
tubulin monomers in microtu-
bules.315 The arrow at the left
points toward the plus end of
the microtubule. Courtesy of
Kenneth H. Downing.

--- Page 376 ---

F. The Cytoskeleton 373
13 γ-Tubulin
αβ Tubulin dimer with 2
13
molecules of bound GTP
Figure 7-34 Growth of a microtubule from a γ-tubulin ring
complex (γTURC). The helical γ-tubulin rings are formed in γTuRC
n
the microtubule organizing centers which, in animal cells,
are the centrosomes. Thirteen γ-tubulin subunits are shown
in a hypothetical array formed together with a base of other
molecules of unknown structure. The microtubule grows by
addition of successive layers of α/β-tubulin dimers, each a
split ring of 13 dimers with the β-tubulin subunits toward
the base, the negative end, and the α-tubulin subunits
toward the growing positive end. After Zheng et al.317
References
1. Williams, D. H., Searle, M. S., Mackay, J. P., 24. Weiss, J. N. (1997) FASEB J.11, 835–841 44a. Eisenstein, M., Shariv, I., Koren, G., Friesem,
Gerhard, U., and Maplestone, R. A. (1993) 25. Wang, X.-G., and Engel, P. C. (1995) A. A., and Katchalski-Katzir, E. (1997) J. Mol.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 1172–1178 Biochemistry34, 11417–11422 Biol.266, 135–143
2. Weber, G. (1992) Protein Interactions, Chapman 26. Damle, V. N. (1972) Biopolymers11, 1789–816 45. Raghavendra, K., Kelly, J. A., Khairallah, L.,
and Hall, London 27. Watson, J. D. (1976) Molecular Biology of the and Schuster, T. M. (1988) Biochemistry27,
3. Scatchard, G. (1949) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.51, Gene, 3rd ed., Benjamin, Menlo Park, 7583–7588
660–672 California (p. 98) 46. Wang, H., and Stubbs, G. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.
4. Zierler, K. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 314–317 28. Bernal, J. D. (1967) J. Mol. Biol.24, 379–390 239, 371–384
5. Munson, P. J., Rodbard, D., and Klotz, I. M. 29. Blundell, T. L., and Johnson, L. N. (1976) Protein 47. Namba, K., Casper, D. L. D., and Stubbs, G. J.
(1983)Science220, 979–981 Crystallography, Academic Press, New York (1985)Science227, 773–776
6. Deranleau, D. A. (1969) J. Am. Chem. Soc.91, 30. Monod, J., Wyman, J., and Changeux, J. D. 48. Eisenstein, B. I. (1987) Escherichia coli and
4044–4049 (1965)J. Mol. Biol.12, 88–118 Salmonella typhimurium, Am. Soc.
7. Dowd, J. E., and Riggs, D. S. (1965) J. Biol. 30a. Dill, K. A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 701–704 Microbiology, Washington, D.C., FC
Chem.240, 863–869 30b. Boresch, S., and Karplus, M. (1995) J. Mol. Niedhardt, ed. (pp. 84–90)
8. Feldman, H. A. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, Biol.254, 801–807 49. Bullitt, E., and Makowski, L. (1995) Nature
12865–12867 30c. Tamura, A., and Privalov, P. L. (1997) J. Mol. (London)373, 164–167
8a. Dunford, H. B. (1984) J. Chem. Educ.61, 129–132 Biol.273, 1048–1060 50. Bullitt, E., Jones, C. H., Striker, R., Soto, G.,
8b. Klotz, I. M. (1997) Ligand-Receptor Energetics, 31. Zhang, R.-G., Westbrook, M. L., Westbrook, E. Jacob-Dubuisson, F., Pinkner, J., Wick, M. J.,
Wiley, New York M., Scott, D. L., Otwinowski, Z., Maulik, P. R., Makowski, L., and Hultgren, S. J. (1996) Proc.
9. Conners, K. A. (1987) Binding Constants, Reed, R. A., and Shipley, G. G. (1995) J. Mol. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 12890–12895
Wiley, New York Biol.251, 550–562 51. Bullitt, E., and Makowski, L. (1998) Biophys. J.
10. Motulsky, H. J., and Ransnas, L. A. (1987) 31a. Marvin, D. A. (1998) Current Opinion in 74, 623–632
FASEB J.1, 365–374 Structural Biology8, 150–158 52. Gong, M., and Makowski, L. (1992) J. Mol.
11. Schejter, A., and Margoliash, E. (1985) Trends 32. Marvin, D. A., Hale, R. D., Nave, C., and Biol.228, 735–742
Biochem. Sci.10, 490–492 Citterich, M. H. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.235, 260–286 53. Kuehn, M. J., Ogg, D. J., Kihlberg, J., Slonim,
12. Steinhardt, J., and Reynolds, J. A. (1969) 33. Glucksman, M. J., Bhattacharjee, S., and L. N., Flemmer, K., Bergfors, T., and Hultgren,
Multiple Equilibria in Proteins, Academic Press, Makowski, L. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.226, 455–470 S. J. (1993) Science262, 1234–1241
New York 34. Day, L. A., Marzec, C. J., Reisberg, S. A., and 53a. Sauer, F. G., Fütterer, K., Pinkner, J. S.,
13. Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1970) in The Enzymes, 3rd Casadevall, A. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Dodson, K. W., Hultgren, S. J., and Waksman,
ed., Vol. 1 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 341–396, Biophys. Chem.17, 509–539 G. (1999) Science285, 1058–1061
Academic Press, New York 35. Williams, K. A., Glibowicka, M., Li, Z., Li, H., 53b. Choudhury, D., Thompson, A., Stojanoff, V.,
14. Tanford, C. (1961) Physical Chemistry of Khan, A. R., Chen, Y. M. Y., Wang, J., Marvin, Langermann, S., Pinkner, J., Hultgren, S. J.,
Macromolecules, Wiley, New York (pp. 533–534) D. A., and Deber, C. M. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.252, and Knight, S. D. (1999) Science285, 1061–
15. Edsall, J. T., and Wyman, J. (1958) Biophysical 6–14 1065
Chemistry, Academic Press, New York 36. Overman, S. A., Tsuboi, M., and Thomas, G. 53c. Skerker, J. M., and Shapiro, L. (2000) EMBO J.
16. Westheimer, F. H., and Shookhoff, M. W. J., Jr. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, 331–336 19, 3223–3234
(1939)J. Am. Chem. Soc.61, 555–560 37. Makowski, L. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.228, 885–892 53d. Hazes, B., Sastry, P. A., Hayakawa, K., Read,
17. Honig, B., and Nicholls, A. (1995) Science268, 38. Rakonjac, J., and Model, P. (1998) J. Mol. Biol. R. J., and Irvin, R. T. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.299,
1144–1149 282, 25–41 1005–1017
18. Rajasekaran, E., Jayaram, B., and Honig, B. 38a. Welsh, L. C., Marvin, D. A., and Perham, R. 53e. Collinson, S. K., Parker, J. M. R., Hodges, R. S.,
(1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 8238–8240 N. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.284, 1265–1271 and Kay, W. W. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.290, 741–756
19. Tanford, C. (1961) Physical Chemistry of 39. Liu, D. J., and Day, L. A. (1994) Science265, 53f. Murphy, F. V., IV, Sweet, R. M., and Churchill,
Macromolecules, Wiley, New York (Chapter 8) 671–674 M. E. A. (1999) EMBO J.18, 6610–6618
20. Maier, G. D., and Metzler, D. E. (1957) J. Am. 40. Bhyravbhatla, B., Watowich, S. J., and Caspar, 54. Hanson, M. S., and Brinton, C. C., Jr. (1988)
Chem. Soc.79, 4386–4391 D. L. D. (1998) Biophys. J.74, 604–615 Nature (London)332, 265–268
21. Metzler, D. E. (1960) in The Enzymes, 2nd ed., 41. Fraenkel-Conrat, H. (1964) Sci. Am.211(Oct), 55. St. Geme, J. W., III, Pinkner, J. S., Krasan, G. P.,
Vol. 2 (Boyer, P. D., Lardy, H., and Myrback, 47–54 Heuser, J., and Bullitt, E. (1996) Proc. Natl.
K., eds), pp. 295–337, Academic Press, New 42. Butler, P. J. G., and Klug, A. (1978) Sci. Am. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 11913–11918
York 239(Nov), 62–69 56. Parge, H. E., Bernstein, S. L., Deal, C. D.,
22. Applequist, J. (1977) J. Chem. Educ.54, 417–419 43. Bloomer, A. C., Champness, J. N., Bricogne, McRee, D. E., Christensen, D., Capozza, M.
23. Hill, T. (1962) Introduction to Statistical G., Staden, R., and Klug, A. (1978) Nature A., Kays, B. W., Fieser, T. M., Draper, D., So,
Thermodynamics, Addison–Wesley, Reading, (London)276, 362–368 M., Getzoff, E. D., and Tainer, J. A. (1990) J.
Massachusetts (pp. 235–241) 44. Holmes, K. C. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 4–7 Biol. Chem.265, 2278–2285

--- Page 377 ---

374 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
References
57. Parge, H. E., Forest, K. T., Hickey, M. J., 85. Zimmerle, C. T., and Alter, G. M. (1993) 113. Koshland, D. E., Jr., Némethy, G., and Filmer,
Christensen, D. A., Getzoff, E. D., and Tainer, Biochemistry32, 12743–12748 D. (1966) Biochemistry5, 365–385
J. A. (1995) Nature (London)378, 32–38 86. Hodgkin, D. C. (1975) Nature (London)255, 103 114. Cornish-Bowden, A. J., and Koshland, D. E.,
58. Folkhard, W., Leonard, K. R., Malsey, S., 87. Whittingham, J. L., Chaudhuri, S., Dodson, E. Jr. (1970) J. Biol. Chem.245, 6241–6250
Marvin, D. A., Dubochet, J., Engel, A., J., Moody, P. C. E., and Dodson, G. G. (1995) 115. Cornish-Bowden, A. J., and Koshland, D. E.,
Achtman, M., and Helmuth, R. (1979) Biochemistry34, 15553–15563 Jr. (1971) J. Biol. Chem.246, 3092–3102
J. Mol. Biol.130, 145–160 88. Chang, X., Jorgensen, A. M. M., Bardrum, P., 116. Darnall, D. W., and Klotz, I. M. (1972) Arch.
59. Paiva, W. D., Grossman, T., and Silverman, P. and Led, J. J. (1997) Biochemistry36, 9409–9422 Biochem. Biophys.149, 1–14
M. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 26191–26197 89. Golmohammadi, R., Valegård, K., Fridborg, K., 117. Doci, Y., Sugita, Y., and Yoneyama, Y. (1973) J.
60. Rubenstein, P. A. (1990) BioEssays12, 309–315 and Liljas, L. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.234, 620–639 Biol. Chem.248, 2354–2363
61. Venkatesh, B., Tay, B. H., Elgar, G., and 90. Liljas, L., Fridborg, K., Valegård, K., Bundule, 118. Perutz, M. F., Muirhead, H., Cox, J. M., and
Brenner, S. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, 655–665 M., and Pumpens, P. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.244, Goaman, L. C. G. (1968) Nature (London)219,
62. Holmes, K. C., Popp, D., Gebhard, W., and 279–290 131–139
Kabsch, W. (1990) Nature (London)347, 44–49 91. Tars, K., Bundule, M., Fridborg, K., and Lijas, 119. Dickerson, R. E., and Geis, I. (1983)
63. Lorenz, M., Poole, K. J. V., Popp, D., L. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.271, 759–773 Hemoglobin: Structure, Function, Evolution and
Rosenbaum, G., and Holmes, K. C. (1995) J. 92. Abad-Zapatero, C., Abdel-Meguid, S. S., Pathology, Benjamin / Cummings Publ.,
Mol. Biol.246, 108–119 Johnson, J. E., Leslie, A. G. W., Rayment, I., Redwood City, California
64. Valentine, R. C. (1969) in Symmetry and Rossmann, M. G., Suck, D., and Tsukihara, T. 120. Antonini, E., and Brunori, M. (1971)
Function of the Biological Systems at the (1980)Nature (London)286, 33–39 Hemoglobin and Myoglobin in Their Reactions
Macromolecular Level (Engstrom, A., and 93. Athappilly, F. K., Murali, R., Rux, J. J., Cai, Z., with Ligands, North-Hollard, Publ.,
Strandberg, B., eds), p. 165, Wiley, New York and Burnett, R. M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.242, Amsterdam
(11th Nobel Symp.) 430–455 121. Kendrew, J. C. (1961) Sci. Am.205(Dec), 96–110
65. Klotz, I. M., Darnall, D. W., and Langerman, 94. Stewart, P. L., Chiu, C. Y., Huang, S., Muir, T., 122. Fermi, G., Perutz, M. F., Shaanan, B., and
N. R. (1975) in The Proteins, 3rd ed., Vol. 1 Zhao, Y., Chait, B., Mathias, P., and Nemerow, Fourme, R. (1984) J. Mol. Biol.175, 159–174
(Neurath, H., and Hill, R. L., eds), p. 293, G. R. (1997) EMBO J.16, 1189–1198 123. Benesch, R., and Benesch, R. E. (1974) Science
Academic Press, New York 95. Caspar, D. L. D., and Klug, A. (1962) Cold 185, 905–908
66. Momany, C., Ernst, S., Ghosh, R., Chang, N.- Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 124. Borgstahl, G. E. O., Rogers, P. H., and Arnone,
L., and Hackert, M. L. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.252, 27, 1–24 A. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.236, 831–843
643–655 96. Johnson, J. E. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 125. Imai, K. (1979) J. Mol. Biol.133, 233–247
67. Almassy, R. J., Janson, C. A., Hamlin, R., 93, 27–33 126. Amiconi, G., Antonini, E., Brunori, M.,
Xuong, N.-H., and Eisenberg, D. (1986) Nature 97. Steven, A. C., Trus, B. L., Booy, F. P., Cheng, Wyman, J., and Zolla, L. (1981) J. Mol. Biol.
(London)323, 304–309 N., Zlotnick, A., Caston, J. R., and Conway, J. 152, 111–129
68. Harrison, S. C. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, F. (1997) FASEB J.11, 733–742 127. Flanagan, M. A., Ackers, G. K., Matthew, J. B.,
345–351 98. Rayment, I., Baker, T. S., Caspar, D. L. D., and Hanania, G. I. H., and Gurd, F. R. N. (1981)
69. Rossmann, M. G., and Johnson, J. E. (1989) Murakami, W. T. (1982) Nature (London)295, Biochemistry20, 7439–7449
Ann. Rev. Biochem.58, 533–573 110–115 127a.Shibayama, N. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.285, 1383–
70. Johnson, J. E., and Speir, J. A. (1997) J. Mol. 99. Liddington, R. C., Yan, Y., Moulai, J., Sahli, R., 1388
Biol.269, 665–675 Benjamin, T. L., and Harrison, S. C. (1991) 128. Waxman, L. (1971) J. Biol. Chem.246, 7318–7327
71. Watson, J. D. (1976) Molecular Biology of the Nature (London)354, 278–284 129. Doyle, M. L., Di Cera, E., and Gill, S. J. (1988)
Gene, 3rd ed., Benjamin, Menlo Park, 100. Champness, J. N., Bloomer, A. C., Bricogne, Biochemistry27, 820–824
California (p. 107) G., Butler, P. J. G., and Klug, A. (1976) Nature 130. Edelstein, S. J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.257, 737–744
72. Unge, T., Liljas, L., Strandberg, B., Vaara, I., (London)259, 20–24 131. Imai, K. (1983) J. Mol. Biol.167, 741–749
Kannan, K. K., Fridborg, K., Nordman, C. E., 101. Fukuda, M., and Okada, Y. (1987) Proc. Natl. 131a.Gibson, Q. H. (1999) Biochemistry38, 5191–
and Lentz, P. J., Jr. (1980) Nature (London)285, Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 4035–4038 5199
373–377 102. McDonald, R. C., Engelman, D. M., and Steita, 132. Paoli, M., Liddington, R., Tame, J., Wilkinson,
73. Küpper, H., Keller, W., Kurz, C., Forss, S., T. A. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 2942–2943 A., and Dodson, G. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.256,
Schaller, H., Franze, R., Stohmaier, K., 103. Galloway, J. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 233– 775–792
Marquardt, O., Zaslavsky, V. G., and 238 133. Henry, E. R., Jones, C. M., Hofrichter, J., and
Hofschneider, P. H. (1981) Nature (London) 104. Kantrowitz, E. R., and Lipscomb, W. N. (1990) Eaton, W. A. (1997) Biochemistry36, 6511–6528
289, 555–559 Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 53–59 134. Silva, M. M., Rogers, P. H., and Arnone, A.
74. Trikha, J., Theil, E. C., and Allewell, N. M. 105. Zhou, B.-B., and Schachman, H. K. (1993) (1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 17248–17256
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.248, 949–967 Protein Sci.2, 103–112 135. Jayaraman, V., and Spiro, T. G. (1995)
75. Larson, S. B., Day, J., Greenwood, A., and 106. Xi, X. G., De Staercke, C., Van Vliet, F., Biochemistry34, 4511–4515
McPherson, A. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.277, 37–59 Triniolles, F., Jacobs, A., Stas, P. P., Ladjimi, M. 136. Schumacher, M. A., Zheleznova, E. E.,
76. Hogle, J. M., Chow, M., and Filman, D. J. M., Simon, V., Cunin, R., and Hervé, G. (1994) Poundstone, K. S., Kluger, R., Jones, R. T., and
(1985)Science229, 1358–1365 J. Mol. Biol.242, 139–149 Brennan, R. G. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
77. Hogle, J. M., Chow, M., and Filman, D. J. 107. Fetler, L., Vachette, P., Hervé, G., and Ladjimi, U.S.A.94, 7841–7844
(1987)Sci. Am.256(Mar), 42–49 M. M. (1995) Biochemistry34, 15654–15660 136a.Tame, J. R. H. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24,
78. Olson, N. H., Kolatkar, P. R., Oliveira, M. A., 108. Honzatko, R. B., Crawford, J. L., Monaco, H. 372–377
Cheng, R. H., Greve, J. M., McClelland, A., L., Ladner, J. E., Edwards, B. F. D., Evans, D. 137. Manning, L. R., Jenkins, W. T., Hess, J. R.,
Baker, T. S., and Rossmann, M. G. (1993) Proc. R., Warren, S. G., Wiley, D. C., Ladner, R. C., Vandegriff, K., Winslow, R. M., and Manning,
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 507–511 and Lipscomb, W. N. (1982) J. Mol. Biol.160, J. M. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 775–781
79. Hadfield, A. T., Oliveira, M. A., Kim, K. H., 219–263 138. Holt, J. M., and Ackers, G. K. (1995) FASEB J.
Minor, I., Kremer, M. J., Heinz, B. A., Shepard, 109. Krause, K. L., Volz, K. W., and Lipscomb, 9, 210–218
D., Pevear, D. C., Rueckert, R. R., and Rossmann, W. N. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 139. Perutz, M. F., Shih, D. T.-b, and Williamson,
M. G. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.253, 61–73 1643–1647 D. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.239, 555–560
80. Wu, H., and Rossmann, M. G. (1993) J. Mol. 110. Thomas, A., Field, M. J., and Perahia, D. 140. Perutz, M. F., Muirhead, H., Cox, J. M.,
Biol.233, 231–244 (1996)J. Mol. Biol.261, 490–506 Goaman, L. C. G., Mathews, F. S., McGandy,
81. Luo, M., Vriend, G., Kamer, G., Minor, I., 110a.Brunori, M. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24, L. E., and Webb, L. E. (1968) Nature (London)
Arnold, E., Rossmann, M. G., Boege, U., 158–161 219, 29–32
Scraba, D. G., Duke, G. M., and Palmenberg, 110b.Di Cera, E., ed. (1998) Advances in Protein 141. Perutz, M. (1990) Mechanisms of Cooperativity
A. C. (1987) Science235, 182–191 Chemistry, Linkage Thermodynamics of and Allosteric Regulation in Proteins,
82. Tikhonenko, A. S. (1970) Ultrastructure of Macromolecular Interactions, Vol. 51, Academic Cambridge Univ. Press, London
Bacterial Viruses, Plenum, New York Press, San Diego, California 142. O’Donnell, S., Mandaro, R., Schuster, T. M.,
83. Birktoft, J. J., Rhodes, G., and Banaszak, L. J. 111. Bloom, C. R., Choi, W. E., Brzovic, P. S., Ha, J. and Arnone, A. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254,
(1989)Biochemistry28, 6065–6081 J., Huang, S.-T., Kaarsholm, N. C., and Dunn, 12204–12208
84. Skarzynski, T., Moody, P. C. E., and Wonacott, M. F. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.245, 324–330 143. Perutz, M. F. (1970) Nature (London)228, 726–739
A. J. (1987) J. Mol. Biol.193, 171–187 112. Hammes, G. G., and Wu, C.-W. (1971) Science 144. Dickerson, R. E. (1972) Ann. Rev. Biochem.41,
172, 1205–1211 815–842

--- Page 378 ---

375
References
145. Ishimori, K., Hashimoto, M., Imai, K., 175. Upmacis, R. K., Hajjar, D. P., Chait, B. T., and 198. Potts, M., Angeloni, S. V., Ebel, R. E., and
Fushitani, K., Miyazaki, G., Morimoto, H., Mirza, U. A. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, Bassam, D. (1992) Science256, 1690–1692
Wada, Y., and Morishima, I. (1994) Biochemis- 10424–10429 199. Yeh, S.-R., Couture, M., Ouellet, Y., Guertin,
try33, 2546–2553 176. Miller, L. M., Pedraza, A. J., and Chance, M. M., and Rousseau, D. L. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.
146. Chao, H., Sönnichsen, F. D., DeLuca, C. I., R. (1997) Biochemistry36, 12199–12207 275, 1679–1684
Sykes, B. D., and Davies, P. L. (1994) Protein 177. Gow, A. J., and Stamler, J. S. (1998) Nature 200. Aronson, H.-E. G., Royer, W. E., Jr., and
Sci.3, 1760–1769 (London)391, 169–173 Hendrickson, W. A. (1994) Protein Sci.3,
147. Kim, H.-W., Shen, T.-J., Ho, N. T., Zou, M., 178. Lutter, L. C., Halvorson, H. R., and Calladine, 1706–1711
Tam, M. F., and Ho, C. (1996) Biochemistry35, C. R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.261, 620–633 201. Honzatko, R. B., Hendrickson, W. A., and
6620–6627 179. Jia, L., Bonaventura, C., Bonaventura, J., and Love, W. E. (1985) J. Mol. Biol.184, 147–164
148. Kavanaugh, J. S., Weydert, J. A., Rogers, P. H., Stamler, J. S. (1996) Nature (London)380, 221– 201a.Qiu, Y., Maillett, D. H., Knapp, J., Olson, J. S.,
and Arnone, A. (1998) Biochemistry37, 4358– 226 and Riggs, A. F. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275,
4373 180. Rizzi, M., Wittenberg, J. B., Coda, A., Fasano, 13517–13528
149. Kiger, L., Klinger, A. L., Kwiatkowski, L. D., M., Ascenzi, P., and Bolognesi, M. (1994) J. 202. Condon, P. J., and Royer, W. E. J. (1994) J. Biol.
De Young, A., Doyle, M. L., Holt, J. M., Noble, Mol. Biol.244, 86–99 Chem.269, 25259–25267
R. W., and Ackers, G. K. (1998) Biochemistry 181. Rizzi, M., Wittenberg, J. B., Coda, A., Ascenzi, 203. Royer, W. E., Jr., Heard, K. S., Harrington, D.
37, 4336–4345 P., and Bolognesi, M. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.258, J., and Chiancone, E. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.253,
150. Hoard, J. L., and Scheidt, W. R. (1973) Proc. 1–5 168–186
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.70, 3919–3922 182. Nguyen, B. D., Zhao, X., Vyas, K., La Mar, G. 204. Mozzarelli, A., Bettati, S., Rivetti, C., Rossi, G.
151. Fermi, G., Perutz, M. F., and Shulman, R. G. N., Lile, R. A., Brucker, E. A., Phillips, G. N., L., Colotti, G., and Chiancone, E. (1996) J. Biol.
(1987)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 6167–6168 Jr., Olson, J. S., and Wittenberg, J. B. (1998) J. Chem.271, 3627–3632
152. De Baere, I., Perutz, M. F., Kiger, L., Marden, Biol. Chem.273, 9517–9526 205. Yang, J., Kloek, A. P., Goldberg, D. E., and
M. C., and Poyart, C. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. 183. Weatherall, D. J., Clegg, J. B., Higgs, D. R., Mathews, F. S. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
Sci. U.S.A.91, 1594–1597 and Wood, W. G. (1995) in The Metabolic and U.S.A.92, 4224–4228
153. Bohr, C., Hasselbalch, K., and Krogh, A. Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed., 206. Huang, S., Huang, J., Kloek, A. P., Goldberg,
(1904)Skand. Arch. Physiol.16, 402– Vol. 1 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., D. E., and Friedman, J. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.
154. Wyman, J., Jr. (1948) Adv. Prot. Chem.4, 407–531 and Valle, D., eds), pp. 3417–3484, McGraw- 271, 958–962
155. Benesch, R. E., and Benesch, R. (1974) Adv. Hill, New York 207. Lamy, J., Kuchumov, A., Taveau, J.-C.,
Prot. Chem.28, 211–237 184. Bank, A., Mears, J. G., and Ramirez, F. (1980) Vinogradov, S. N., and Lamy, J. N. (2000) J.
156. Fang, T.-Y., Zou, M., Simplaceanu, V., Ho, N. Science207, 486–493 Mol. Biol.298, 633–647
T., and Ho, C. (1999) Biochemistry38, 13423– 185. Hirsch, R. E., Juszczak, L. J., Fataliev, N. A., 208. de Haas, F., Taveau, J.-C., Boisset, N.,
13432 Friedman, J. M., and Nagel, R. L. (1999) J. Biol. Lambert, O., Vinogradov, S. N., and Lamy, J.
157. Fronticelli, C., Pechik, I., Brinigar, W. S., Chem.274, 13777–13782 N. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 140–153
Kowalczyk, J., and Gilliland, G. L. (1994) J. 186. Arnone, A., Thillet, J., and Rosa, J. (1981) J. 209. de Haas, F., Zal, F., You, V., Lallier, F.,
Biol. Chem.269, 23965–23969 Biol. Chem.256, 8545–8552 Toulmond, A., and Lamy, J. N. (1996) J. Mol.
158. Perrella, M., Ripamonti, M., and Caccia, S. 187. Lehmann, H., and Huntsman, R. G. (1966) Biol.264, 111–120
(1998)Biochemistry37, 2017–2028 Man’s Haemoglobins, North-Holland Publ. Co., 210. de Haas, F., Boisset, N., Taveau, J.-C.,
159. Arnone, A. (1972) Nature (London)237, 146–149 Amsterdam (p. 246) Lambert, O., Vinogradov, S. N., and Lamy, J.
160. Benesch, R., and Benesch, R. E. (1969) Nature 188. Olson, J. S., Gibson, Q. H., Nagel, R. L., and N. (1996) Biophys. J.70, 1973–1984
(London)221, 618–622 Hamilton, H. B. (1972) J. Biol. Chem.247, 211. Zuckerkandl, E. (1965) Sci. Am.212(May),
161. Brewer, G. J., and Eaton, J. W. (1971) Science 7485–7493 110–118
171, 1205–1211 189. Poyart, C., Bursaux, E., Arnone, A., 212. Perutz, M. F. (1986) Nature (London)322, 405
162. Perutz, M. F., Bauer, C., Gros, G., Leclercq, F., Bonaventura, J., and Bonaventura, C. (1980) 213. Wood, W. B., and Edgar, R. S. (1967) Sci. Am.
Vandecasserie, C., Schnek, A. G., Braunitzer, J. Biol. Chem.255, 9465–9473 217(Jul), 60–74
G., Friday, A. E., and Joysey, K. A. (1981) 189a.Burmester, T., Weich, B., Reinhardt, S., and 214. Kikuchi, Y., and King, J. (1975) J. Mol. Biol.99,
Nature (London)291, 682–684 Hankeln, T. (2000) Nature407, 520–523 645–672
163. Komiyama, N. H., Miyazaki, G., Tame, J., and 190. Tomita, S. (1981) J. Biol. Chem.256, 9495–9500 215. Casjens, S., and King, J. (1975) Ann. Rev.
Nagai, K. (1995) Nature (London)373, 244–246 191. Giardina, B., Scatena, R., Clementi, M. E., Biochem.44, 555–611
164. Fantl, W. J., Di Donato, A., Manning, J. M., Cerroni, L., Nuutinen, M., Brix, O., Sletten, S. 216. Pollard, T. D., and Craig, S. W. (1982) Trends
Rogers, P. H., and Arnone, A. (1987) J. Biol. N., Castagnola, M., and Condò, S. G. (1993) J. Biochem. Sci.7, 55–58
Chem.87, 12700–12713 Mol. Biol.229, 512–516 217. Ito, K., Date, T., and Wickner, W. (1980) J. Biol.
165. Sage, J. T., and Jee, W. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.274, 192. Clementi, M. E., Scatena, R., Mordente, A., Chem.255, 2123–2130
21–26 Condò, S. G., Castagnola, M., and Giardina, B. 218. McDonnell, P. A., Shon, K., Kim, Y., and
166. Teng, T.-Y., Srajer, V., and Moffat, K. (1997) (1996)J. Mol. Biol.255, 229–234 Opella, S. J. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.233, 447–463
Biochemistry36, 12087–12100 192a.Burr, A. H. J., Hunt, P., Wagar, D. R., Dewilde, 219. Sanders, J. C., Haris, P. I., Chapman, D., Otto,
166a.Ostermann, A., Waschipky, R., Parak, F. G., S., Blaxter, M. L., Vanfleteren, J. R., and C., and Hemminga, M. A. (1993) Biochemistry
and Nienhaus, G. U. (2000) Nature (London) Moens, L. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 4810–4815 32, 12446–12454
404, 205–208 193. Lee, H. C., Wittenberg, J. B., and Peisach, J. 220. Guy-Caffey, J. K., and Webster, R. E. (1993) J.
167. Chance, M. R., Miller, L. M., Fischetti, R. F., (1993)Biochemistry32, 11500–11506 Biol. Chem.268, 5496–5503
Scheuring, E., Huang, W.-X., Sclavi, B., Hai, 194. Harutyunyan, E. H., Safonova, T. N., 221. Duda, R. L., Martincic, K., and Hendrix, R. W.
Y., and Sullivan, M. (1996) Biochemistry35, Kuranova, I. P., Popov, A. N., Teplyakov, A. V., (1995)J. Mol. Biol.247, 636–647
9014–9023 Obmolova, G. V., Rusakov, A. A., Vainshtein, 222. Xie, Z., and Hendrix, R. W. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.
168. Ösapay, K., Theriault, Y., Wright, P. E., and B. K., Dodson, G. G., Wilson, J. C., and Perutz, 253, 74–85
Case, D. A. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.244, 183–197 M. F. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.251, 104–115 223. Marvik, C. J., Dokland, T., Nokling, R. H.,
169. Martin, K. D., and Parkhurst, L. J. (1990) 195. Hargrove, M. S., Barry, J. K., Brucker, E. A., Jacobsen, E., Larsen, T., and Lindqvist, B. H.
Biochemistry29, 5718–5726 Berry, M. B., Phillips, G. N., Jr., Olson, J. S., (1995)J. Mol. Biol.251, 59–75
170. Tetreau, C., Lavalette, D., Momenteau, M., Arredondo-Peter, R., Dean, J. M., Klucas, R. 224. LeCuyer, K. A., Behlen, L. S., and Uhlenbeck,
Fischer, J., and Weiss, R. (1994) J. Am. Chem. V., and Sarath, G. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.266, O. C. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10600–10606
Soc.116, 11840–11848 1032–1042 225. McKenna, R., Ilag, L. L., and Rossmann, M. G.
171. Huang, Y., and Ackers, G. K. (1995) 196. Trevaskis, B., Watts, R. A., Andersson, C. R., (1994)J. Mol. Biol.237, 517–543
Biochemistry34, 6316–6327 Llewellyn, D. J., Hargrove, M. S., Olson, J. S., 226. Dokland, T., McKenna, R., Ilag, L. L., Bowman,
172. Paoli, M., Dodson, G., Liddington, R. C., and Dennis, E. S., and Peacock, W. J. (1997) Proc. B. R., Incardona, N. L., Fane, B. A., and Rossmann,
Wilkinson, A. J. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.271, 161–167 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 12230–12234 M. G. (1997) Nature (London)389, 308–313
173. Daugherty, M. A., Shea, M. A., and Ackers, G. 196a.Hargrove, M. S., Brucker, E. A., Stec, B., 227. Thuman-Commike, P. A., Greene, B., Jakana,
K. (1994) Biochemistry33, 10345–10357 Sarath, G., Arredondo-Peter, R., Klucas, R. V., J., Prasad, B. V. V., King, J., Prevelige, P. E., Jr.,
174. Stamler, J. S., Jia, L., Eu, J. P., McMahon, T. J., Olson, J. S., and Phillips, G. N., Jr. (2000) and Chiu, W. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.260, 85–98
Demchenko, I. T., Bonaventura, J., Gernert, K., Structure8, 1005–1014 228. Parker, M. H., Stafford, W. F., III, and Prevelige,
and Piantadosi, C. A. (1997) Science276, 197. Hardison, R. C. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. P. E., Jr. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.268, 655–665
2034–2037 U.S.A.93, 5675–5679

--- Page 379 ---

376 Chapter 7. How Macromolecules Associate
References
229. Butcher, S. J., Dokland, T., Ojala, P. M., 258. van der Geer, P., and Pawson, T. (1995) Trends 289. Herrmann, H., Häner, M., Brettel, M., Müller,
Bamford, D. H., and Fuller, S. D. (1997) EMBO Biochem. Sci.20, 277–280 S. A., Goldie, K. N., Fedtke, B., Lustig, A.,
J.16, 4477–4487 259. Zhou, M.-M., Ravichandran, K. S., Olejniczak, Franke, W. W., and Aebi, U. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.
230. Olson, N. H., Baker, T. S., Willingmann, P., E. T., Petros, A. M., Meadows, R. P., Sattler, 264, 933–953
and Incardona, N. L. (1992) J. Structural Biol. M., Harlan, J. E., Wade, W. S., Burakoff, S. J., 289a.Herrmann, H., Strelkov, S. V., Feja, B., Rogers,
108, 168–175 and Fesik, S. W. (1995) Nature (London)378, K. R., Brettel, M., Lustig, A., Häner, M., Parry,
231. Hayashi, M., Aoyama, A., Richardson, D. L., 584–592 D. A. D., Steinert, P. M., Burkhard, P., and
Jr., and Hayashi, M. N. (1988) in The Bacterio- 260. Rameh, L. E., Arvidsson, A.-k, Carraway, K. Aebi, U. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.298, 817–832
phages (Calendar, R., ed), pp. 1–71, Plenum, L., III, Couvillon, A. D., Rathbun, G., 289b.Heimburg, T., Schuenemann, J., Weber, K.,
New York Crompton, A., VanRenterghem, B., Czech, M. and Geisler, N. (1996) Biochemistry35, 1375–
232. Butcher, S. J., Bamford, D. H., and Fuller, S. D. P., Ravichandran, K. S., Burakoff, S. J., Wang, 1382
(1995)EMBO J.14, 6078–6086 D.-S., Chen, C.-S., and Cantley, L. C. (1997) J. 290. Geisler, N., Schünemann, J., and Weber, K.
233. Berger, B., Shor, P. W., Tucker-Kellogg, L., and Biol. Chem.272, 22059–22066 (1992)Eur. J. Biochem.206, 841–852
King, J. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 261. Hemmings, B. A. (1997) Science275, 1899 290a.Bellin, R. M., Sernett, S. W., Becker, B., Ip, W.,
7732–7736 262. Blomberg, N., Baraldi, E., Nilges, M., and Huiatt, T. W., and Robson, R. M. (1999) J. Biol.
234. Steven, A. C., Greenstone, H. L., Booy, F. P., Saraste, M. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24, 441– Chem.274, 29493–29499
Black, L. W., and Ross, P. D. (1992) J. Biol. 445 291. Leterrier, J. F., Käs, J., Hartwig, J., Vegners, R.,
Chem.228, 870–884 263. Koshiba, S., Kigawa, T., Kim, J.-H., Shirouzu, and Janmey, P. A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
235. van Driel, R. (1980) J. Mol. Biol.138, 27–42 M., Bowtell, D., and Yokoyama, S. (1997) J. 15687–15694
236. King, J., and Mykolajewycz, N. (1973) J. Mol. Mol. Biol.269, 579–591 292. Betts, J. C., Blackstock, W. P., Ward, M. A., and
Biol.75, 339–358 264. Saras, J., and Heldin, C.-H. (1996) Trends Anderton, B. H. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
237. Feller, S. M., Ren, R., Hanafusa, H., and Biochem. Sci.21, 455–458 12922–12927
Baltimore, D. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 265. Cabral, J. H. M., Petosa, C., Sutcliffe, M. J., 293. Carter, J., Gragerov, A., Konvicka, K., Elder,
453–458 Raza, S., Byron, O., Poy, F., Marfatia, S. M., G., Weinstein, H., and Lazzarini, R. A. (1998)
238. Pawson, T. (1995) Nature (London)373, 573– Chishti, A. H., and Liddington, R. C. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.273, 5101–5108
580 Nature (London)382, 649–652 294. Osborn, M., and Weber, K. (1986) Trends
239. Koch, C. A., Anderson, D., Moran, M. F., Ellis, 266. Ponting, C. P. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 464–468 Biochem. Sci.11, 469–472
C., and Pawson, T. (1991) Science252, 668–674 267. Resnick, D., Pearson, A., and Krieger, M. 295. Gibson, M. A., Kumaratilake, J. S., and Cleary,
240. Maignan, S., Guilloteau, J.-P., Fromage, N., (1994)Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 5–8 E. G. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 4590–4598
Arnoux, B., Becquart, J., and Ducruix, A. 268. Chang, Y., Mochalkin, I., McCance, S. G., 296. Steinert, P. M. (1991) J. Structural Biol.107,
(1995)Science268, 291–293 Cheng, B., Tulinsky, A., and Castellino, F. J. 157–174
241. Ullner, M., Selander, M., Persson, E., Stenflo, (1998)Biochemistry37, 3258–3271 297. Cohlberg, J. A. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18,
J., Drakenberg, T., and Teleman, O. (1992) 269. de Vos, A. M., Ultsch, M. H., Kelley, R. F., 360–362
Biochemistry31, 5974–5983 Padmanabhan, K., Tulinsky, A., Westbrook, 298. Nakajima-Iijima, S., Hamada, H., Reddy, P.,
242. Meininger, D. P., Hunter, M. J., and Komives, M. L., and Kossiakoff, A. A. (1992) Biochemis- and Kakunaga, T. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
E. A. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 1683–1695 try31, 270–279 U.S.A.82, 6133–6137
243. Bersch, B., Hernandez, J.-F., Marion, D., and 270. De Serrano, V. S., and Castellino, F. J. (1992) 299. Orlova, A., Chen, X., Rubenstein, P. A., and
Arlaud, G. J. (1998) Biochemistry37, 1204–1214 Biochemistry31, 11698–11706 Egelman, E. H. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.271, 235–243
244. Rand, M. D., Lindblom, A., Carlson, J., 271. Sun, M.-F., Zhao, M., and Gailani, D. (1999) J. 300. Fulton, A. B. (1984) The Cytoskeleton: Cellular
Villoutreix, B. O., and Stenflo, J. (1997) Protein Biol. Chem.274, 36373–36377 Architecture and Choreography, Chapman and
Sci.6, 2059–2071 272. Macias, M. J., Hyvönen, M., Baraldi, E., Schultz, Hall, New York
245. Müller, K., Gombert, F. O., Manning, U., J., Sudol, M., Saraste, M., and Oschkinat, H. 301. Bershadsky, A. D., and Vasiliev, J. M. (1988)
Grossmüller, F., Graff, P., Zaegel, H., Zuber, J. (1996)Nature (London)382, 646–649 Cytoskeleton, Plenum, New York
F., Freuler, F., Tschopp, C., and Baumann, G. 273. Bogusky, M. J., Dobson, C. M., and Smith, R. 302. DeRosier, D. J., Tilney, L. G., and Egelman, E.
(1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 16500–16505 A. G. (1989) Biochemistry28, 6728–6735 (1980)Nature (London)287, 291–296
246. Fry, M. J., Panayotou, G., Booker, G. W., and 274. Hoffmann, W., and Hauser, F. (1993) Trends 303. Collier, N. C., and Wang, K. (1982) J. Biol.
Waterfield, M. D. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 1785– Biochem. Sci.18, 239–243 Chem.257, 6937–943
1797 275. Lamb, J. R., Tugendreich, S., and Hieter, P. 304. Moon, R. T., and Lazarides, E. (1983) Proc.
247. Malek, S. N., Yang, C. H., Earnshaw, W. C., (1995)Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 257–259 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.80, 5494–5499
Kozak, C. A., and Desiderio, S. (1996) J. Biol. 276. Das, A. K., Cohen, P. T. W., and Barford, D. 305. Meek, R. L., Lonsdale-Eccles, J. D., and Dale,
Chem.271, 6952–6962 (1998)EMBO J.17, 1192–1199 B. A. (1983) Biochemistry22, 4867–4877
248. Tong, L., Warren, T. C., King, J., Betageri, R., 277. Barlow, P. N., Luisi, B., Milner, A., Elliott, M., 306. Steinert, P. M., and Idler, W. W. (1979)
Rose, J., and Jakes, S. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.256, and Everett, R. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.237, 201–211 Biochemistry18, 5664–5669
601–610 278. Lichtarge, O., Yamamoto, K. R., and Cohen, F. 307. Dustin, P. (1980) Sci. Am.243(Aug.), 67–76
249. Xu, R. X., Word, J. M., Davis, D. G., Rink, M. E. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.274, 325–337 308. Mandelkow, E., and Mandelkow, E.-M. (1994)
J., Willard, D. H., Jr., and Gampe, R. T., Jr. 279. Saurin, A. J., Borden, K. L. B., Boddy, M. N., Current Opinion in Structural Biology4, 171–179
(1995)Biochemistry34, 2107–2121 and Freemont, P. S. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci. 309. Hyams, J. S., and Lloyd, C. W., eds. (1994)
250. Mikol, V., Baumann, G., Zurini, M. G. M., and 21, 208–214 Microtubules, Wiley-Liss, New York
Hommel, U. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.254, 86–95 280. Pérez-Alvarado, G. C., Kosa, J. L., Louis, H. 310. Sosa, H., and Milligan, R. A. (1996) J. Mol.
251. Pascal, S. M., Yamazaki, T., Singer, A. U., Kay, A., Beckerle, M. C., Winge, D. R., and Summers, Biol.260, 743–755
L. E., and Forman-Kay, J. D. (1995) Biochemis- M. F. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.257, 153–174 311. Margulis, L., To, L., and Chase, D. (1978)
try34, 11353–11362 281. Porter, K. R., and Tucker, J. B. (1981) Sci. Am. Science200, 1118–1124
252. Zhou, M.-M., Meadows, R. P., Logan, T. M., 244(Mar), 57–67 312. Thormählen, M., Marx, A., Müller, S. A., Song,
Yoon, H. S., Wade, W. S., Ravichandran, K. S., 282. Weber, K., and Osborn, M. (1985) Sci. Am. Y.-H., Mandelkow, E.-M., Aebi, U., and
Burakoff, S. J., and Fesik, S. W. (1995) Proc. 253(Oct), 110–120 Mandelkow, E. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.275, 795–809
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 7784–7788 283. Amos, L. A., and Amos, B. W. (1991) Molecules of 313. Weber, K., Pollack, R., and Bibring, T. (1975)
253. Metzler, W. J., Leiting, B., Pryor, K., Mueller, the Cytoskeleton, The Guilford Press, New York Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.72, 459–463
L., and Farmer, B. T., II. (1996) Biochemistry35, 284. Lazarides, E. (1980) Nature (London)283, 249– 314. Wolf, S. G., Nogales, E., Kikkawa, M.,
6201–6211 256 Gratzinger, D., Hirokawa, N., and Downing,
254. Viguera, A. R., Arrondo, J. L. R., Musacchio, 285. Fuchs, E., and Weber, K. (1994) Ann. Rev. K. H. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.262, 485–501
A., Saraste, M., and Serrano, L. (1994) Biochem.63, 345–382 315. Nogales, E., Wolf, S. G., and Downing, K. H.
Biochemistry33, 10925–10933 286. Fuchs, E., and Cleveland, D. W. (1998) Science (1998)Nature (London)391, 199–203
255. Liang, J., Chen, J. K., Schreiber, S. L., and 279, 514–519 316. Pennisi, E. (1998) Science279, 176–177
Clardy, J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.257, 632–643 287. Kaufmann, S. H. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 317. Zheng, Y., Wong, M. L., Alberts, B., and
256. Lim, W. A., Richards, F. M., and Fox, R. O. 13946–13955 Mitchison, T. (1995) Nature (London)378,
(1994)Nature (London)372, 375–379 288. Ip, W., Hartzer, M. K., Pang, Y.-Y. S., and 578–583
257. Guruprasad, L., Dhanaraj, V., Timm, D., Robson, R. M. (1985) J. Mol. Biol.183, 365–375 318. Hackney, D. D. (1995) Nature (London)376,
Blundell, T. L., Gout, I., and Waterfield, M. D. 215–216
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.248, 856–866

--- Page 380 ---

377
References
319. Raff, E. C., Fackenthal, J. D., Hutchens, J. A., 324. Hoenger, A., and Milligan, R. A. (1996) J. Mol. 329. Berridge, M. J. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 9583–
Hoyle, H. D., and Turner, F. R. (1997) Science Biol.263, 114–119 9586
275, 70–73 325. Fan, J., Griffiths, A. D., Lockhart, A., Cross, R. 330. Arnold, C. S., Johnson, G. V. W., Cole, R. N.,
320. Angelastro, J. M., and Purich, D. L. (1992) J. A., and Amos, L. A. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, Dong, D. L.-Y., Lee, M., and Hart, G. W. (1996)
Biol. Chem.267, 25685–25689 325–330 J. Biol. Chem.271, 28741–28744
321. Terry, B. J., and Purich, D. L. (1980) J. Biol. 326. Hirose, K., Fan, J., and Amos, L. A. (1995) J. 331. Bosc, C., Cronk, J. D., Pirollet, F., Watterson,
Chem.255, 10532–10536 Mol. Biol.251, 329–333 D. M., Haiech, J., Job, D., and Margolis, R. L.
322. Rakic, P., Knyihar-Csillik, E., and Csillik, B. 327. Knop, M., and Schiebel, E. (1997) EMBO J.16, (1996)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 2125–
(1996)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 9218– 6985–6995 2130
9222 328. Moritz, M., Braunfeld, M. B., Sedat, J. W.,
323. Rodionov, V. I., and Borisy, G. G. (1997) Alberts, B., and Agard, D. A. (1995) Nature
Science275, 215–218 (London)378, 638–640
Study Questions
1. Rewrite Equations 6-75 through 6-77 in terms of 5. The binding of adenosine to polyribouridylic acid
dissociation constants. These may be labeled K , [poly(U)] has been studied by the method of
1
K ,K, etc., as is conventional, but you may prefer equilibrium dialysis [Huang and Ts’o (1966) J. Mol.
2 i
to use K ,K ,K , etc., to avoid confusion. Biol.16, 523]. The table below gives the fraction of
1d 2d id
poly(U) sites occupied, Y at various molar concen-
2. A molecule has two identical binding sites for a trations of free adenosine [A] at 5°C. Assuming
ligand X. The Gibbs energy of interaction between that the nearest-neighbor interaction model is
ligands bound to the same molecule, ε, is defined correct, determine the intrinsic association con-
as the change in Gibbs energy of binding of the stant for the binding of adenosine to poly U and
ligand to the molecule that results from the prior the free energy of interaction of adjacent bound
binding of a ligand at the adjacent site. If the adenosines. Do the bound molecules attract or
saturation fraction is Y, show from the equation for repel each other?
the binding isotherm that the following equation
holds when Y = 1/ 2: [A] x 103 Y [A] x 103 Y
1
dY/d ln[X] = 0.51 0 3.07 0.72
2(1 + e
ε/RT)
2.10 0 4.00 0.92
2.70 0.15 6.50 0.93
3. The hydrogen ion binding curve for succinate is 2.96 0.36 8.50 0.93
shown is Fig. 7-4. From the curve estimate ε and 3.01 0.52 10.00 1.00
the microscopic association constants.
4. A linear chain molecule has a very large number
of identical binding sites for a ligand X. The Gibbs
energy of interaction between ligands bound to
adjacent sites is ε. Interactions between non-
nearest neighbors are considered negligible. If the
binding constant for a site adjacent to unoccupied
sites is K, the binding isotherm is given by
r
1
K[X]e–ε/RT–
1
Y = +
2 2{K[X]e–ε/RT– 1)2 + 4K[X]}1/2
[Applequist, J. (1977) J. Chem. Ed. 54, 417]. Show
from the equation for the binding isotherm that
the following equation holds at Y = 1/ 2;
dY/d ln [ X ] = 1/4 e ε /2RT

--- Page 381 ---

378 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
Portion of an endocytic vacuole forming in the
plasma membrane of a cultured fibroblast. The
view is from the inside of the cell and shows a
large clathrin cage assembling to form a coated
vesicle. The overall diameter of the vacuole is
~ 0.2 µm. Clathrin cages vary in size and in the
number of faces but are typically ~ 0.1 µm in
diameter (see Fig. 8-27 and associated references).
Courtesy of Barbara Pearse.
Contents
380 A. Lipid Structures 420 5. Transport of Ions
380 1. Fatty Acids, Fatty Alcohols, and Hydrocarbons 420 Anions
382 2. Acylglycerols, Ether Lipids, and Waxes 421 Cation channels
382 3. Phospholipids 422 Active transport of cations
387 4. Glycolipids 422 ATP-driven ion pumps
389 5. Sphingolipids 425 6. Exocytosis, Endocytosis, and the Flow of
389 6. Sterols and Other Isoprenoid Lipids Membrane Constituents
390 B. Membranes 427 D. Communication
390 1. The Structure of Membranes 427 E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls
392 Lipids of membranes 427 1. The Structure of Bacterial Cell Walls
392 Liquid crystals, liposomes, and artificial membranes 428 The outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria
394 Physical properties of membrane lipids 431 Teichoic and teichuronic acids
396 Functions of phospholipid head groups 431 Mycobacteria
397 Non-bilayer structures of phospholipids 431 Other bacterial coats
397 Membrane fluidity and life 431 2. The Surroundings of Animal Cells
400 Electrical properties of membranes 432 The collagens
401 The two sides of a membrane 436 Elastic fibers
401 2. Membrane Proteins 436 Cartilage and basement membranes
401 Integral membrane proteins 440 Fibrillin and Marfan’s syndrome
402 Anchors for proteins 440 The cuticles of invertebrates
403 Analyzing erythocyte membranes 440 Bones, teeth, and shells
404 Glycoproteins 443 3. Cell Walls of Fungi and Green Plants
405 Connections to the cytoskeleton
405 Integrins and focal adhesions 444 References
406 Other cell adhesion molecules 452 Study Questions
407 Peripheral proteins of the outer membrane surface
409 3. Enzymes and Membrane Metabolism Boxes
410 C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 384 Box 8-A The Platelet-Activating Factor
410 1. Facilitated Diffusion and Active Transport 386 Box 8-B Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine and the
411 2. Pores, Channels, and Carriers Surfactant System of the Lungs
411 Porins 398 Box 8-C Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
411 Aquaporins Spectra and “Spin Lables”
412 Ion channels 418 Box 8-D Colicins: Antibiotic Proteins
414 Channel-forming toxins and antibiotics 438 Box 8-E Genetic Defects of Collagen Structure
414 Ionophores and other mobile carriers 439 Box 8-F Skin
415 3. The 12-Helix Major Facilitator Superfamily 442 Box 8-G The Biochemistry of Teeth
415 Entrance of sugars into cells
416 Cotransport of sugars and other nutrients Tables
with H+ or Na+ 380 Table 8-1 Some Important Fatty Acids
417 4. Active Transport Systems 381 Table 8-2 Fatty Acid Composition (in %) of Some
417 Periplasmic permeases Typical Fats and Oils
419 The bacterial phosphotransferase system 393 Table 8-3 Estimated Chemical Compositions of
Some Membranes
435 Table 8-4 Types of Vertebrate Collagen

--- Page 382 ---

379
8
Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
The boundary between a living cell and its sur-
F
roundings is the incredibly thin (7–10 nm) plasma
BM
CT
membrane. This vital partition, which controls the
flow of materials into and out of a cell and which
En
senses and controls the response of cells to hor- BM Co
mones and other external signals, consists largely of
phospholipids together with embedded proteins. The
E
nonpolar chains of the phospholipids stick together to
form a double molecular layer or bilayer which provides
the basic structure of almost all biological membranes.
Phospholipids, together with other natural materials L
that have a high solubility in apolar solvents or are
structurally related to compounds with such solubility
G
properties, are classified as lipids. The most abundant
lipids are the fats, compounds that are stored by animals
and by many plants as an energy reserve (Fig. 8-1).
Other lipids form the outer cuticle of plants and yet
others serve as protective coatings on feathers and
hair. Vitamins A, D, K, and E and ubiquinone are all
N
lipids as are a variety of hormones and such light-
absorbing plant pigments as the chlorophylls and
carotenoids. Many of these compounds are dissolved
in or partially embedded in the plasma membrane of
bacteria or in the mitochondrial and chloroplast mem- M
G
branes of higher organisms. Membranes serve many
purposes. The most obvious is to divide space into
compartments. Thus, the plasma membrane forms cell
boundaries and mitochondrial membranes separate
the enzymes and metabolites of mitochondria from Figure 8-1 Electron micrograph of a thin section of a fat
those of the cytosol. Membranes are semipermeable storage cell or adipocyte. L, the single large fat droplet; N,
and regulate the penetration into cells and organelles nucleus; M, mitochondria; En, endothelium of a capillary
containing an erythrocyte (E); CT, connective tissue ground
of both ionic and nonionic substances. Many of these
substance which contains collagen fibers (Co) and fibroblasts
materials are brought into the cell against a concentra-
(F). The basement membranes (BM) surrounding the endo-
tion gradient. Hence, osmotic work must be done in a
thelium and the fat cell are also marked. From Porter and
process known as active transport. Many enzymes, Bonneville.6 Courtesy of Mary Bonneville.

--- Page 383 ---

380 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
including those responsible for most of the oxidative
1. Fatty Acids, Fatty Alcohols, and Hydrocarbons
metabolism of cells, are found in membranes of bacteria
and of mitochondria. Within the chloroplasts of green
The names and structures of some fatty acids are
leaves, highly folded membranes containing chlorophyll
summarized in Table 8-1. Notice that these acids have
absorb energy from the sunlight. Thin membranes
straight carbon chains and may contain one or more
contain the photoreceptor proteins that function in
double bonds. Except for the smallest members of
vision. Electrical impulses are transmitted along the
the series, which are soluble in water, fatty acids are
membranes of nerve cells.
strongly hydrophobic. However, they are all acids
The outer surfaces of membranes are designed to
with pK values in water of ~4.8. To the extent that
interact with the cell’s external world. Special receptors a
free fatty acids occur in nature, they are likely to be
sense the presence of hormones. Binding proteins
found in interfaces between lipid and water with the
await the arrival of needed nutrients and help to bring
carboxyl groups dissociated and protruding into the
them into cells. Highly individual arrangements of
water. However, most naturally occurring fatty acids
protein and of the carbohydrate “fuzz” of glycoproteins
and sphingolipids screen the outer surface, helping to
TABLE 8-1
prevent attack by foreign bacteria, viruses, and toxins.
Some Important Fatty Acids
No. carbon Systematic Common Common name
A. Lipid Structures
atoms name name Abbreviationa of acyl group
Unlike proteins, polysaccharides, and nucleic acids, Saturated fatty acids
most lipids are not polymers. However, they are made
1 Methanoic Formic Formyl
by linking together smaller molecules.1–5 Among the
2 Ethanoic Acetic Acetyl
“building blocks” of lipids are fatty acids, glycerol,
3 Propanoic Propionic Propionyl
phosphoric acid, and sugars. Many lipids have
4 Butanoic Butyric 4:0 Butyryl
bothpolar and nonpolar regions. This gives them an
12 Dodecanoic Lauric 12:0 Lauroylb
amphipathic character, i.e., a tendency toward both
14 Tetradecanoic Myristic 14:0 Myristoyl
hydrophobic and hydrophilic behavior, and accounts
16 Hexadecanoic Palmitic 16:0 Palmitoyl
for their tendency to aggregate into membranous
18 Octadecanoic Stearic 18:0 Stearoyl
structures. Notice that in the following structure the
20 Eicosanoic Arachidic 20:0
carbon atoms of glycerol have been numbered 1 to 3.
22 Docosanoic Behenic 22:0
Although glycerol is not chiral, the positioning of the
24 Tetracosanoic Lignoceric 24:0
two hydroxymethyl groups is not equivalent. If the
priority, used in the RS system (page 42) for the C-1 Unsaturated fatty acidsc
group is raised (e.g., by ester formation) to be higher
4 Crotonic 4:1(2t) Crotonoyl
than that for the C-3 group, the molecule would have
16 Palmitoleic 16:1(9c)
theS configuration. The C-1 group is said to be pro-S
18 Oleic 18:1(9c) Oleoyl
and the C-3 group pro-R. According to the stereo-
18 Vaccenic 18:1(11c)
chemical numbering (sn) system, which is discussed
18 Linoleic 18:2(9c,12c)
further in Chapter 9, the carbon in the pro-S position
18 Conjugated 18:2(9c,11t)
is numbered 1.
linoleic
18 Linolenic 18:3(9c,12c,15c)
O 20 Arachidonic 20:4(5c,8c,11c,14c)
C a The number of carbon atoms is given first, then the number of
HO CH3 double bonds. The positions of the lowest numbered carbon of
A fatty acid each double bond and whether the configuration is cis (c) or trans
Stearic acid, 18 carbon atoms, major (t) are indicated in parentheses.
component of animal triacylglycerols b Official IUPAC names of these and other acyl groups have been
designated by the Commission of the Nomenclature of Organic
Chemistry in Pure and Applied Chemistry10, 111–125 (1965). In
a number of cases IUPAC inserted an o in the traditional name,
1
HO 2 CH2OH pro-S group e.g., palmityl became palmitoyl and crotonyl became crotonoyl.
C However, acetyl was not changed. In many cases the systematic
H 3CH2OH names, e.g., hexadecanoyl (from hexadecanoic acid), are preferable
and IUPAC–IUB recommends that alkyl radicals always be designated
Glycerol
by systematic names, e.g., hexadecyl, not palmityl alcohol. The
Labeled by the stereochemical older use of palmityl for both acyl and alkyl radicals was one
numbering (sn) system
reason for IUPAC’s adoption of new names for acyl radicals.
c Systematic names are not often used because of their complexity,
e.g., linolenic acid is cis,cis,cis-9,12,15-octadecatrienoic acid.

--- Page 384 ---

A. Lipid Structures 381
are esterified or combined via amide linkages in com- Bacteria usually lack polyunsaturated fatty acids
plex lipids. For example, ordinary fats are largely the but often contain branched fatty acids, cyclopropane-
fatty acid esters of glycerol called triacylglycerols containing acids, hydroxy fatty acids, and unesterified
(triglycerides). fatty acids. Mycobacteria, including the human patho-
There is a seemingly endless variety of fatty acids, genMycobacterium tuberculosis, contain mycolicacids.
but only a few of them predominate in any single In these compounds the complex grouping R contains
organism. Most fatty acid chains contain an even a variety of functional groups including –OH,–OCH ,
3
number of carbon atoms. In higher plants the C
16
palmitic acid and the C unsaturated oleic and
18
linoleic acids predominate. The C saturated stearic Branched fatty acids of the anteiso series have a branch here
18 and a 5-carbon “starter piece” derived from isoleucine
acid is almost absent from plants and C to C acids
20 24
are rarely present except in the outer cuticle of leaves. HO
Certain plants contain unusual fatty acids which may C
be characteristic of a taxonomic group. For example, O Branched fatty acids of the iso series
contain a 5-carbon “starter piece” derived
the Compositae (daisy family) contain acetylenic fatty
from leucine or a 4-carbon piece derived from valine
acids and the castor bean contains the hydroxy fatty
Branched fatty acids
acidricinoleic acid.
O O H
CH2
C
C HO H
HO C C
Lactobacillic acid
Crepenynic acid 18:2 (9c, 12a)
A major fatty acid of lactobacilli
Accounts for 60% of the fatty acids in seeds of
Crepis foetida, a member of the compositae family
H OH
O
O H C R A complex chain of about 60 carbon atoms
HO H C C with a variety of functional groups (see text)
C
HO
HO
Ricinoleic acid (12-hydroxyoleic acid) C or C alkyl group
22 24
Accounts for up to 90% of the fatty acids of Ricinus communis (castor bean) A mycolic acid
Like plants, animals contain palmitic and oleic C=O,–COOH, cyclopropane rings, methyl branches,
acids. In addition, large amounts of stearic acid and and C=C bonds. Each species of Mycobacterium contains
small amounts of the C , C , and C acids are also about two dozen different mycolic acids9,10 as well as
20 22 24
present. Phospholipids of photoreceptor membranes other complex C –C fatty acids (see Eq. 21-5).11
30 56
of the retina contain fatty acid chains as long as C .7 Certain polyunsaturated fatty acids are essential
36
The variety of fatty acids found in animals is greater in the human diet (see Box 21-B). One of these,
than in a given plant species. A large fraction of the arachidonic acid (which may be formed from dietary
fatty acids present in most higher organisms are unsat- linoleic acid), serves as a precursor for the formation
urated and contain strictly cis double bonds. Table 8-2 of the hormones known as prostaglandins and a series
shows the fatty acid composition of some typical of related prostanoids. Lipids of animal origin also
triacylglycerol mixtures.
COOH
TABLE 8-2
Fatty Acid Composition (in %) of Some Typical
Fats and Oilsa Arachidonic acid
A nutritionally essential fatty acid (Box 21-A)
No. of carbon atoms and (following colon) is shown here in a folded conformation
the number of double bonds
O
Fats and oils 14 16 18 16:1 18:1 18:2 H
COOH
Human depot fat 3 23 4 8 45 10
Beef tallow 4 30 25 5 36 1 HO
H H H OH
Corn oil 13 2 31 54
Prostaglandin PGE
Lard 1 28 15 3 42 9 2
One of a family of hormones, this one is
a From Gunstone.8 synthesized in tissues from arachidonic acid

--- Page 385 ---

382 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
contain unusual unsaturated fatty acids. Among e.g., combining in ester linkage with three fatty acids to
them,conjugated linoleic acids are receiving atten- formtriacylglycerols (triglycerides), the common fats
tion for their possible cancer-preventive action. The of adipose tissues and plant oils. Diacyl- and monoacyl-
predominant form in meats, dairy products, and the glycerols (diglycerides, and monoglycerides) are
human body is the C 9-cis, 11-trans isomer whose
18
two double bonds are conjugated.11a
O
Other lipid components include the fatty alcohols
which are formed by reduction of the acids. These are C
O
esterified with fatty acids to form waxes. Both fatty
O
alcohols and free fatty acids occur in waxes together CH2
with the esterified forms. These mixtures are found C
*
H C O
on exterior surfaces of plants and animals. Plants
and, to a limited extent, animals are able to decarboxy- CH2 O
late fatty acids in a multistep process to alkanes and
C
these too are important constituents of some waxes. O
Small amounts of fatty acid amides such as cis-9,10- A triacylglycerol (fat)
octadecenoamide are present in low concentrations in Notice the chiral center, designated by the asterisk
present to a lesser extent. In addition, small amounts
O
ofalkylethers or alkenyl ethers are often present in
C
isolated lipids. They are especially abundant in fish
O liver oils.
A wax
An ester of a fatty acid and a fatty alcohol O 1 CH2 O CH2 R1
H
C O
R2 C O
the cerebrospinal fluid of cats and rats as well as humans.
CH2 O C R3
This compound accumulates in cats that are deprived 1-Alkyl-2,3-diacyl-sn-glycerol, an alkyl ether lipid
of sleep. When the synthetic compound was injected
into rats they fell into apparently normal sleep.12
O 1CH2 O CH CHR1
H
O C O
R2 C O
C
9 CH2 O C R3
H2N 1-Alkenyl-2,3-diacyl-sn-glycerol, an alkenyl ether
cis-9,10-Octadecenoamide (Oleic acid amide)
These ether lipids are all chiral molecules with an R
Insects make unsaturated as well as saturated hydro- configuration but are derivatives of the nonchiral
carbons. The former as well as long-chain alcohols and glycerol. The carbon atoms of glycerol are numbered
their esters often form the volatile pheromones with using the stereochemical system which is described
which insects communicate. Thus, the female pink on p. 470. The ether linkage is to the sn-1 carbon atom.
bollworm attracts a male with a sex pheromone con- Most phospholipids are derivatives of the sn-3 phosphate
sisting of a mixture of the cis,cis and cis,trans isomers ester of glycerol.
of 7,11-hexadecadienyl acetate,13 and European corn Triacylglycerols and the ether lipids described in
borer males are attracted across the cornfields of Iowa the previous section are classified as neutral lipids.
bycis-11-tetradecenyl acetate.14 Addition of a little of Other neutral lipids are alcohols, waxes, aldehydes,
thetrans isomer makes the latter sex attractant much and hydrocarbons derived from fatty acids. These
more powerful. Since more than one species uses the sometimes have specific biological functions. For exam-
same attractant, it is possible that the males can distin- ple, fatty aldehydes are important in the biolumines-
guish between different ratios of isomers or of mixtures cence of bacteria (Eq. 23-47).
of closely related substances.
3. Phospholipids
2. Acylglycerols, Ether Lipids, and Waxes
As major constituents of biological membranes,
The components of complex lipids are linked in a phospholipids play a key role in all living cells.
variety of ways. Often, glycerol acts as the central unit, The two principal groups of phospholipids are the

--- Page 386 ---

A. Lipid Structures 383
O glycerophospholipids (glycero-
H
O phosphatides; Fig. 8-2) which con-
H2C C
HO tain the alcohol glycerol and the
H2C O
C sphingophospholipids which
H
O O C contain the alcohol sphingosine
H
HO
H (Section 5). The glycerophospho-
lipids can be thought of as arising
O OH
–O P from the building blocks glycerol,
OH 2H 2 O fatty acids, the dihydrogen phos-
O phate ion H PO –, and the appro-
H3C CH3 H priate alcoho 2 l by 4 removal of four
C
N+ O O molecules of water (Eq. 8-1). They
H3C
H2C CH2
H2C
O are derivatives of sn-glycerol-3-
H2C
C C phosphate. Esterification of this
O O O alcohol with two fatty acids gives
H
–O P
aphosphatidic acid (Fig. 8-2).
H3C CH3 O Formation of a phosphate diester
N+
linkage to one of the alcohols
H3C
H2C CH2
A phosphatidylcholine (lecithin). (8-1)
1CH2OH
HO 2
C
H 3
The ester linked fatty acid in this position is CH2O PO3 2–
replaced in plasmalogens by a vinyl ether group: sn-Glycerol 3-phosphate
R (L-α-glycerol phosphate)
O
and in ether phosphatides by an alkoxy group:
R choline, serine, or ethanolamine
O O yields a glycerophospholipid.
The resulting three groups
C
O of phospholipids are called
H2C
O phosphatidylcholine (lecithin),
H2C
phosphatidylserine, and
O C C
––O P O H O p re h s o p s e p ct h iv a e t l i y d y (F le ig th . 8 a - n 2 o ). lamine,
Y The phosphate and choline,
ethanolamine, or serine portions
Abbrev.
of the phosphatide are electrically
Y = OH Phosphatidic acid PA
charged and provide a polar “head”
O CH2CH2 N+(CH3)3 Phosphatidylcholine (lecithin) PC
for the molecule. In all three cases
O CH2 CH2 NH3 + Phosphatidylserine (serine cephalin) PS the positively charged group is
able to fold back and form an ion
COO–
pair with the negatively charged
O CH2CH2 NH3 + Phosphatidylethanolamine PE
phosphate group. However, the
(ethanolamine cephalin)
methyl groups surrounding the
HO
nitrogen in phosphatidylcholine
O
prevent a very close approach and
1 OH Phosphatidylinositol PI
with phosphatidylserine the adja-
4
HO 5 OH cent carboxylate group weakens
OH this electrostatic interaction. Un-
like the triacylglycerols, most of
O CH2 CH CH2OH Phosphatidylglycerol which are liquid at body tempera-
ture, phospholipids are solid at
OH
this temperature. This property,
O CH2 CH CH2 O Diphosphatidylglycerol (cardiolipin),
a special component of bacterial and like the ionic properties of the
OH mitochondrial membranes phosphatides, is doubtless related
to their suitability for functioning
Figure 8-2 Structures of some phosphatides (glycerophospholipids). in biological membranes.

--- Page 387 ---

384 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
Lecithins and related phospholipids usually con- of all eukaryotes and have a specific role in regulating
tain a saturated fatty acid in the C-1 position but an responses of cells to hormones and other external
unsaturated acid, which may contain from one to agents. See Chapter 11 for details. Phosphatidylinositol
four double bonds, at C-2. Arachidonic acid is often also forms part of “anchors” used to hold certain proteins
present here. Hydrolysis of the ester linkage at C-2 onto membrane surfaces (see Fig. 8-13).
yields a 1-acyl-3-phosphoglycerol, better known as a Bacteria and plants often make the anionic
lysophosphatidylcholine. The name comes from the phosphatidyglycerol in which the second glycerol is
powerful detergent action of these substances which esterified at its sn-1 position with the phosphate. Bacteria,
leads to lysis of cells. Some snake venoms contain as well as mitochondria, contain diphosphatidylglycerol
phospholipases that form lysophosphatidylcholine. (cardiolipin) in which phosphatidyl groups are attached
Lysophosphatidic acid (1-acyl-glycerol-3-phosphate) at both the 1 and 3 positions of glycerol (Fig. 8-2).
is both an intermediate in phospholipid biosynthesis Ether phospholipids, analogous to the ether lipids
(Chapter 21) and also a signaling molecule released described in Section 2, are also widely distributed. The
into the bloodstream by activated platelets.15 alkenyl ether analogs of phosphatidylcholine (Fig. 8-2)
Another group of phosphatides contain the are called plasmalogens.17 In neutrophils the 1-O-alkyl
hexahydroxycyclohexane known as inositol (Fig. 8-2, ethers contain the major share of the cell’s arachidonic
see also Chapter 21).16 Phosphatidylinositol, as well acid, which is esterified in the 2 position.18,19
as smaller amounts of phosphatides derived from In halophilic (salt loving), thermophilic, and meth-
phosphate esters of inositol are present in membranes anogenic bacteria, most of the lipids present are either
BOX 8-A THE PLATELET-ACTIVATING FACTOR
in surrounding tissues.
PAF has been identified as the following simple
ether phospholipid:a–d
O-alkyl
Scanning EM of
activated blood H
O
platelets.
© Quest, Photo –
O O C CH3
Researchers
H3C O P
+ CH3 O
N O
H3C
Platelet-activating factor (PAF)
1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerophosphocholine
A remarkably potent compound, its effects on plate-
lets are observed at concentrations of 10–11 to 10–10
Transmission EM
of thin section through M. Both lyso-PAF and the glycero-1- phosphocho-
activated blood platelets. line enantiomer are inactive. Specific receptors for
© Photo Researchers this factor are evidently present on platelet surfaces.e–g
One effect of PAF on platelets is to induce a
Part of the immune response consists of the rapid (5–10s) cleavage of phosphatidylinositol
release from stimulated neutrophils, macrophages, 4,5-bisphosphate by phospholipase C to give diacyl-
and other cells of a plateletactivating factor glycerol and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. The
(PAF), a material that “activates” blood platelets. subsequent effects of these two substances in causing
Activated platelets aggregate, a response that ini- a rapid influx of Ca2+ and in inducing a series of
tiates clot formation. They may also be lysed and secondary responses are outlined in Fig. 11-9. Among
release stored substances that include platelet- these responses are the release of the materials
derived growth factors (see Chapter 11) and fibrin stored in the platelet’s granules. PAF also appears
stabilizing factor, a proenzyme that is converted to to inhibit adenylate cyclaseb and causes vasodila-
the protein-crosslinking enzyme transglutaminase tion, a property not expected for a compound that
(Eq. 2-17). See Fig. 12-17. However, the principal stimulates clotting. Receptors for PAF are also
interest in the platelet-activating factor has arisen present in the brain, where this phosholipid may
from its powerful effect in inducing inflammation function in regulation of development.h

--- Page 388 ---

A. Lipid Structures 385
phospholipids and glycolipids containing the C Many other phospholipids are present in small
20
isoprenoid phytanyl group or the C diphytanyl amounts or in a limited number of species. These
40
group20– 25 (see also Section 4), related isoprenoid includephosphonolipids, which contain a C–P bond
alcohols, or long-chain 1,2-diols.25 An example of a and are abundant in ciliate protozoa such as Tetrahymena
diphytanylglycerophospholipid is the following: and in some other invertebrates.26 Phosphonoethyl-
amine replaces phosphoethanolamine in these lipids.
A consequence of this structural alteration is a high
O–
HOH2C CH2 O
C P
H O O
O
OH
H2C 1
HO P CH2CH2NH3 +
C O O–
Phosphonoethylamine
H CH2
Phytanyl groups
O degree of resistance to the action of the enzyme phos-
pholipase C. The phosphonolipids of the external
A phospholipid derived from 2,3-di-O-phytanyl-sn-glycerol
membrane of Tetrahymena are also ether lipids with an
alkoxy group in the sn-1 position. This makes them
BOX 8-A (continued)
Stimulated platelets release arachidonic acid Platelets can inactivate PAF by the inverse sequence:
rapidly from their phospholipids, apparently as deacetylation followed by acylation with arachidonic
a result of activation of phospholipase A . The acid. PAF can also be hydrolyzed by a PAF acetylhydro-
2
released arachidonate can in turn be metabolized lase, a phospholipase.o Absence of this enzyme in the
to endoperoxides and thromboxane A (Chapter 21). brain may be related to a human brain malformation.h
2
These compounds are also potent activators of Some tissues may contain a lipid that inhibits binding
platelets and cause a self-activating or autocrine of PAF.p The following compound from a Chinese herb
effect.i,j While PAF has a beneficial function, it can binds to PAF receptors and may be the forerunner of
under some conditions contribute in a dangerous way useful drugs.q
to inflammation and to allergic responses including
anaphylaxis,jasthmag and cold-induced urticaria.k CH3O
Although the effect of PAF is separate from those of
histamine and of leukotrienes, these agents may act
O
cooperatively to induce inflammation.l
CH3O O
The biosynthesis of PAF is discussed in Chapter
21, Section C. One pathway is deacylation at the
glycerol C-2 of a longer chain alkyl phospholipid OCH3
followed by acetylation at the same position.m,n Kadsurenone
a Cusack, N. J. (1980) Nature (London)285, 193 k Grandel, K. E., Farr, R. S., Wanderer, A. A., Eisenstadt, T. C.,
b Hanahan, D. J. (1986) Ann. Rev. Biochem.55, 483 – 509 and Wasserman, S. I. (1985) N. Engl. J. Med.313, 405 – 409
c Prescott, S. M., Zimmerman, G. A., and McIntyre, T. M. (1990) J. l Tomeo, A. C., Egan, R. W., and Durán, W. N. (1991) FASEB J.5,
Biol. Chem.265, 17381– 17384 2850– 2855
d Winslow, C. M., and Lee, M. L., eds. (1987) New Horizons in mBillah, M. M., Eckel, S., Myers, R. F., and Siegel, M. I. (1986)
Platelet Activating Factor Research, Wiley, New York J. Biol. Chem.261, 5824 – 5831
e Hwang, S.-B., Lam, M.-H., and Pong, S.-S. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. n Lee, T.-c, Ou, M.-c, Shinozaki, K., Malone, B., and Snyder, F.
261, 532 – 537 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 209 – 217
f Ishii, I., Izumi, T., Tsukamoto, H., Umeyama, H., Ui, M., and o Stafforini, D. M., McIntyre, T. M., Zimmerman, G. A., and
Shimizu, T. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 7846 – 7854 Prescott, S. M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 17895 – 17898
g Bazan, N. G. (1995) Nature (London)374, 501– 502 p Miwa, M., Hill, C., Kumar, R., Sugatan, J., Olson, M. S., and
h Hattori, M., Adachi, H., Aoki, J., Tsujimoto, M., Arai, H., and Hanahan, D. J. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 527– 530
Inoue, K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 31345 – 31352 q Hwang, S.-B., Lam, M.-H., Biftu, T., Beattie, T. R., and Shen, T.-Y.
i Bussolino, F., Sironi, M., Bocchietto, E., and Mantovani, A. (1985)J. Biol. Chem.260, 15639 – 15645
(1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 14598 – 14603
j Darius, H., Lefer, D. J., Smith, J. B., and Leefer, A. M. (1986)
Science232, 58 – 60

--- Page 389 ---

386 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
BOX 8-B DIPALMITOYLPHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE AND THE SURFACTANT SYSTEM OF THE LUNGS
When air is exhaled the small alveoli of the The properties of the surfactant allow for rapid
lungs could collapse if it were not for the surface formation of a large area of lipid monolayer–air
active material (surfactant) present in the fluid that interface. The low surface tension and the ability
coats the lungs.a– e In fact, the lack of adequate to rapidly spread the mixture of lipids and proteins
surfactant is the cause of respiratory distress are essential.o At the end of the expiration stage of
syndrome, a major cause of death among prema- breathing the surfactant is present in the interface as
ture infants and a disease that may develop in a strong, tightly packed monolayer whose properties
acute form in adults. The surfactant material reflect the rigidity of the dipalmitoylphosphatidyl-
forms a thin film of high fluidity at the air–liquid choline. The excess surfactant in the alveolar fluid
interface and lowers the surface tension from the forms liposome-like bilayer structures and also
72 mN/m of pure water to <10 mN/m.f,g (Pay associates with proteins and calcium ions to form a
attention to the definition of surface tension.h) lattice-like material called tubular myelin. Lipid
About 65% by weight of the surfactant is lecithin, in this form must be transferred rapidly into the air
mostly dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (see Fig. –liquid interface during inspiration.p The ability of
8-4), a phospholipid resistant to attack by oxygen. phospholipids to pass through a hexagonal phase
Phosphatidylglycerol, in an unusually high concen- (Fig. 8-12) may also be important for this transition.q,r
tration, accounts for ~ 12% of the human surfactant. One enzyme present in the surfactant fluid is an
Other phospholipids, plasmalogen,i cholesterol, acid phosphatase able to hydrolyze phosphatidyl-
proteins, and calcium ions are also present. glycerol phosphate, perhaps functioning in the final
The surfactant contains four unique proteins, step of biosynthesis of the phosphatidylglycerol
designated SP-A, SP-B, SP-C, and SP-D.c,e The major present in the surfactant.c Study of the action of the
protein (SP-A) is a sialic acid-rich glycoprotein natural lung surfactant has led to development of
derived from a 26-kDa peptide, which contains a artificial surfactant mixtures that are being used
short collagen-like domain.e,j,k Like collagen, this effectively to save many lives.d
domain contains glycosylated hydroxyproline.
The C-terminal domain is a Ca2+-dependent C-type a Rooney, S. A. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 189–191
lectin (Chapter 4), while the N-terminal domain is b Persson, A., Chang, D., Rust, K., Moxley, M., Longmore, W.,
and Crouch, E. (1989) Biochemistry28, 6361–6367
involved in oligomer formation through disulfide
c Rooney, S. A., Young, S. L., and Mendelson, C. R. (1994) FASEB J.
bridges. The overall structure is similar to that of 8, 957 – 967
the complement protein C1q (Chapter 31).e,j Protein d Jobe, A. H. (1993) N. Engl. J. Med.328, 861 –868
D is also collagen-likel but evidently plays a very e Kuroki, Y., and Voelkers, D. R. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 25943–
25946
different functional role than SP-A. The latter asso-
f Shiffer, K., Hawgood, S., Haagsman, H. P., Benson, B., Clements,
ciates with the major surfactant lipids but SP-D does J. A., and Goerke, J. (1993) Biochemistry32, 590–597
not. It does bind phosphatidylinositolm and gluco- g Pastrana-Rios, B., Flach, C. R., Brauner, J. W., Mautone, A. J.,
sylceramide, lipids that are present in small amounts. and Mendelsohn, R. (1994) Biochemistry33, 5121–5127
h Bangham, A. D. (1992) Nature (London)359, 110
Perhaps SP-D helps to remove these polar lipids
i Rana, F. R., Harwood, J. S., Mautone, A. J., and Dluhy, R. A.
which might interfere with surfactant action.e Both (1993)Biochemistry32, 27–31
proteins A and D may also have functions in the j McCormack, F. X., Calvert, H. M., Watson, P. A., Smith, D. L.,
immune system.l Mason, R. J., and Voelker, D. R. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 5833–
5841
Proteins SP-B and SP-C are small extremely
k Taneva, S., McEachren, T., Stewart, J., and Keough, K. M. W.
hydrophobic polypeptides consisting of 79 and (1995)Biochemistry34, 10279–10289
35 amino acid residues, respectively.n,o Aliphatic l Crouch, E., Persson, A., Chang, D., and Heuser, J. (1994) J. Biol.
branched amino acids constitute 23 of the 35 residues Chem.269, 17311–17319
mOgasawara, Y., Kuroki, Y., and Akino, T. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.
of the C-terminal part of protein C, which is also
267, 21244–21249
palmitoylated on two cysteine residues. SP-B is n Korimilli, A., Gonzales, L. W., and Guttentag, S. H. (2000) J.
formed from a large 381-residue precursor. The Biol. Chem.275, 8672 – 8679
mature protein contains seven cysteines and disulfide o Pastrana, B., Mautone, A. J., and Mendelsohn, R. (1991)
Biochemistry30, 10058–10064
bridges. Both proteins have major effects on the
p Lipp, M. M., Lee, K. Y. C., Zasadzinski, J. A., and Waring, A. J.
properties of the surfactant mixture. They promote (1996)Science273, 1196–1199
rapid reorganization of lipid layers, an important q Perkins, W. R., Dause, R. B., Parente, R. A., Minchey, S. R.,
consideration for the functioning of the surfactant. Neuman, K. C., Gruner, S. M., Taraschi, T. F., and Janoff, A. S.
(1996)Science273, 330–332
Infants lacking SP-B suffer severe respiratory failure
r Discher, B. M., Maloney, K. M., Grainger, D. W., Sousa, C. A.,
with high mortality.e and Hall, S. B. (1999) Biochemistry38, 374–383

--- Page 390 ---

A. Lipid Structures 387
resistant to phospholipase A as well. These two pro- O –
1 O
perties appear to protect the naked cell membranes of
H
CH2 P CH2 OH
the protozoa from their own phospholipases which C O O C
m
for
a
m
y b
a
e
n
s
a
e
r
c
s
r
e
e
n
te
ic
d
- c
in
on
to
t a
t
i
h
n
e
i n
e
g
n v
p
i
h
ro
o
n
sp
m
h
e
o
n
li
t
p
.2
i
6
d
M
O
a
-p
ri
h
n
o
e
s
a
p
l
h
g
a
a
-
e CH2 HO
CH2 H2C
H
tidyltrimethylarsonium lactic acid.27 – O + As CH2 O O
O
CH3 O C
H3C
+
COOH R1
H3C
As CH2 C
OH
HO OH
H3C H Arsenophospholipid of aquatic plants
Trimethylarsonium lactic acid
The plasma membrane of mammalian male germ cells
They apparently do this as part of a scheme for detoxi- contains the following sulfogalactosylglycerolipid.
fying arsenate taken up with phosphate from the It is found only in spermatozoa and testes, in which it
phosphate-poor ocean water. accounts for 5 – 8% of total lipid, and in the brain, in
which it accounts for only 0.2% of total lipid.31
4. Glycolipids
R'
O
The polar heads of the glycoglycerolipids lack
phospho groups but contain sugars in glycosidic link-
OH
H CH2
O
age.28 Large amounts of the galactolipids shown in the HO C
following structure are found in chloroplasts.29 The
H2C
O H2C C
O R
monogalactosyl diacylglycerol is said to be the most –O3SO O
abundant polar lipid in nature. OH
Sulfogalactosylglycerolipid, a sulfate ester
O
A second galactose C A variety of acylated glucolipids and
may be added here O phosphoglucolipids, including monoglucosyl
and diglucosyl diacylglycerols, have been
OH H
CH2
O identified in membranes of the cell-wall-less
HO C bacteriumAcholeplasma laidlawii.32,32a The
CH2 O H2C O C following glycolipid from the methanogen
Methanosarcina33 is identical to the core
HO O A galactolipid of chloroplasts—typically 96%
OH of the fatty acyl groups are from linolenic acid structure of eukaryotic glycosylphospha-
tidylinositol membrane protein anchors
(Fig. 8-13).
Chloroplasts also contain the following sulfolipid, an
anionic sulfonate.
O HO
CH2OH
O
d-Glucosamine
C R1 HO
O H2N
HO
–O3S
CH2 O H C C O H2 O C
S
c R h
u
l 2
l
o
fo
ro
li
p
p
l
i
a
d
s t
o
s
f
HO HO 4 HO 6
O
OH
1
O O P
O
O–
HO
OH
CH2
myo-Inositol
diphytanylglycerol
O
6-Sulfo-6-deoxy-α-d glucopyranosyl diglyceride
In addition to the previously mentioned phytanyl ether
Marine algae as well as aquatic higher plants accumu- phospholipids, methanogens contain diphytanyl
latearsenophospholipids.30 tetraether lipids that are both glycerophospholipids
and glycolipids.

--- Page 391 ---

388 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
PO3 –-glycerol
O (sn-glycerol3-P)
H CH2
O C
O
H2C
O CH2
C
O
H2C H
αGlcpβ1→2Galf-O A dipthytanyl tetraether lipid
From a methanogenic bacterium.21
Sphingosine-containing lipids are classified as
5. Sphingolipids
sphingophospholipids (sphingomyelins) and
sphingoglycolipids. In both cases the sphingosine is
The backbone of the sphingolipids is the basic alco-
combined in amide linkage with a fatty acid to form a
holsphingosine (sphingenine) or a related long chain
ceramide (Fig. 8-3) which still contains a free hydroxyl
base. At least 60 such bases have been identified.34,35
group able to combine with another component. In the
They vary in chain length from C to C and include
14 22 sphingomyelins, which were first isolated from human
members of the branched iso and anteiso series. Up
brain by Thudicum in 1884, the additional component
to two double bonds may be present. Sphingosine
is usually phosphocholine (Fig. 8-3). Ceramide amino-
contains 18 carbon atoms and is formed from palmitic
ethylphosphonates and related glycolipids occur in
acid and serine (Fig. 21-6). An intermediate in the
some invertebrates.36,37
formation of sphingosine is the saturated sphinganine
Thecerebrosides are glycosides of ceramide
(dihydrosphingosine), which is also a common com-
containing galactose or glucose. They are found in
ponent of animal sphingolipids. Hydroxylation of
relatively large amounts in the brain where monoga-
sphinganine to phytosphingosine occurs in both plants
lactosylceramide predominates. Cerebrosides also
and animals, especially within glycolipids. The name
occur in other animal tissues and to a lesser extent in
comes from the fact that phytosphingosine was first
plants. Many glycosphingolipids contain oligosaccha-
discovered in plants.
rides of various sizes. When the oligosaccharide
contains one or more residues of sialic acid the com-
pound is known as a ganglioside.38 Sialic acids are
H
NH2
never found in plants. However, plants and fungi
HOH2C containphytoglycolipids, which resemble ganglio-
sides. Some contain inositol phosphates as well as
HO sugars.39– 41 The structures of gangliosides may be very
H complex. Like glycoproteins, these substances are often
Sphingosine (sphingenine)
located at the outer surface of cells where they may act
as receptors for toxins, viruses, and hormones (see
H
NH2 Section D).42 Some of them carry attached blood
HO CH2 group antigens (Box 4-C).43,44 The sulfate esters of
cerebrosides, known as sulfatides(Fig. 8-3), are also
important components of membranes.45
HO H C14H29
Gliding bacteria such as Capnocytophaga contain
Sphinganine (dihydrosphingosine) sulfonolipids:46
H
NH2
O R
HO CH2 H C
OH
H NH
HO
H C14H29 – O3S C
Phytosphingosine CH2
H OH
N-acylcapnine
A 1-deoxy-1-sulfonate analog of ceramides from
gliding bacteria. R is a long-chain alkyl group.

--- Page 392 ---

A. Lipid Structures 389
These are analogs of the ceramides. The sulfono- The phytyl group of chlorophyll (Fig. 23-30), the phy-
lipids seem to be necessary for the gliding movement tanyl and diphytanyl groups of the lipids of methano-
of these bacteria across solid surfaces.47 gens, and the side chain of the pigment heme a (Fig.
16-5) are all related and are all derived from the pre-
cursorprenyl pyrophosphate (isopentenyl diphos-
6. Sterols and Other Isoprenoid Lipids phate). The whole group of compounds are often
referred to as polyprenyl or by the older designation
A large group of isoprenoid lipids, including isoprenoid. The major discussion of polyprenyl
sterols,terpenes, and carotenoidcompounds, are compounds is found in Chapter 22 but the role of
often present in membranes or in extracted lipids. cholesterol and related compounds in membranes and
Among these are the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and the function of polyprenyl groups as membrane anchors
K and the high polymers rubber and gutta-percha. for some proteins will be considered in this chapter.
An–OH group occurs here in some brain cerebrosides
O
C
N H
H
H C
2
O H OH
Y
The compounds in which Y = H are ceramides.
Y = —H Sphingolipids are often named as ceramide
derivatives.
O
+
Y = O P O CH CH N (CH ) Sphingomyelins
2 2 33
Phosphocholine
–
O
O
+
Y = P CH CH NH Ceramide aminoethyl phosphonates
2 2 3
–
O
Y = d-Galβ or d-Galβ1→4Glc– Cerebrosides or ceramide mono- and oligosaccharides
The galactose bears a 3-sulfate group in cerebroside
sulfatides, e.g., in lactosyl ceramide sulfate
Y = GalNAc1→3Gal1→4Gal1→4Glc Present in sphingolipid of red blood cell membranes
O
Y = O P O Inositol Mannose Present in phytoglycolipid of yeast
–
O
Figure 8-3 Structures of some sphingolipids.

--- Page 393 ---

390 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
H3C
CH3 CH3
H3C CH3
H3C CH3
CH3 CH3
CH3
Notice the center of symmetry
β-Carotene, a yellow pigment
in this 40-carbon molecule
H3C CH3
of carrots and other plants;
converted in the human body
derived from 8 prenyl units CH3
H
to vitamin A. CH3
H3C H
H2C
O O– O O– Prenyl diphosphate (pyro-
phosphate) (isopentenyl H H
P P
pyrophosphate), precursor
H3C CH2 O O OH of steroid,carotenoid, and HO
other isoprenoid substances Cholesterol, a sterol
B. Membranes 1. The Structure of Membranes
In Chapter 7 we examined ways in which protein Membranes consist largely of protein and lipid.
subunits can be stacked to form helices and closed The ratio (by weight) of protein to lipid varies from 0.25
oligomers. Another important arrangement of cell in myelin to ~ 3.0 in bacterial membranes. In mem-
constituents is that of flat sheets or membranes.48– 54 branes of erythrocytes it is about 1.2 and a ratio of
Chemists, physicists, and biologists have mounted a about 1.0 may be regarded as typical for animal cells.
sustained effort to understand these thin but remark- Small amounts of carbohydrates (< 5%) are present, as
ably tough outer surfaces of cells. However, consider are traces of RNA (< 0.1%).
the fact that a 7 - to10-nm-thick plasma membrane of a In 1926, Gorter and Grendel calculated that the
cell of 10-µm diameter has less than 1/ 1000 the thick- erythrocyte ghost contained just enough lipid to form
ness of the cell and occupies only 0.5% of the total a 3.0- to 4.0-nm-thick layer around the cell. Apparently
volume. The technical difficulties in studying such a they reached this correct conclusion only because their
membrane are great and are compounded by the fact measurements of pressures of surface films contained
that a cell contains more than one kind of membrane. compensating errors.58 Nevertheless, this information,
Membranes from many sources have been studied. together with the known propensity of lipids to aggre-
One of these is myelin, the multilayered insulation gate in micelles in which the hydrocarbon “tails”
that surrounds the axons of many nerve cells.55– 57 clustered together and the polar “heads” protruded
Myelin is derived from the plasma membrane of into the surrounding water,59 led Danielli and Davsen
Schwann cells which lie adjacent to many neurons. in 1935 to propose the lipid bilayer structure for
Schwann cells literally wrap themselves around neu- membranes.60 Its essential features are indicated in
ronal axons. Their cytoplasm is squeezed out leaving Fig. 8-4. Hydrophobic bonding holds the extended
little but tightly packed membrane layers. Myelin hydrocarbon chains together, while the polar groups
membranes are the most stable known and also have of the phospholipid molecules may interact with
the highest lipid content (80%). Another readily avail- proteins on the sides of the bilayer. The original pro-
able experimental material is the plasma membrane posal assumed an extended β structure for the proteins,
of the human red bood cell, which can be prepared which would allow them to coat the bilayer uniformly
by osmotic rupture of the cells. The remaining on both sides. However, this is not correct. Proteins
erythrocyte ghosts contain ~ 1% of the dry matter are sometimes embedded in the bilayer, sometimes
of the cell and may have been studied more than any protrude through it, and sometimes are attached on
other membrane. A much investigated specialized one surface, most often the cytoplasmic surface of
membrane is the outer portion of the visual receptor the plasma membrane. These concepts were brought
cells known as rods (Chapter 23), which contains a together by Singer and Nicolson in 1972 in the fluid
closely packed and regular array of flat discs, each one mosaic model of membrane structure61 (Fig. 8-5).
consisting of a pair of membranes. Both membranes The lipid bilayer still provides the basic structure upon
and cell walls of many kinds of bacteria have also been which the complex membranes of living organisms are
investigated. assembled.52,54,62– 65 The term “fluid” refers to the fact

--- Page 394 ---

391
O
2.0 nm
–O P O O
H3C N
CH3 O
C O O
C
CH3 CH3
H3C O
Distearoyl phosphatidylcholine Cross-sectional
area of hydrocarbon
chain is 0.2 nm2
~4 nm
O O
H
H
3C
3C
N CH3 –OO PO OCO O O C C O O OCO OP OO–H3C N
C
C
H
H
3
3
O O
H H 3C 3C N CH3 –OO PO OCO O O C C O O OCO OP OO–H3C N C C H H 3 3 Schematic diagram of
O O
H
H
3C
3C
N CH3 –OO PO OCO O O C C O O OCO OP OO–H3C N
C
C
H
H
3
3 phospholipid bilayer
O O
H
H
3C
3C
N CH3 –OO PO OCO O O C C O O OCO OP OO–H3C N
C
C
H
H
3
3 Polar“head”
~7 nm
~2 nm ~3 nm ~2 nm
Typical appearance
of osmium-stained
membranes in the
electron microscope
Figure 8-4 Bimolecular lipid layers and membranes. (Top) A molecule
of phosphatidylcholine. (Center) Lipid bilayer structure. (Bottom)
Bilayer structure as seen by the electron microscope with osmium
tetroxide staining.
7
Figure 8-6 (A) Molecular packing of 2,3-
dimyristoyl-D-glycero-1-phosphocholine dihy-
drate. The two molecules in the asymmetric
unit are labeled 1 and 2. The position of the
Figure 8-5 The fluid mosaic model of Singer and Nicolson.61 Some water molecules is indicated either by W1–W4
integral membrane proteins, which are shown as irregular solids, are or by small open circles. Hydrogen bonds are
dissolved in the bilayer. Transmembrane proteins protrude from both represented by dotted lines. From Pascher et
sides. One of these is pictured as a seven-helix protein, a common al.66 (B) Two-dimensional “orthorhombic”
type of receptor for hormones and for light absorption by visual pig- arrangement of hydrocarbon chains in a crystal-
ments. Other proteins adhere to either the outer or the inner surface. line alkane. The a–bplane corresponds to the
Many membrane proteins carry complex oligosaccharide groups which plane of the bilayer surface; the long axes of the
protrude from the outer surface (Chapter 4). A few of these are indicated acyl chains project from the page. From Cameron
here as chains of sugar rings. et al.67
1
6 4
7 5 2 3 1
B. Membranes
A
B
H H
θ
H H H H
H H H
S S
b H H
6 4
5 H H H 2 3
H H H H
a
H H

--- Page 395 ---

392 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
Five kinds of phospholipid predominate: phospha-
tidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidyl-
serine, phosphatidylglycerols, and sphingomyelin.
Usually there are also small amounts of phosphatidyli-
nositol. The major phospholipid in animal cells is
phosphatidylcholine, but in bacteria it is phosphati-
dylethanolamine. The phospholipids of E. coli consist
of 80% phosphatidylethanolamine, 15% phosphati-
dylglycerol, and 5% diphosphatidylglycerol (cardio-
lipin). Significant amounts of cardiolipin are found
only in bacteria and in the inner membrane of mito-
chondria. Sphingomyelin is almost absent from mito-
chondria, endoplasmic reticulum, or nuclear membranes.
0.5 nm Glycolipids are important constituents of the
plasma membranes, of the endoplasmic reticulum,
and of chloroplasts. The cerebrosides and their sulfate
esters, the sulfatides, are especially abundant in myelin.
Figure 8-7 Atomic force microscope image of a dimyristoyl- In plant membranes, the predominant lipids are the
phosphatidylethanolamine bilayer deposited by the Langmuir galactosyl diglycerides.29,74 The previously described
–Blodgett technique (see Fig. 8-8) at a specific molecular area ether phospholipids (archaebacteria), ceramide amino-
of 0.41 nm2 and a surface pressure of 40 mN/m on a freshly
ethylphosphonate (invertebrates), and sulfolipid
cleaved mica substrate. The images were taken under water.
(chloroplasts) are also important membrane components.
The long, uniformly spaced rows are roughly 0.7– 0.9 nm in
Cholesterol makes up 17% of myelin and is present
spacing. The modulation along the rows, with rounded
in plasma membranes. However, it usually does not
bright spots roughly every 0.5 nm, corresponds to the indi-
vidual headgroups of the phosphatidylethanolamine mole- occur in bacteria and is present only in trace amounts
cules. The lattice spacing is identical to that measured by in mitochondria. Related sterols are present in plant
X-ray diffraction at the air–water interface. The area per membranes. Esters of sterols occur as transport forms
molecule in the AFM image is ~ 0.4 nm2. From Zasadzinski but are not found in membranes. Membrane bilayers,
et al.68 likewise, contain little or no triacylglycerols, the latter
being found largely as droplets in the cytoplasm.
Quantitatively minor membrane components with
that at temperatures suitable for growth and metabo- important biological functions include ubiquinone,
lism the hydrocarbon chains are not rigidly packed in which is present in the inner mitochondrial membrane,
the center of the bilayer but are “molten” (see Section 2). and the tocopherols. Plant chloroplast membranes
However, at a low enough temperature they become contain chlorophyll, carotenes, and other lipid-soluble
rigid and pack together in a manner similar to that of pigments.
the chains in crystals of the phosphatidylcholine shown
in Fig. 8-6A. These crystals consist of stacked bilayers Liquid crystals, liposomes, and artificial mem-
of thickness 5.5 nm.66,69 The scanning tunneling and branes. Phospholipids dissolve in water to form true
atomic force microscopes have provided direct views solutions only at very low concentrations (~ 10–10M for
of a similar arrangement of side chains in a monomo- distearoyl phosphatidylcholine). At higher concentra-
lecular fatty acid layer68,70,71 (Fig. 8-7). Measurements tions they exist in liquid crystalline phases in which
on multilamellar vesicles of dipalmitoylphosphatidyl- the molecules are partially oriented. Phosphatidylcho-
choline give bilayer thicknessess from 5.4 nm for dehy- lines (lecithins) exist almost exclusively in a lamellar
drated vesicles to 6.7 nm for the biologically relevant (smectic) phase in which the molecules form bilayers.
fully hydrated bilayers.72 In a warm phosphatidylcholine–water mixture con-
taining at least 30% water by weight the phospholipid
Lipids of membranes. Approximately 1500 formsmultilamellar vesicles, one lipid bilayer sur-
different lipids have been identified in the myelin of rounding another in an “onion skin” structure. When
the central nervous system of humans. About 30 of such vesicles are subjected to ultrasonic vibration they
these are present in substantial amounts.73 The distri- break up, forming some very small vesicles of diameter
bution of the different lipids varies markedly between down to 25 nm which are surrounded by a single
membranes from different sources (Table 8-3) making bilayer. These unilamellar vesicles are often used for
generalization difficult. However, phospholipids are study of the properties of bilayers. Vesicles of both
apparently always present and, except in chloroplasts, types are often called liposomes.75– 77
make up from 40% to over 90% of the total lipid (Table When liposomes are stained with osmium tetroxide
8-3). or potassium permanganate, embedded, and sectioned

--- Page 396 ---

B. Membranes 393
for electron microscopy, their membranes show a O O O O
characteristic three layered structure similar to that
Os Os
observed for biological membranes. Two darkly
stained lines ~ 2 – 2.5 nm thick are separated by a clear O O O O
space ~ 2.5 – 3.5 nm wide in the center. Both myelin An osmate ester formed
and the retinal rod outer segments show closely spaced from two unsaturated groups
pairs of such membranes with a combined width of
18 nm. These results seemed to support the original brane which can be made from a solution of phospha-
Davsen–Danielli model. However, many questions tidylcholine or of a mixture of phospholipids plus
must be raised about the interpretation of these results. cholesterol in a hydrocarbon solvent. A droplet of
Why does OsO stain only the outer protein layer when solution is placed on a small orifice in a plastic sheet,
4
it is known to react also with double bonds of hydro- separating two compartments filled with an aqueous
carbon side chains of lipids to form osmate esters medium (Fig. 8-8). The solution in the orifice quickly
which are readily reduced to a diol and osmium?77a-c,78 drains, just as does a soap bubble, and the resulting
Membranes from which most of the lipid has been film eventually becomes so thin that the bright colors
extracted still stain with OsO to give three-layered disappear and a “black membrane” is formed. Similar
4
electron micrographs. Perhaps little can be concluded membranes, but without a residual content of hydro-
from the three-layered appearance. We have learned carbon solvent, have been created by apposition of
that it is difficult to determine even the thickness, let two lipid monolayers formed at an air–water inter-
alone the complete structure of an object that is only face.79,80 The thickness of such artificial membranes is
6– 10 nm thick. thought to be only 6 – 9 nm. Resilient and self-sealing,
Strong support for the lipid bilayer model comes the membranes can be stained with OsO to give a
4
from the preparation of another type of artificial mem- typical three-layered pattern.
TABLE 8-3
Estimated Chemical Compositions of Some Membranes
Percentage of total dry weight of membranea
Plasma
membrane E. colib,c,d
Myelin Retinal (human Mitochondrial (inner and outer
Compound (bovine) rod erythrocyte) membranes membranes) Chloroplastse
Protein 22 59 60 76 75 48
Total lipid 78 41 40 24 25 52f
Phosphatidylcholine 7.5 13 6.9 8.8
Phosphatidylethanolamine 11.7 6.5 6.5 8.4 18
Phosphatidylserine 7.1 2.5 3.1
Phosphatidylinositol 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.75
Phosphatidylglycerol 4
Cardioliping 0.4 4.3 3
Sphingomyelin 6.4 0.5 6.5
Glycolipid 22.0 9.5 Trace Trace 23
Cholesterol 17.0 2.0 9.2 0.24
Total phospholipid 33 27 24 22.5 25 4.7
Phospholipid as a percentage 42 66 60 94 >90% 9
of total lipid
a Dewey, M. M. and Barr, L. (1970) Curr. Top. Membr. Transp.1, 6.
b Kaback, H. R. (1970) Curr. Top. Membr. Transp. 1, 35 – 99.
c Mizushima, S. and Yamada, H. (1975) Biochim. Biophys. Acta.375, 44 – 53 .
d Yamato, I. Anraku, Y. and Hirosawa, H. (1975) J. Biochem. (Tokyo)77, 705 – 718. These investigators found 67% protein, 21% lipids, 10%
carbohydrate, and 2% RNA.
e Lichtenthaler, H. K. and Park, R. B. (1963) Nature (London)198, 1070 –1072.
f About 14% is accounted for by chlorophyll, carotenoids, and quinones.e
g Diphosphatidylglycerol (Fig. 8 -2).

--- Page 397 ---

394 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
The study of monolayers formed on a water sur-
face has also provided important information. A thin
film of an amphiphilic (containing both polar and non-
polar groups) compound such as a fatty acid is prepared.
This is done by depositing a small quantity of the
compound dissolved in a volatile solvent on a clean
aqueous surface between the barriers of a Langmuir
trough (Fig. 8-8).81,82 The difference in surface tension
(π) across the barriers is measured with a suitable
device81 for different areas of the monolayer, i.e., for
different positions of the moveable barrier. The value
ofπ is low for expanded monolayers and falls to nearly
zero when the surface is no longer completely covered.
The pressure reaches a plateau when a compact mono-
layer is formed, after which it rises again (Fig. 8-8B).
At very high values of π the monolayer collapses
(buckles). Both the cross-sectional area per molecule
in the monolayer and the collapse pressure can be
determined. For typical fatty acids, regardless of chain
length, the area covered is only ~ 0.2 nm2 per molecule
indicating that the fatty acid chains are stacked verti-
cally to the surface in the monolayer. The collapse
A Moveable Fixed
γ barrier γ barrier 0
Trough
Aqueous phase
B
Solid
Condensed
Expanded
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
nm2/molecule
Figure 8-8 (A) The Langmuir–Adam film balance. Ten-
sion on the moveable barrier is recorded for different areas
of the surface between the barriers. This gives the surface
pressure π, which is the difference between the surface
tension (γ ) of a clean aqueous surface and that of a spread o
monolayer (γ): π = γ –γ. Courtesy of Jones and Chapman.81
o (B) Surface pressure (π)– area per molecule isotherm for a
typical fatty acid (e.g., pentadecanoic acid C H CO H) at
14 29 2
the aqueous – air interface. From Knobler.81a
)1-mNm(
π
pressure is higher for longer molecules as a result of the
greater number of van der Waals interaction between
the chains. Langmuir–Blodgett layers are prepared
by transferring one or more monolayers onto a smooth
solid surface (Fig. 8-7).82,83
Physical properties of membrane lipids. A
completely extended C fatty acid chain as shown in
18
Fig. 8-4 has a length of ~ 2.0 nm and occupies, either in
crystals or in monolayers, when viewed “end-on,” an
area of ~ 0.2 nm2. The hydrocarbon layer in a lipid
bilayer containing such chains would have a thickness
of about 4.0 nm; that determined by X-ray diffraction
for myelin is ~ 3.5 nm. However, for artificial black
membranes the thickness of the hydrocarbon layer can
be as little as 3.1 nm when all solvent is removed.84
These and many other results85 indicate that the hydro-
carbon chains are to some extent folded and that the
membrane is expanded over that expected according
to the simplest model.
Structure determinations on crystalline alkanes
confirm that the chains exist in a completely extended
conformation and that adjacent chains often pack
together in the orthorhombic arrangement shown in
Fig. 8-6B. As the temperature of such crystals is raised
a series of solid–solid phase transitions is observed
below the melting point of the crystals.86 These can be
detected by changes in the infrared absorption spectrum
or by small amounts of heat absorption revealed by
differential scanning calorimetry (Fig. 8-9). Each
new phase permits a greater degree of mobility for the
hydrocarbon chains. Thus, at a high enough tempera-
ture but below the melting point, the chains are able
to rotate freely about their own axes in a so-called
hexagonal phase. Now the chains are packed in a
hexagonal array instead of the orthorhombic array of
Fig. 8-6B. At intermediate temperatures, some of the
chains may assume nonplanar conformations and
changes in the tilt of the hydrocarbon chains (Fig. 8-6)
may occur.
Similar phase transitions are observed for bilay-
ers.88– 90 For dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine the first
detectablesubtransition91 is centered at a temperature
T of 18°C. The second, known as the pretransition,
s
occurs at 35°C(T ). The structure below T may be
p s
described as rigid or crystalline and that above T as
s
agel in which the hydrocarbon side chains twist and
turn much more freely but in which the orthorhombic
packing is maintained.86 Above T the head groups
p
become disordered. Although the orthorhombic pack-
ing of the tails may be maintained, there are several
distinct phases,92,93 including one or more in which the
gel is thought to assume a structure analogous to that
in the hexagonal phase of hydrocarbons. At 41°C the
main transition occurs.

--- Page 398 ---

B. Membranes 395
High temperature different components containing a variety of fatty acid
Lα Liquid crystalline, partially ordered chains leads to a broadening of the melting range.
disordered chains, biologically relevant The behavior of bilayers is strongly influenced
by the lipid composition. Phospholipids containing
Pβ (Gr) Rippled;
T m 41°C G h , Hexagonal saturated, long-chain fatty acids have high transition
G o , Orthorhombic, like alkanes temperatures. The presence of unsaturated fatty acyl
groups with cis double bonds in membrane lipids
Lβ' (G
d
) G
po
e
l
l
a
p
r
h
h
a
e
s
a
e
d
, o
g
r
r
t
o
h
u
o
p
rh
s
o
d
m
is
b
o
i
r
c
d
,
ered encourages folding of the hydrocarbon chains and
lowersT . Even a single double bond lowers T , the
m m
T 35°C decrease being greatest when the double bond is near
P
the center of the chain.94– 96 While T for dipalmitoyl
m
phosphatidylcholine is 41°C, that of 1,2-dipalmitoyl
L (G) Sub-gel, interdigitated
C S phosphatidyl-sn-glycerol, which lacks the phospho-
choline head group, is 70°C. This falls to 11.6°C for
the polyunsaturated 1-stereoyl-2-linoleoyl-sn-glycerol,
T 18°C
S whose melting curve is shown in Fig. 8-9.87 This lipid
also shows a complex phase behavior and a melting
LΒ Crystalline phase, dehydrated highly point for the stable, crystalline β’ phase higher than
ordered all-trans extended chains that of the α phase.
Low temperature
Inclusion of other molecules of irregular shape
within membranes also lowers T . However, a mole-
m
This is a sharper transition with a well-defined melting cule of cholesterol can pack into a bilayer with a cross-
temperature designated T . Above T the lipid is in sectional area of 0.39 nm2, just equal to that of two
m m
the lamellar liquid crystalline or Lα state. The bilayer hydrocarbon chains.49 It tends to harden membranes
continues to hold together, but the fatty acid chains aboveT but increases mobility of hydrocarbon chains
m
have melted and are now free to rotate and undergo belowT .97– 100 A complex of cholesterol and phospha-
m
twisting movements more freely than at lower temper- tidylcholine may form a separate phase within the
atures (Fig. 8-11). The main transition is highly, but membrane.101,102 The ether-linked plasmalogens may
not completely, cooperative. Thus, the melting of the account for over 30% of the phosphoglycerides of the
membrane occurs over a range of several degrees. white matter of the brain and of heart and ether linked
The presence in biological membranes of a variety of phospholipids are the major lipids of many anaerobic
bacteria.103 Their T values are a few
m
degrees higher than those of the corre-
sponding acyl phospholipids.104
Between the pretransition temper-
β' Melt ature and T solid and liquid regions
m
may coexist within a bilayer.101 The
Heat
termlateral phase separation has been
absorbed Heating
(a) applied to this phenomenon.105,106
Since changes in the equilibrium be-
Heat subα 2 subα 1 α Crystallization (b) tween solid and liquid can be induced
evolved Cooling readily, e.g., by changes in the ionic
Reheating environment surrounding the bilayer,
α Melt
lateral phase separation may be of
abso
H
rb
e
e
a
d
t subα
2
subα
1 (c) significance in such phenomena as
nerve conduction.107
The phase transitions in bilayers
–10 0 10 20 30
Temperature (°C) can be recognized in many ways.
Differential scanning colorimetry has
already been mentioned. Another
Figure 8-9 Differential scanning calorimetric curves for 1-stearoyl-2- approach is to measure the spacing
linoleoyl-sn-glycerol. (A) Crystals of the compound grown from a hexane between molecules by X-ray diffrac-
solution were heated from –10° to 35°C at a rate of 5°C per minute and the tion. The cross-sectional area occupied
heat absorbed by the sample was recorded. (B) The molten lipid was
by a phospholipid in a bilayer is
cooled from 35° to –10°C at a rate of 5° per minute and the heat evolved
always greater than the 0.40 nm2
was recorded as the lipid crystallized in the α phase and was then trans-
formed through two sub-α phases. (C) The solid was reheated. From Di expected for closest packing of a pair
and Small.87 Courtesy of Donald M. Small. of extended hydrocarbon chains.39,85

--- Page 399 ---

396 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
BelowT the spacing between chains is about 0.42 nm bilayer into two or more phases can be observed using
m
corresponding to close packing of the fatty acid chains 2H- or 31P- NMR.118 – 120 The orientation and dynamic
in a hexagonal array with an area per phospholipid of behavior of various head groups has been explored,110,121
0.41 nm2. As the temperature is raised above T the as have effects of mixing into the bilayer other lipids
m
spacing increases85 to give an average area per phos- such as glycosphingolipids122 and cholesterol.123,124
pholipid of 0.64–0.73 nm2. Another technique (Box 8-C) Crystalline phospholipids are being investigated by
is to study a spin label by EPR while yet another is to solid-state NMR.125
observe the fluorescence of a polarity-dependent Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy126,127 also
fluorescence probe such as N-phenylnaphthylamine provides information about conformation of both
or other fluorescent probes108 (see Chapter 23). The hydrocarbon chains and head groups. EPR spectros-
compound is incorporated into the membrane and copy (Box 8-C) with doxyl probes on carbon atoms at
undergoes changes in the intensity of its fluorescence different depths within the bilayer has also been em-
when the state of the membrane is altered. ployed.128
A variety of NMR techniques are being applied109– 113 In recent years molecular dynamics simulations
both to liposomes and to natural membranes.111,114 have been used to predict behavior of membranes. As
Incorporation of 13C or 2H into various positions in the is indicated in Fig. 8-11, the molten interior of the liquid
hydrocarbon chains has allowed measurements of the crystalline Lα state is portrayed clearly.129– 131 In the gel
relative degree of mobility of the chains at different state the hydrocarbon chains maintain a closer packing
depths in the bilayer (Fig. 8-10).109,115 – 117 The results and undergo coordinated movement.88 It is difficult to
are in agreement with statistical mechanical predictions know how realistic the simulations are. To calibrate
that configurational freedom increases with depth the method efforts are made to correctly predict a series
toward the midplane of the bilayer. Separation of a of known properties such as density and area per lipid
(0.61 nm).130
A 3-9 14 3-9 Functions of phospholipid head groups. The
10 14
10 dipolar ionic head groups of phosphatidylcholine and
phosphatidylethanolamine occupy about the same
11 cross-sectional area as the two hydrocarbon tails.
12 13 2 2 2 2 13 12 11 Thus, they are in rather close contact with each other.
In crystals chains of hydrogen-bonded atoms may be
formed. In phosphatidylethanolamine the phosphate
and–NH + ions may alternate in these chains.132
3
H H H
B 3-89 1 1 0 1 1 2 2 13 2 14 14 2 1 2 2 1 1 1 0 93-8 H N + H – O P O H N + H – O P O H N + H
13
O O O O
Glycerol Glycerol
10 kHz
In phosphatidylcholine, in which the nitrogen is sur-
rounded by methyl groups and cannot form this kind
Figure 8-10 2H NMR spectra of dimyristoyl phosphatidyl- of chain, water molecules bridge between the phos-
choline-d 27 /water in lamellar phases at 40°C. One chain of phates but the positive charges still interact with the
the phosphatidylcholine is fully deuterated, containing 27
adjacent negative charges.
atoms of 2H. The mole ratios of water to lipid were 5.0 in (A)
The chains of hydrogen bonds between the head
and 25.0 in (B). The average interfacial areas per alkyl chain
groups of phosphatidylethanolamine help to stabilize
as measured by X-ray diffraction were 0.252 nm2 for (A) and
0.313 nm2 for (B). 2H NMR spectra are presented as “powder the bilayer and are apparently responsible for the
patterns” because the lipid molecules are randomly oriented elevation of T m by 10 – 30° above that observed for
in the magnetic field of the spectrometer as if in a powder. phosphatidylcholine.132 In contrast, the negatively
This gives rise to pairs of peaks symmetrically located on charged carboxyl groups of phosphatidylserine make the
both sides of the origin. The separation distances are a membrane less stable. The melting point is increased
measure of the quadrupole splitting of the NMR absorption if the pH is lowered, protonating these groups. Their
line caused by the 2H nucleus. The various splittings of the
presence also makes the membrane sensitive to the
resonances of the 13 – CH – and one – CH groups reflect
2 3 concentration of cations.133 The same is true of phos-
differences in mobility.109 The peaks have been assigned
phatidylglycerol, whose head group contains a
tentatively as indicated. From Boden, Jones, and Sixl.115
negatively charged phosphate without an attached
Courtesy of N. Boden.

--- Page 400 ---

B. Membranes 397
counterion. Addition of calcium ions increases T thought to be a result of very high curvature of a
m
greatly and causes either phosphatidyglycerol or bilayer that arises from the sizes and packing of their
phosphatidylserine to form a separate phase with a head groups. Another phase, even though it is liquid,
more crystalline-like packing of the hydrocarbon side has a three-dimensional cubic symmetry.142– 144a It
chains.134 Hydrogen bonding between head groups apparently consists of a complex arrangement of
also occurs with glycolipids.135 polyhedral bilayer surfaces with interpenetrating
water channels between them.143
Non-bilayer structures of phospholipids.
Under appropriate conditions some aqueous phospho- Membrane fluidity and life. In agreement with
lipids can exist in non-bilayer phases, a fact that may the known behavior of bilayers, the lipids of most
be of considerable biological importance.119,136,137 In membranes in all organisms are partially liquid at
the presence of Ca2+ some pure phospholipids can be those temperatures suitable for life. Organisms have
converted to the inverted hexagonal or H phase developed at least three distinct means of ensuring
II
(Fig. 8-12).136,138– 140 In this phase the phospholipid that membrane lipids remain liquid.145 (1) In our
heads are clustered together in cylindrical “inverted” bodies (as well as in E. coli) the unsaturated fatty acids
micelles which pack in a hexagonal array. The ease that are present lower the melting point. Mutants of E.
with which this transition can occur is increased by the coli that are unable to synthesize unsaturated fatty acids
presence of small amounts of diacylglycerols or lyso- cannot live unless these materials are supplied in the
lecithins.141 Some lipids, such as the galactosyldia- medium.146 (2) In Bacillus subtilis, which contains no un-
cylglycerol of chloroplasts, do not form bilayers but saturatedfatty acids when grown at 37°C, and in other
prefer the hexagonal phase structure.29,32a This is gram-positive bacteria, more than 70% of membrane
A 31P NMR spectrum Phospholipid phase
Mol % egg PC
0
30
?
50
25 ppm
H
B
Figure 8-12 (A) 31P NMR spectra of different phospholipid
phases. Hydrated soya phosphatidylethanolamine adopts
Figure 8-11 Results of simulated motion in a lipid bilayer the hexagonal H phase at 30°C. In the presence of 50 mol%
II
consisting of 64 molecules of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcho- of egg phosphatidylcholine only the bilayer phase is observed.
line and 23 water molecules per lipid at a pressure of 2 atm At intermediate (30%) phosphatidylcholine concentrations
and 50°C. The view is that observed after 500 ps of simula- an isotropic component appears in the spectrum. (B) Inverted
tion. Bold lines represent the head group and glycerol parts micelles proposed to explain “lipidic particles” seen in freeze
of the structures and the thin lines the hydrocarbon chains. fracture micrographs of bilayer mixture of phospholipids,
The gray spheres represent water molecules. From Berger, e.g., of phosphatidylethanolanine + phosphatidylcholine +
Edholm, and Jähnig.130 Courtesy of Dr. Olle Edholm. cholesterol. From de Kruijft et al.119 Courtesy of B. de Kruijft.

--- Page 401 ---

398 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
BOX 8-C ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE (EPR) SPECTRA AND “SPIN LABELS”
Unpaired electrons have magnetic moments and absorption itself. Thus, for the paramagnetic nitroxide
are therefore suitable objects for magnetic resonance 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl the EPR spec-
spectroscopy. The technique is similar to NMR spec- trum consists of three equally spaced bands whose
troscopy, but microwave frequencies of ~1010 Hz are peaks are marked at the points where the steep
employed, the energies being ~100 times greater than
those used in NMR.a,b Unpaired electrons are found
in organic free radicals and in certain transition metal
This "spin" label is often
ions, both of which are important to many enzymatic attached by covalent linkage
at this point to larger molecules.
processes. Furthermore, spin labels in the form of
N
stable organic free radicals, can be attached to macro-
molecules at many different points.a,c– e Coupling of O
such artificially introduced unpaired electrons with 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl
the magnetic moments of other unpaired electrons
or of magnetic nuclei can often be observed by EPR lines in the middle of the first derivative plots cross
techniques. the horizontal axis.
The conditions for absorption of energy in the Coupling with the 14N nuclear spin causes split-
EPR spectrometer are given by the equation ting into three lines as shown in the accompanying
figure.
hν = gβH
o
which is identical in form to that for NMR spectros-
copy. Here H is the external magnetic field strength
o
andβ is a constant called the Bohr magneton. The
value of g, the spectroscopic splitting factor, is
one of the major characteristics needed to describe
an EPR spectrum. The value of g is exactly 2.000 for
a free electron but may be somewhat different in
radicals and substantially different in transition
metals. One factor that causes g values to vary with
environment is spin-orbit coupling which arises
because the p and d orbitals of atoms have directional
character. For the same reason g sometimes has three
discrete values for the three different directions (g
value anisotropy). The g value parallel to the direc-
tion of H (g ) often differs from that in the perpen-
o ||
dicular direction (g⊥). Both values can be ascertained
experimentally.
A second feature of an EPR spectrum is hyper- EPR spectrum of tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl dissolved
fine structure which results from coupling of the in an aqueous dispersion of phospholipids. (Top) above
the main bilayer transition temperature T; (center) be-
magnetic moment of the unpaired electron with t
tween T and pretransition temperature; (bottom) below
nuclear spins. The coupling is analogous to the spin t
pretransition temperature. From Shimshick and
–spin coupling of NMR (Chapter 3). The hyperfine
McConnell.f
splitting constant A, like the coupling constant J of
NMR spectroscopy, is given in Hertz. Splitting may
be caused by a magnetic atomic nucleus about which This nitroxide is more soluble in liquid regions
the electron is moving or by some adjacent nucleus of bilayers than it is in solid regions. As bilayers
or other unpaired electron. Sometimes important are warmed in the EPR spectrometer, the solubility
chemical conclusions can be drawn from the presence of this spin-labeled compound in the lipid can be
or absence of splitting. Thus, the EPR spectrum of a followed (see figure). The lower of the three spectra
metal ion in a complex will be split by nuclei in the approximates that of the spin label in water alone,
ligand only if covalent bonding takes place. while the others are composite spectra for which
It is customary in EPR spectroscopy to plot part of the spin label has dissolved in the phospho-
the first derivative of the absorption rather than the lipid bilayers.

--- Page 402 ---

B. Membranes 399
BOX 8-C (continued)
Since frequencies for EPR spectroscopy are ~100 Much of the interpretation of the observed
times higher than those for NMR spectroscopy, changes in EPR spectra of spin labels is empirical.
correlation times (Chapter 3) must be less than For example, the spectra in the accompanying figure
~10–9s if sharp spectra are to be obtained. Sharp can be interpreted to indicate that the spin label
bandsmay sometimes be obtained for solutions, but dissolves in the lipid to a greater extent at higher
samples are often frozen to eliminate molecular temperatures. The ratio f (defined in the figure) is
motion; spectra are taken at very low temperatures. an empirical quantity whose change can be moni-
For spin labels in lipid bilayers, both the bandwidth tored as a function of temperature. Plots of f vs T
and shape are sensitively dependent upon molecular have been used to identify transition and pretransi-
motion, which may be either random or restricted. tion temperatures in bilayers.f
Computer simulations are often used to match EPR spectroscopy is used widely in the study of
observed band shapes under varying conditions with proteins and of lipid–protein interactions.c It has
those predicted by theories of motional broadening often been used to estimate distances between spin
of lines. Among the many spin-labeled compounds labels and bound paramagnetic metal ions.g A high-
that have been incorporated into lipid bilayers are resolution EPR technique that detects NMR transi-
the following: tions by a simultaneously irradiated EPR transition
is known as electron-nuclear double resonance
(ENDOR).h
O
N a Berliner, L. J., and Reuben, J., eds. (1989) Spinlabeling. Theory and
C
HOOC (CH2)n O Applications, Vol. 8, Plenum, New York ((Biological Magnetic
Resonance Series)
(CH2)m
OH b Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R. (1980) Biophysical Chemistry,
H3C CH3 Freeman, San Francisco, California (pp. 525 – 536, 1352 – 1362)
c Marsh, D. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 330 – 333
d Esmann, M., Hideg, K., and Marsh, D. (1988) Biochemistry27,
CH3 3913– 3917
e Millhauser, G. L. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 448 – 452
f Shimshick, E. J., and McConnell, H. M. (1973) Biochemistry12,
O 2351– 2360
N g Voss, J., Salwinski, L., Kaback, H. R., and Hubbell, W. L. (1995)
O Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 12295 – 12299
H h Lubitz, W., and Babcock, G. T. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 96 –
100
fatty acids contain methyl branches (Chapter 21)147,148 membranes in many vital transport processes. Biologi-
which can decrease the melting point and increase the cal membranes have a relatively high permeability to
monolayer surface area by a factor of as much as 1.5. neutral molecules (including H O),64,150 and it has been
2
(3) Yet another mechanism for lowering the melting suggested that above T fatty acid chains are free to
m
point of fats is the incorporation of cyclopropane- rotate by 120° around single bonds from trans to gauche
containing fatty acids (Chapter 21). conformations. When such rotation occurs about
On the other hand, as we have already seen, cho- adjacent, or nearly adjacent single bonds, kinks are
lesterol tends to reduce the mobility of molecules in formed. If a kink originates near the bilayer surface,
membranesand causes phospholipid molecules to as will usually be the case, a small molecule may jump
occupy a smaller area than they would otherwise. into the void created. Since the kink can easily migrate
Myelin is especially rich in long-chain sphingolipids through the bilayer, a small molecule may be carried
and cholesterol, both of which tend to stabilize artificial through with it.151,152 The same factors may assist
bilayers. Within our bodies, the bilayers of myelin tend larger protein molecules which function in membrane
to be almost solid. Bilayers of some gram-positive transport. They probably also account for the substan-
bacteria growing at elevated temperatures are stiffened tial degree of hydration of bilayers which involves
by biosynthesis of bifunctional fatty acids with co- both the polar head groups and water diffusing through
valently joined “tails” that link the opposite sides of the nonpolar interior.153
a bilayer.149 Not only can molecules diffuse through membranes
Why must membrane lipids be mobile? One but also membrane lipids and proteins can move with
reason is probably to be found in the participation of respect to neighboring molecules. The rates of lateral

--- Page 403 ---

400 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
diffusion of lipids in bilayers and of antigenic proteins value at an ionic strength of 10–3 M and to still greater
on cell surfaces are rapid.80,154 If diffusion of phospho- distances at lower ionic strengths.
lipids is assumed to occur by a pairwise exchange of The net surface charge of a cell and the associated
neighboring molecules, the frequency of such exchanges electrical double layer are important in interactions
can be estimated155 as ~ 107s–1. However proteins may between cells and may influence the development of
meet many obstacles to free diffusion.156 Lateral diffu- extracellular structure such as basement membranes.
sion is often measured by the technique of fluorescence The net negative charge on cells also gives rise to an
recovery after photobleaching. One small spot in experimentally measurable electrophoretic mobility.
a bilayer that contains a dye attached to a lipid or a A characteristic of living cells is the maintenance
protein is bleached by a laser beam. Lateral diffusion ofionic gradients across the plasma membrane. Thus
of nearby unbleached molecules into the bleached almost all cells accumulate K+, even “pumping” it from
spot can then be observed.80 Lateral diffusion can also very dilute external solutions. Cells also exclude sodium,
be observed by NMR spectroscopy157 and by single- pumping it out from the cytoplasm by mechanisms
particle tracking.158,159 In addition to diffusion there considered in Section C,2. If a microelectrode is inserted
may often be a flow of membrane constituents in through a cell membrane and the potential difference
directions dictated by metabolism.160 Although lateral is measured between the inside and outside of the cell,
diffusion is fast a “flip-flop” transfer of a phospholipid aresting potential which, in nerve cells, may be as
from one side of the bilayer to the other may require high as 90 mV is observed. The origin of the potential
many seconds.161 However, a sudden increase in the appears to lie in the concentration differences of ions.
calcium ion concentration, an important intramolecular From the value of ∆G for dilution of an ion (Eq. 6-25)
signal (Chapter 11), activates a “scramblase” protein and the relationship between ∆G and electrode poten-
which promotes a rapid transbilayer movement of tial (Eq. 6-63), the Nernst equation (Eq. 8-2) can be
phospholipids.162 derived. According to this equation, which applies to
a single ion for which the membrane is permeable,
Electrical properties of membranes. Biological
membranes serve as barriers to the passage of ions and
polar molecules, a fact that is reflected in their high RT c  0.059 c 
E = ln 1 = log 1 at 25°C
electrical resistance and capacitance. The electrical m nF c  n c 
2 2 (8-2)
resistance is usually 103 ohms cm–2, while the capaci-
tance is 0.5 – 1.5 microfarad (µF) cm–2. The correspond-
ing values for artificial membranes are ~ 107 ohms cm–2 a 10-fold concentration difference across the membrane
and 0.6 – 0.9 µF cm–2. The lower resistance of biological for a monovalent ion (n = 1) would lead to a 59-mV
membranes must result from the presence of proteins membrane potential, E . Since membranes are relatively
m
and other ion-carrying substances or of pores in the impermeable to sodium ions, it is generally conceded
membranes. The capacitance values for the two types that for many membranes the origin of the membrane
of membrane are very close to those expected for a potential lies mainly with the potassium ion concen-
bilayer with a thickness of ~ 2.5 nm and a dielectric tration difference which is maintained by the Na+, K+-
constant of 2.54,84,163 The electrical potential gradient ATPase (Section C). A more complete equation takes
is steep. account of K+, Na+, and Cl- together with their respec-
Outer cell surfaces usually carry a net negative tive permeabilities.167– 169 Note also that Eq. 6-64 is also
charge, the result of phosphate groups of phospholipids, often called the Nernst equation.170
of carboxylate groups on proteins, and of sialic acids Protons are also pumped across cytoplasmic and
attached to glycoproteins. This negatively charged inner mitochondrial membranes, a topic of Chapter 18.
surface layer attracts ions of the opposite charge (coun- The flow of protons from inside to outside also contri-
terions), including protons, and repels those of the butes to the membrane potential. The positive charges
same charge. The result is development of a diffuse of H+, K+, and other cations associated with the exter-
electrical double layer consisting of the fixed nal membrane surface are balanced by the negative
negative charges on the surface and a positive ionic charges of protein molecules as well as Cl– and phos-
atmosphere extending into the solution for a distance phate anions that are in or near to the inner surface of
that depends upon the ionic strength.164– 166 This ionic the membranes.
atmosphere is analogous to that postulated by the Another possibility for proton flow has intrigued
Debye–Hückel theory (Chapter 6). At the physiological biophysicists for years. Membranes often display a
ionic strength of 0.145 M the thickness of the double substantial electrical conductivity in a lateral direction
layer, taken as the distance at which the electrical along the membrane surface.171– 173 Electrical conduction
potential falls to a certain fraction of that at the cell may involve movement of protons along hydrogen-
surface,164,165 is about 0.8 nm. However, the double- bonded lines, e.g., involving ethanolamine head
layer thickness increases to about three times this groups or phosphate groups and bridging water as

--- Page 404 ---

B. Membranes 401
previously discussed (see also Eq. 9-96). Alternatively, referred to as intrinsic or integral membrane
conduction may depend upon membrane-associated proteins. Proteins that are more loosely associated
proteins.174 This lateral proton conduction may be with the membrane, principally at the inner surface,
important to many proton-driven membrane processess, are called peripheral.61
such as rotation of bacterial flagella, ATP synthesis, and
pumping of ions (Chapter 18). Integral membrane proteins. Membrane pro-
teins are hard to crystallize178 and precise structures
The two sides of a membrane. Many observa- are known for only a few of them.179– 181 A large frac-
tions indicate great differences between the inside and tion of all of the integral membrane proteins contain
outside of the membranes that surround cells.51,175,176 one or more membrane-spanning helices with loops
Bretscher and Raff62 observed that, among the phos- of peptide chain between them. Folded domains in
pholipids of the erythrocyte membrane, phosphatidyl- the cytoplasm or on the external membrane surface
choline predominates in many mammals but is replaced may also be present. The best-known structure of a
by sphingomyelin in ruminants. Sheep erythrocytes transmembrane protein is that of the 248-residue
are resistant to cobra venom phospholipase A, which bacteriorhodopsin. It consists of seven helical segments
is known to remove the fatty acid from the central that span the plasma membrane (Fig. 23-45) and serves
position on the glycerol of phosphatidylcholine, causing as a light-activated proton pump. Other proteins with
lysis of the cells. The resistance of sheep erythrocytes similar structures act as hormone receptors in eukary-
suggested that the sphingomyelin is on the outside of otic membranes. A seven-helix protein embedded in a
the membrane while the phosphatidylethanolamine membrane is depicted in Fig. 8-5 and also, in more
and other phospholipids are inside. By inference, detail, in Fig. 11-6.
phosphatidylcholine is also largely on the outside of The most hydrophobic integral membrane proteins
plasma membranes. Supporting this conclusion is the can be extracted into organic solvents such as mixtures
observation that most of the reactive amino groups of of chloroform and methanol. One such proteolipid
phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylserine protein, the 23.5-kDa lipophilin, accounts for over half
are found on the inside (cytoplasmic) surfaces.177 the protein of myelin.57,182 The purified protein from
Since the total content of phosphatidylcholine and rat brain contains 66% of nonpolar amino acids and six
sphingomyelin often exceeds that of phosphatidyletha- molecules of covalently bound palmitic acid and other
nolamine and phosphatidylserine, the bilayer would fatty acids per peptide chain in thioester linkage to
be incomplete on the inside of the membrane were it cysteine side chains. This protein evidently has four
not for the presence of proteins, which contribute more transmembrane helical segments with the six fatty acid
to the inside than to the outside surface. chains incorporated into the membrane bilayer. It also
Glycolipids are usually on the outside of plasma has cytoplasmic and extracellular loops, one of which
membranes with the attached sugar chains projecting binds inositol hexakisphosphate (Ins P-6). (Fig. 11-9).183
into the surrounding water. An important generalization The myelin proteolipid is an essential component of
is that sugar groups attached either to lipids or to proteins the myelin sheath and defects in this protein are asso-
tend to be on outer cell surfaces or on materials that are ciated with some demyelinating diseases57 which are
being exported from cells. An exception is found in the discussed in Chapter 30.
abundant galactolipids of chloroplasts. There are many known topologies for helix-bundle
membrane proteins with the number of membrane-
spanning helices ranging from 1 to 14 or more e.g.,
2. Membrane Proteins see Fig. 8-23.184– 186 A topology can often be predicted
using suitable computer programs.187– 191 A first step
The many proteins present within or attached to is to identify all sequences of 20 or more residues that
membranes have a variety of functions. Some are could form a helix sufficiently hydrophobic to allow
obviously structural, tying other proteins to a mem- good nonpolar interactions with the bilayer core.
brane or providing a base for projecting fimbriae, Sequences that can form amphipathic (amphiphilic)
flagella, and other appendages. Some proteins of the helices must also be considered because two or more
outer surface act as anchoring points for macromolecules of these can pack together in a membrane with their
that lie between cells. The inner surfaces of membranes hydrophilic sides together, sometimes forming pores
are attached to the cytoskeleton (Chapter 7). Many (see Section C,1).192
of the proteins embedded in membranes control the Predictions of membrane protein structure are in
passage of materials across membranes. Others serve part based on the positive-inside rule which states
as receptors that sense the presence of specific com- that positively charged lysine and arginine residues
pounds or of light. Membranes may also contain will not pass through a membrane but will remain on
foreign proteins such as subunits of virus coats. Pro- the negatively charged cytoplasmic surface. Often,
teins that are deeply embedded in membranes are N-terminal parts of a protein will pass through a

--- Page 405 ---

402 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
membrane and will contain glutamate or aspartate A third important structural pattern involves
residues whose side chains carry negative charges. extensive use of amphipathic helices that lie partially
These tend to remain outside of the membrane where embedded in a membrane surface. For example, the
they are attracted to the positive charges on the mem- blood lipoproteins are lipid particles partially coated
brane outer surface. Positively charged residues may by amphipathic helices (Chapter 21).200,201
interact with phosphate groups of phospholipids and
tyrosine and tryptophan side chains may interact with Anchors for proteins. Proteins with membrane-
the carbonyl groups of the ester linkages.192a,b spanning sequences are usually anchored into the
After probable transmembrane helical regions have membranes with the help of many polar side chains,
been identified a residue-by-residue attempt can be often including glycosylated residues, in the ends and
made to identify cytosolic and extracellular loops. loops that protrude on the two sides of the membranes.
Chemical reactivities of the naturally occurring side Other proteins are anchored by insertion into mem-
chains can also be examined. Residues within the branes of nonpolar groups. These include fatty acyl
helix bundle will be protected. Mutations can be pre- groups at N termini, fatty acid ester groups on serine,
pared systematically by “scanning mutagenesis.” For threonine, or cysteine side chains, and polyprenyl groups
example, presumed extracellular loops in the erythro- attached to cysteine side chains as thioethers.202 Many
cyte band 3 protein (next section) have been mutated membrane-anchored proteins carry the saturated 14-
by introduction of N-glycosylation acceptor sites (Asn- carbonmyristoyl group in amide linkage with an
X-Ser / Thr). If the sequence is at least 12–14 residues N-terminal glycine of the protein.203– 206 The fatty acid
away from transmembrane sequences it will probably chain is added at the time of the protein synthesis, i.e.,
be glycosylated in a suitable laboratory test system.193 cotranslationally. It can intercalate into the membrane
Within a transmembrane domain amino acid residues bilayer but provides a relatively weak anchor.207 The
can be systematically replaced with alanine (“alanine 16-carbonpalmitoyl group is typically added to a
scanning mutagenesis”) or with cysteine and effects on cysteine thiol in recognition sequences at various
the protein can be observed. Substitution with cys- positions in a protein.182,202,208,209 The modification
teine allows another possibility: Two cysteines on occurs after protein synthesis, i.e., posttranslationally.
adjacent transmembrane helices may be linked as Because thioesters are relatively unstable, palmitoy-
disulfides if they are close enough.194,195 Discovery of lation is regarded as a reversible modification.210
such neighboring pairs can be very valuable in at- A third lipid anchor is provided by the polyprenyl
tempting to establish relationships of one helix to an- farnesyl (15-carbon) and geranylgeranyl (20-carbon)
other. A cloned gene can also be split into two pieces groups in thioether linkage to cysteine residues. These
prior to crosslinking of cysteine side chains. This may must be present in specific recognition sequences at
facilitate mapping of tertiary interactions within trans- the C termini of proteins, most often with the sequence
membrane proteins.196 Molecular dynamics methods CAAX.211 – 215 The prenylation (also called isoprenyla-
for modeling helix bundle proteins are also being tion) reaction is followed by proteolytic removal of the
developed.197 last three residues (AAX) and methylation of the new
Not all integral membrane proteins have a helix C-terminal carboxyl group as is discussed in Chapter
bundle structure. Some of the simplest transmembrane 11, Section D,3. See also Chapter 22, Section A,4.
proteins are the subunits of bacterial viruses and pili A lipoprotein present in the periplasmic space of
(Figs. 7-7 and 7-9) The 7-nm α-helical rods of phage E. coli is anchored to the outer bacterial membrane by
M13 have a 20-residue hydrophobic section (residues a triacylated modified N-terminal cysteine containing
25-46) which is preceded by a negatively charged se- a glyceryl group in thioether linkage as shown in the
quence that appears to form a short amphipathichelix following structure (see also Section E,1).
that lies on theexternal surface of the membrane and
helps to anchor the subunit. A positively charged cluster
O
at the opposite end of the hydrophobic helical region H
Protein
N
remains in the cytoplasm.180,186,198 The porins, which N COOH
H
form pores in outer membranes of bacteria and ribosomes, O
are large 16-strand β cylinders (Section C,1).179,180 It O S
has been suggested that this different basic architecture O
may be related to the fact that the porin polypeptides O
must be exported through the inner membrane before
being refolded in the periplasm.199 Keep in mind that O
aβ strand of nine residues can span the 33-nm bilayer
core just as well as can a 22-residue helix. Beta struc- A related anchor that uses diphytanylglycerylation
tures as well as shorter helices may well be present in is found in certain proteins of archaeobacteria.216
proteins that also contain membrane-spanning helices.

--- Page 406 ---

B. Membranes 403
O They usually do not dissolve readily in water, but red
H
Protein
H3C N
N COOH
cell membranes can be almost completely solubilized in
H water using a 5 x 10–3 M solution of the chelating agent
O
S EDTA (Table 6-9) or by 0.1 M tetramethyl ammonium
bromide.226 These observations suggested that ionic
O
linkages between proteins, or between proteins and
O
phospholipids, are important to membrane stability.
Nonionic detergents such as those of the Triton X series
orβ-octylglucopyranoside also solubilize most mem-
A series of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) brane proteins,178,227– 229 whereas ionic detergents such
anchors that are covalently linked to a variety of pro- as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) often cause unfolding
teins utilize diacylglycerol or alkylacylglycerol for and denaturation of peptide chains.
attachment to a bilayer. The proteins are joined through Gel electrophoresis of plasma membrane proteins
their C-terminal carboxyl groups to the diacylglycerol in SDS solution yields ~ 10 prominent bands and at
by a chain of covalently linked ethano-
lamine, phosphate, mannose, gluco-
samine, and myo-inositol as shown in
Fig. 8-13.217– 223 The proteins are linked Protein (C-terminus)
to the diacylglycerol through the O
conserved structure: H 2 N-protein→ HN
ethanolamine→P→6Manα1→2Manα1→
Ethanolamine
6Manα1→4GlcNAc→Ins→diacylglycerol.
The structure in Fig. 8-13, which
O O
anchors the small Thy-1 antigen to P
–O O Manα1
surfaces of rat thymocytes,224 contains H
O
additional mannose, N-acetylgalac- HO O Man
tosamine, and ethanolamine phos-
HO 1 α
phate. These groups may be missing + NH3 –O O
or substituted by other groups in other P
O O O +
anchors.225 For example, that of human HO O Man NH3
erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase lacks HO 2 1 α
the extra mannose and GalNAc of the O
T gr h o y u -1 p a a n tt c a h c o h r e d bu to t c a o n n o ta x i y n g s e a n p a a t l o m m it o o f yl G H a O lNAc O N
C
H
H3
O O 4 6 O O P M O a – n
the inositol. This provides an addi- O HO 1 α OH
tional hydrocarbon tail that can enter HO
the bilayer.218 Other PI-anchored HO O 4 GlcN
HO O
proteins include enzymes, such as
alkaline phosphatase and lipoprotein
lipase, and surface proteins of the
H2N
O
O
parasitesTrypanosoma,225Leishmania, Inositol HO 6 1 O P O–
andToxoplasma.220 Some adhesion HO 2 H
molecules and a variety of other outer HO
O O O
surface proteins are similarly attached C O C O
or
to membranes. Analysis of the genome Acyl
ofCaenorhabditis elegans suggests that
the nematode contains over 40 GPI-
tailed proteins and perhaps more than
120.225a Membrane
(1/2 thickness)
Analyzing erythrocyte mem-
branes. The proteins of red blood cell
membranes were among the first to be
studied. Because membrane proteins
are present in small amounts and tend
Figure 8-13 Structure of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (also called phospha-
to be hard to dissolve without denatur-
tidylinositol-glycan) membrane anchors. The core structure is shown in black.
ation, they have been difficult to study.
The green parts are found in the Thy-1 protein and / or in other anchors.

--- Page 407 ---

404 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
H3C H
H
H3C C C CH2 O Spectrin
H3C
H3C
C O CH2
n
H Ankyrin
CH3
Polyoxyethylene p-t-octyl phenol: the Triton X series of detergents.
n = 9 – 10 for Triton X-100 and 7 – 8 for Triton X-114.
Pallidin 72kDa
least 30 less intense bands ranging in molecular mass
from 10 to 360 kDa.230,231 Proteins of erythrocyte ghosts,
Dematin
and the usual system for numbering them, are shown
in Fig. 8-14. Some very important proteins known to
be present in this membrane, such as (Na+ + K+)-activated
ATPase (Section C,2), are found in such low quantities
(e.g., a few hundred molecules in a single red blood
cell)62 that they do not show up in electropherograms.
Mitochondrial membranes appear to be more complex
Hemoglobin
than plasma membranes, but myelin has a somewhat
simpler composition. A B C D E
Glycoproteins. Many of the integral proteins of Figure 8-14 SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of
membranes are glycoproteins.234– 236 These may some- human erythrocyte ghosts. (A) From untreated cells. (B) From
times be recognized in electropherograms because they cells digested externally with chymotrypsin. (C) Inside-out
vesicles prepared from cells pretreated with chymotrypsin.
are stained by the periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) procedure.
(D) The same inside-out vesicles after further treatment with
At least 20 glycoproteins are present in erythrocyte ghosts,
chymotrypsin. (E) Polypeptides released by the chymotryptic
and glycoproteins appear to be prominent protein
treatment of the inside-out vesicles. The peptides are numbered
components of the plasma membranes of all eukaryotes
according to the system of Steck232; Hb, hemoglobin. From
and of primitive archaebacteria such as Halobacterium. Lunaet al.233
The most abundant glycoprotein of red blood cell
membranes is the 95-kDa PAS-reactive band 3 protein
(Fig. 8-14) which makes up ~ 25% of the total mem-
brane protein.236– 240 A variety of asparagine-linked weight carbohydrate. Its 131-residue chain has a
oligosaccharides based on the core hexasaccharide single ~ 23-residue membrane-spanning helix. The
structure shown in Chapter 4, Section D,2 are present first 50 residues at the N terminus, which project from
and apparently project into the surrounding medium. the outside surface of the membrane, include many
Electron micrographs of freeze-fractured surfaces serines and threonines. Their side chains carry 15
through the membrane bilayer (Fig. 8-15) show ~ 4200 O-linked tetrasaccharides and one complex N-linked
particles of 8 nm diameter per square micrometer, oligosaccharide. There are a total of ~ 160 sugar residues
randomly distributed and apparently embedded in per peptide chain, largely N-acetylgalactosamine,
the membrane. These probably represent dimers of galactose, and sialic acid. Some of the oligosaccharides
the glycoprotein. The amino acid sequence of the contain MNO blood group determinants234,241 (Box 4-C).
911-residue protein suggests 13 membrane-spanning Because of a high content of sialic acid, glycophorin
helices in the 550-residue C-terminal domain and that also carries a large negative charge. The 35-residue
the 41-kDa N-terminal domain projects inward into C-terminal domain is hydrophilic and rich in proline,
the cytoplasm.236,240 Among the first 31 residues are glutamate, and aspartate. It probably extends into the
16 of aspartate or glutamate. These provide a highly cytoplasm and may bind calcium ions or interact with
negatively charged tail that is able to interact electro- – NH + groups on phospholipid heads.
3
statically with other proteins.236 Among these are com- If all the sugar residues of the glycophorin mole-
ponents of the cytoskeleton, which appears to be anchored cules in an erythrocyte were spread over the surface of
to the membrane via the band 3 protein. The band 3 the cell they could cover approximately one-fifth of its
protein is also a substrate for transglutaminase (Eq. 2-23) surface in a loose network. However, it is more likely
which creates covalent crosslinks to other proteins.237 that they form bushy projections of a more localized
Another major function of the band 3 glycoprotein is sort. These oligosaccharides not only act as immuno-
to form channels for the transport of anions (Section C,2). logical determinants but also serve as receptors for
Another integral glycoprotein of erythrocytes, the influenza viruses. Other glycoproteins related to
31-kDaglycophorinA(PAS-1),235,241– 244 is ~ 60% by glycophorin A occur in smaller amounts.244

--- Page 408 ---

B. Membranes 405
with separate binding domains for spectrin and band
3 protein. The latter domain contains 24 ankyrin
repeats, 33-residue modules, also found in a variety
of other proteins.258,259
Ankyrin binds firmly to the band 3 glycoprotein
which is embedded in the membrane. The 78 kDa
band 4.1 protein is another major component of the
erythrocyte membrane skeleton.261,262 Protein 4.1
binds both to ankyrin and also to glycophorin C,
providing another anchor to an integral membrane
protein (Fig. 8-16C). Spectrin:actin:protein 4.1 in a
1:2:1 ratio are the major components of the membrane
skeleton.262 Other less abundant proteins include
adducin, protein 4.2 (pallidin, which interacts with
band 3 protein),263 protein 4.9 (dematin, an actin
bundling protein),264 and the muscle proteins tro-
pomyosin and tropomodulin (Chapter 19). While
spectrin and ankyrin of erythrocyte membranes have
been studied most intensively, related proteins occur
in other cells.265 Spectrin of brain and other tissues is
Figure 8-15 Freeze-fractured membranes of two erythrocyte
also known as fodrin.266 Dystrophin and (cid:1)-actinin,
“ghosts.” The upper fracture face (PF) shows the interior of
the membrane “half” closest to the cytoplasm. The smooth actin-crosslinking proteins of muscle, are also mem-
region is lipid and contains numerous particles. The lower bers of the spectrin superfamily.248 Protein 4.1 also
face, the extracellular half (EF), possesses fewer particles. occurs in various organisms,267 in various tissues, and
The space between the two is nonetched ice. See Figs. 1-4 in various locations in cells.268
and 1-15 for electron micrographs of sections through bio- What is the function of the membrane skeleton?
logical membranes. Courtesy of Knute A. Fisher.
There is a group of hereditary diseases including
spherocytosis in which erythrocytes do not maintain
their biconcave disc shape but become spherical or
have other abnormal shapes and are extremely frag-
Connections to the cytoskeleton. About one- ile.269– 272 Causes of spherocytosis include defective
third of the protein of the red blood cell membrane is formation of spectrin tetramers and defective association
accounted for by a pair of larger hydrophobic peptides of spectrin with ankyrin or the band 4.1 protein.265,273
calledspectrin with molecular masses of 280 kDa (α Thus, the principal functions of these proteins in
chain) and 246 kDa (β chain).245– 250a These are found erythrocytes may be to strengthen the membrane and
in bands 1 and 2 of Fig. 8-14. The spectrin monomers to preserve the characteristic shape of erythrocytes
consist largely of 106- to 119- residue repeat sequences during their 120-day lifetime in the bloodstream. In
each of which folds into a short triple-helical bundle other cells the spectrins are able to interact with micro-
(Fig. 8-16B). The beaded-chain monomers associate tubules, which are absent from erythrocytes, and to
readily to αβ dimers, long ~ 100 nm thin flexible rods microtubule-associated proteins of the cytoskeleton
which associate further to (αβ) tetramers. The latter, (Chapter 7, Section F).270 In nerve terminals a protein
2
in turn, bind to monomers or to small oligomers of similar to erythrocyte protein 4.1 may be involved in
actin. In red blood cells the actin crosslinks the spec- transmitter release.274 The cytoskeleton is also actively
trin tetramers into a two-dimensional “fishnet” (Fig. 8- involved in transmembrane signaling.
16A), the ~ 85,000 spectrin tetramers uniformly
covering the entire inner surface (130 µm2) of the Integrins and focal adhesions. Mature erythro-
erythrocyte.245,251 The inner location of spectrin was cytes have no nucleus and lack the microtubules and
established by the fact that chemical treatments252 that actin filaments that span other cells. In nonerythroid
covalently label groups on proteins exposed on the cells the major connections of the cytoskeleton to
outer surface of erythrocytes (e.g., iodination with the membrane are through large αβ heterodimeric
lactoperoxidase; Chapter 16) did not label spectrin.257 membrane-spanning proteins called integrins (Fig.
Spectrin also binds to one domain of another large 8-17). These proteins, as well as the ends of the actin
215-kDa peripheral protein called ankyrin (band 2.1, filaments, tend to be concentrated in regions long
in Fig. 8-14) which anchors the spectrin network to the observed and described by microscopists as focal
membrane.258,259 Ankyrin is actually a multigene adhesions.275– 279 These are also sites of interaction
family of related proteins that are present in many with the external proteins that form the extracellular
metazoan tissues.258,260 These are modular proteins matrix (ECM). There are at least 16 different integrin

--- Page 409 ---

406 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
A Figure 8-16 The erythrocyte membrane skeleton. (A)
Electron micrograph showing a region of the membrane
skeleton (negatively stained, X 200,000) and artificially
spread to a surface area nine to ten times as great as in the
native membrane. Spreading makes it possible to obtain
clear images of the skeleton whose protein components are
so densely packed and so subject to thermal flexing on the
native, unspread membrane that it is difficult to visualize the
individual molecules and the remarkably regular way that
they are connected. The predominantly hexagonal and
pentagonal network is composed of spectrin tetramers cross-
linked by junctions containing actin oligomers and band 4.1
protein. Band 4.9 protein and tropomyosin are probably also
bound to the oligomers, whose length (13 actin monomers
long) corresponds to the length of a tropomyosin molecule.
From Byers and Branton.253,254 Courtesy of Daniel Branton.
(B) Proposed triple α-helical structure of a single spectrin
repeat unit.255 Courtesy of Ruby I. MacDonald and Alfonso
Mondragón. Each α spectrin chain consists of 20 and each β
spectrin chain of 17 such repeats, which have only partially
conserved sequences. The α and β chains are thought to
associate in a side-by-side fashion and the αβ heterodimers
B
in an end-to-end fashion to give tetramers. These are the
rod-like structures seen in (A) and (C). (C) Cross section of
the unspread membrane and cytoskeleton as pictured by
Luna and Hitt.256 Major interactions among components of
the cytoskeleton are shown. Apparent sizes of the protein
subunits, based on migration positions in SDS-polyacryla-
mide gel electrophoresis are: spectrin (260 and 225 kDa),
adducin (105 and 100 kDa), band 3 (90 to 100 kDa), protein
4.1 (78 kDa), protein 4.2 (pallidin, 72 kDa), dematin (protein
4.9, 48 kDa), glycophorin C (~25 kDa), actin (43 kDa), and
tropomyosin (29 and 27 kDa). Courtesy of Elizabeth J. Luna.
C Membrane
Glycophorin C Anion exchanger
Actin Ankyrin (Band 3) 4.1
Adducin 4.1
4.2
Spectrin
Actin
α chain
Tropomyosin β chain 4.9
Tropomodulin
α subunits, whose external domains consist of up to external matrix to which they bind. They span the
1114 residues, at least 8 β subunits with external do- cell membrane and appear to be actively involved in
mains of up to 678 residues, and at least 22 distinctly communication between the cytoskeleton and external
different αβ heterodimers.280– 282 The N-terminal part proteins.275,277,284 They are often described as
of each α subunit contains seven repeats of ~ 60 resi- receptors for the proteins that bind to them.
dues each, probably arranged as a β-propeller (see Fig.
11-7D or 15-23).281 The integrins are structurally com- Other cell adhesion molecules. Long before the
plex. Some contain a nucleotide-binding domain (see discovery of integrins another class of transmembrane
Figs. 2-13 and 2-27C).283 Integrins have differing and adhesion molecules were recognized as members of
quite exacting specificities toward the proteins of the the immunoglobulin family. These were called cell

--- Page 410 ---

B. Membranes 407
α β α β ECM
PM Integrin
R/E/M
Paxillin
Talin
pp125FAK p-Tyr? Tensin
pp60src α-Actinin
Others Vinculin
Zyxin
F-actin
Tenuin VASP
Figure 8-17 Working model of the protein–protein interactions in focal adhesions determined by in vitro binding experi-
ments and immunolocalization. In addition, several interactions are of relatively low affinity in solution but may be enhanced
at the membrane surface. Abbreviations are: ECM, extracellular matrix; PM, plasma membrane; p-Tyr-?, unknown phosphoty-
rosine-containing protein; R/E/M, member of the radixin/ezrin/moesin family; VASP, vasodilator-stimulated phosphopro-
tein. Diagram is modified from Simon et al.285
adhesion molecules (CAMs) by Edelman.286,287 These receptors of the Ig superfamily. Each of the corecep-
molecules go by names such as intercellular adhesion tors in a pair has binding sites for other ligands as well
molecule-1 (ICAM-1), neural cell adhesion molecule (Fig. 8-18). The CAMs and many other adhesion
(NCAM),288,289 liver cell adhesion molecule (LCAM), molecules are most abundantly expressed in embryon-
vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM), and platelet ic tissues in which cells often migrate to new locations
endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM).290,291 and for which the communication with neighboring
Many of these proteins, including the T-cell antigen cells is especially active. Many adhesion molecules
CD2,291a were first recognized on leukocyte surfaces bind only weakly and reversibly to their ligands,
as differentiation antigens and are often designated by allowing cells to move.
the“Cluster of Differentiation” names (Chapter 31). Thecadherins are calcium-dependent adhesion
For example, ICAM-1 is also called CD54 and PECAM proteins that mediate direct cell–cell interactions.295,296
CD31.290,292 The genes for these proteins are often The external parts of the cadherins also have repeated
expressed differentially in various tissues and the structural domains with the Ig fold.297-298b They have
mRNA molecules formed undergo alternative splic- high affinity for each other, allowing cadherins from
ing.287,289 The extracellular domains of these adhesion two different cells to interact and tie the cells together
molecules consist largely of Ig domains and most have with a zipper-like interaction that is stabilized by the
a single transmembrane helix and a small cytoplasmic bound Ca2+ ions,297,300 and may be relatively long-
C-terminal domain. Some of the alternatively spliced lived. The gene for cadherin E is often mutated in
forms are attached to the membrane by PGI tails.287,289 breast cancers and may be an important tumor
ICAM-1 (Fig. 8-18) has five Ig domains and VCAM-1 suppressor gene (Box 11-D).301
has seven,293 but some CAMs have only two.294 The
CAMs are glycoproteins, often with large N-linked Peripheral proteins of the outer membrane
oligosaccharides attached. The widely distributed N- surface. Many integral membrane glycoproteins have
CAM contains long α2→8 linked polysialic acid chains their sugar-bearing portions exposed on the outer
on two of the three N-glycosylation sites in the fifth Ig surface of the plasma membrane. Among these are
domain.289 The CAMs are often referred to as recep- receptors, ion pumps, and biochemical markers of
tors. Their ligands include surface proteins such as individuality. In addition to these proteins, which are
fibronectin (next section) but also the integrins, which actually embedded in the bilayer, there are external
are also called receptors. Integrins are coreceptors for peripheral proteins. One of the best known of these is

--- Page 411 ---

408 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
A
B
Figure 8-18 (A) Diagram of the ICAM-1 molecule. The structures labeled D1–D5 are the Ig domains. The glycosylation sites
are labeled with small lollipops and approximate sites for binding of the α chain (CD11a) of the integrin called LFA-1, for the
macrophage antigen Mac-1, for fibrinogen, for a ligand from erythrocytes infected by the malaria organism Plasmodium falci-
parum (PFIE), and for human rhinoviruses (HRV) are labeled. The binding sites are indicated schematically but each one is a
complex interacting surface complementary to its ligand. From Bella et al.299 Courtesy of Michael Rossman. (B) Structure of
two N-terminal domains of E-cadherin. The molecules of the dimer are related by a noncrystallographic twofold symmetry
axis running vertically in the plane of the page. Clusters of three calcium ions are bound in the linker regions, connecting the
N- and C-terminal domains of each molecule and, in this view, are separated by the twofold axis. The N- and C-terminal
domains are composed of seven-stranded β-barrels showing the same topology and similar three-dimensional structures.
From Nagar et al.296
fibronectin (from fibra,“fiber”, and nectare,“to nal domain. A second domain binds collagen and a
bind”).302– 309 This very large 470-kDa glycoprotein is a domain near the C-terminus binds heparin. Several
disulfide-linked dimer. Appearing under the electron different integrins of cell surfaces bind to the region of
microscope as having two 60-nm arms,305 fibronectin the 8th, 9th, and 10th type III repeats.308 The specificity
molecules join together and surround animal cells, of the binding depends to a large extent on the presence
anchoring other proteins and carbohydrates of the of the specific tripeptide sequence Arg-Gly-Asp
ECM to the cells. Fibronectin binds tightly to several (RGD) in a type III repeat (Fig. 8-19B). Peptide
different cell surface integrins and also to collagen and sequences such as the PHSRN (Fig. 8-19B) and oth-
to glycosaminoglycans of the matrix. It binds to the ers310 also participate in binding to specific integrins.
blood-clotting protein fibrinogen, to actin, and also to Initial interactions are noncovalent but fibrin and
staphylococci and other bacteria. Each peptide chain collagen gradually become covalently attached to
of the fibronectin dimer is organized as several do- fibronectin through isopeptide linkages formed by
mains. Fibrin and staphylococci bind to the N-termi- transglutaminase (Eq. 2-23). This enzyme is abundant

--- Page 412 ---

B. Membranes 409
A 40 kDa
12 13 14 15 101112 C
Type I domain Type II domain Type III domain
S S
S S
N 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 V 15 101112 C
70 kDa 9 kDa 110 kDa 30 kDa
B
Figure 8-19 (A) Schematic diagram of a human fibronectin molecule showing one complete
~ 250-kDa chain consisting largely of 29 type I, II, or III fibronectin domains with a 12-kDa
type III connecting segment or “V-region.” The second chain, for which only the C-terminal
portion is shown, is identical to the first except for the absence of the V-region as a result of
alternative splicing of the mRNA. The two chains are joined in antiparallel fashion by a pair
of– S – S – bridges near the C terminus.313 The kDa sizes refer to fragments generated by the
action of thermolysin. After Ingham et al.306 (B) MolScript ribbon drawing of the structure of
the ninth and tenth type III repeats in human fibronectin. The biologically active peptide
segments PHSRN and RGD are represented in a stick and ball mode. The arrow marks valine
1416, next to which a polyglycine linker of various lengths has been inserted experimentally
in order to study interactions between modules.308 From Spitzfaden et al.314
in many developing tissues but often disappears as the
3. Enzymes and Membrane Metabolism
tissues mature.311,312 Fibronectin was formerly known
as the “large external transformation-sensitive pro-
Many of the proteins of membranes are enzymes.
tein,” a name derived from the fact that its quantity is
For example, the entire electron transport system of
greatly reduced in many virus-transformed cells. This
mitochondria (Chapter 18) is embedded in membranes
might explain the loss of adhesiveness and of “contact
and a number of highly lipid-soluble enzymes have
inhibition” observed for cancer cells (Box 11-D).
been isolated. Examples are phosphatidylserine
There are 20 isoforms of human fibronectin.
decarboxylase, which converts phosphatidylserine to
These arise by alternative splicing of the primary
phosphatidylethanolamine in biosynthesis of the
gene transcript. Their formation is developmentally
latter, and isoprenoid alcohol phosphokinase,
regulated.308,315 One of the isoforms is present as a
which participates in bacterial cell wall synthesis
soluble protein (cold-insoluble globulin) in blood
(Chapter 20). A number of ectoenzymes are present
plasma.302 The fibronectins belong to a larger family
predominantly on the outsides of cell membranes.329
ofcytoadhesins, among which are the blood-clotting
Enzymes such as phospholipases (Chapter 12), which
proteins fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor
are present on membrane surfaces, often are relatively
(Chapter 12), and also thrombospondin,vitronectin,316
inactive when removed from the lipid environment
tenascin,317– 320laminin,321,322 osteopontin,323 and
but are active in the presence of phospholipid bilay-
collagens. These proteins all have a modular construc-
ers.330,331 The distribution of lipid chain lengths as
tion with repeated domains, often of several different
well as the cholesterol content of the membrane can
types.324 For example, tenascin contains 14 1/2 EGF
affect enzymatic activities.332
domains (Table 7-3), 16 fibronectin type III repeats,
Why are membranes so important to cells? Be-
and a C-terminal segment homologous to fibrino-
sides their obvious importance in enclosing and defin-
gens.325 Laminin (see Fig. 8-33) also has EGF-like
ing the limits of cells, membranes are the result of a
modules. Most of these proteins also have in common
natural aggregation of amphipathic molecules. They
the presence of the RGD sequence, which binds the
also represent a natural arrangement for boundaries
cytoadhesins to those integrins and other molecules
between different aqueous phases within a cell. In
that carry RGD receptor sites.304,326– 328 The extracellu-
addition, membranes are the “habitat” for many rela-
lar matrix is discussed further in Section E,2.
tively nonpolar molecules formed by metabolism.
These include proteins with hydrophobic surfaces and

--- Page 413 ---

410 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
those with membrane anchors. The semiliquid interi- coefficientP which is related to the diffusion coeffi-
or of the membrane permits distortion of the bilayer cientD (Eq. 8-3).
and the addition or subtraction of proteins (and low-
molecular-mass materials) in response to metabolic J = –D m Kc / ∆x = –P∆c (8-3)
processes in the adjacent cytoplasm.
The principal factor providing stability to macro- Here J is the flux of molecules across the membrane,
molecules and membranes is the hydrophobic nature i.e., the number of molecules crossing one cm2 per
of reduced organic compounds. This characteristic second. D is the diffusion coefficient in the bilayer,
m
leads to the separation of lipids, proteins, and other whileK is a partition coefficient, the ratio of the
molecules from the aqueous cytoplasm into oligomeric concentration of the diffusing solute in the bilayer to
aggregates and membranes. However, the best cata- that in water. The concentration gradient of the solute
lysts, including most enzymes, are soluble in water. across the membrane is ∆c, while ∆x is the membrane
Thus, membranes represent thin regions of relative thickness in centimeters. The permeability coefficient
stability adjacent to aqueous regions in which chemi- P for H O through biological membranes333 is about
2
cal reactions occur readily and which tend to contain 1– 10 µm s–1. For H+ and OH–P is 0.1 µm s–1. For
the more polar, the smaller, and the more water-solu- halide ions diffusing across liposome bilayers P ranges
ble materials. The stability of membrane surfaces from 10–5 to 10–3µm s–1,334 fast enough to be of some
provides a means of bringing together reactants and of biological significance. However, for most other ions
promoting complex sequences of biochemical reac- P is less than 10–6µm s–1. Because of their high lipid
tions. For example, membranes contain both oxidative content membranes are quite permeable to nonpolar
enzymes and reactive, dissolved quinones. The mem- materials. For example, anesthetics usually have a
brane–cytoplasmic interfaces may often be the meta- high solubility in lipids, enabling them to penetrate
bolically most active regions of cells. nerve membranes.
Despite their stability, membrane components
have a metabolism of their own which is related to the
high concentrations of oxidizing enzymes located in or 1. Facilitated Diffusion and Active Transport
on membranes. Oxidative reactions provide a mecha-
nism for modification of hydrophobic membrane While simple diffusion may account for the en-
constituents. For example, sterols, prostaglandins, and trance of water, carbon dioxide, oxygen, and anesthetic
other regulatory molecules are initially synthesized as molecules into cells, movement of most substances is
hydrophobic chains attached to water-soluble “head facilitated by protein channels and transporters.335
groups” (Chapter 21). The hydrophobic products of Genes of 76 families of such proteins have been locat-
these synthetic reactions tend to be deposited in mem- ed in the genomes of 18 prokaryotes.335aSome of these
branes. However, attack by oxygen leads to introduc- provide for facilitated diffusion.169,335 Like simple
tion of hydroxyl groups and to a gradual increase in diffusion, it depends upon a concentration gradient
water solubility. As the hydrophilic nature of the and molecules always flow from a higher to a lower
compound is increased through successive enzymatic concentration. A distinguishing feature of facilitated
hydroxylation reactions, the hydrophobic membrane diffusion is a saturationeffect, i.e., a tendency to
constituents eventually redissolve in the water and are reach a maximum rate of flow through the membrane
completely metabolized. Another process that actively as the concentration of the diffusing substance, on the
degrades membrane lipids is attack by hydrolytic high concentration side, is increased. In this character-
enzymes such as the phospholipases. istic it is similar to enzymatic action (Chapter 9).
Inactive transport a material is carried across a
membrane against a concentration gradient, i.e., from
C. The Transport of Molecules through a lower concentration to a higher concentration. This
Membranes process necessarily has a positive Gibbs energy change
(as given by Eq. 6-25) of approximately 5.71 log c /c
2 1
Small neutral molecules, such as water or ethanol, kJ mol–1, where c and c are the higher and lower
2 1
can penetrate membranes by simple diffusion.64,150 concentrations, respectively. The transport process
The rate is determined by the solubility of a substance must be coupled with a spontaneous exergonic reac-
in the membrane, by its diffusion coefficient (see Eq. tion. In primary active transport there is a direct
9-24) in the membrane, and by the difference in its coupling to a reaction such as the hydrolysis of ATP to
concentration between the outside and the inside of “pump” the solute across the membrane. Secondary
the cell. This concentration difference is commonly active transport utilizes the energy of an electro-
referred to as the concentration gradient across the chemical gradient established for a second solute;
membrane. The ease of diffusion through a mem- that is, a second solute is pumped against a concentra-
brane is described quantitatively by a permeability tion gradient and the first solute is then allowed to

--- Page 414 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 411
cross the membrane through an exchange process with as porins. They form a large number of trimeric pores
the second solute (antiport or exchange diffusion). which allow molecules and ions with molecular mass-
Alternatively, both the first and the second solutes es < 600 Da to enter. However, even small proteins are
may pass through the membrane bound to the same excluded. This appears to be a means for protecting
carrier (cotransport or symport). Another form of the bacteria against enzymes such as lysozyme (Chap-
active transport is group translocation, a process in ter 12). Four distinct porins are among the most abun-
which the substance to be transported undergoes dant proteins of the outer membrane of E. coli.338 They
covalent modification, e.g., by phosphorylation. The are designated according to the names of their genes.
modified product enters the cell and within the cell OmpF (a nonspecific, open channel) and OmpC
may be converted back to the unmodified substance. (osmoporin)are encoded by OmpF (outer membrane
Transport processes, whether facilitated or active, protein F) and OmpC genes, respectively. Maltoporin
often require the participation of more than one mem- (LamB) is selective for maltodextrins but also allows
brane protein. Sometimes the name permease is used other small molecules and ions to pass.338– 341a Its
to describe the protein complexes utilized. name comes from its original discovery as a receptor
Like facilitated diffusion, active transport depends for bacteriophage lambda. PhoE (phosphoporin) is a
upon conformational changes in carrier or pore pro- porin with a preference for anions such as sugar phos-
teins, the equilibrium between the two conformations phates while OmpF prefers cations.342 Porin FepA is
depending upon the coupled energy-yielding process. ligand gated, opening to take up the chelated iron
Thus, if ATP provides the energy a phosphorylated from ferric enterochelin (Chapter 16). OmpF, OmpC,
carrier will probably have a different conformation and PhoE all have 16-stranded β-barrel structures (Fig.
than the unphosphorylated protein. A carrier with 8-20).199,343 Maltoporin forms a quite similar 18-
Na+ bound at one site may have a different affinity for stranded barrel. Similar porins are present in many
glucose than the same carrier lacking Na+. A hypo- bacteria.199,344
thetical example of the kind of cycle that can function The porin monomers associate to form trimeric
in active transport is provided by the picture of the channels as is shown in Fig. 8-20B. They all have a
“sodium pump” given in Fig. 8-25. central water-filled, elliptical channel that is constricted
in the center to an “eye” ~ 0.8 x 1.1 nm in size. In this
restriction zone the channel is lined with polar residues
2. Pores, Channels, and Carriers that provide the substrate discrimination and gating.
For example, in OmpF and PhoE there are many posi-
To accommodate the rapid diffusion that is often tively and negatively charged side chains that form the
needed to supply food, water, and inorganic ions to edge of the eye (Fig. 8-20C). The electrostatic potential
cells, membranes contain a variety of small pores and difference across the outer membrane is small, but
channels. The pores may be nonspecific or they may apparently determines whether the porins are in an
be selective for anions or cations or for some other open or a closed state.344a The voltage difference has
chemical characteristics. They may be permanently opposite effects on OmpF and PhoE, apparently as a
open or sometimes closed and referred to as gated. result of the differing distribution of charged
The gating may be controlled by the membrane electri- groups.342,345,346 A key role in determining the voltage
cal potential, by a hormone, by the specific ligand, or dependence may be played by Lys 18 (Fig. 8-20C).342
by other means. Some pores may be small enough to Polyamines (Chapter 24), which are present in the
allow only small molecules such as H O to pass outer membrane, induce closing of porin channels
2
through. Others may be large enough to allow for by binding to specific aspartate and tyrosine side
nonspecific simple diffusion of molecules of low mo- chains.347
lecular mass. Structures are known for only a few. The most abundant protein in the E. coli outer
Large pores tend to be nonspecific, but when the membrane is OmpA. It appears to form a transmem-
solute approaches the pore diameter in size the speci- brane helical bundle. Although it is regarded primarily
ficity increases. Furthermore, diffusion of ions as a structural protein it too acts, in monomeric form,
through pores is influenced strongly by any charged as an inefficient diffusion pore.350 Mitochondrial
groups in or near the pore. Thus, a cation will not outer membranes contain nonspecific pores (mito-
enter a pore containing a net positive charge in its chondrial porins) that allow passage of sucrose and
surface. Any electrical potential difference across the other saccharides of molecular mass up to 2 to 8
membrane, resulting from accumulation of excess kDa.351,352 Similar pore-forming proteins have been
negative ions within the cell, will also affect the diffu- found in plant peroxisomes.353
sion of ions.336,337
Aquaporins. Many biological membranes are not
Porins. The outer membranes of gram-negative sufficiently permeable to water to allow for rapid
bacteria contain several 34- to 38-kDa proteins known osmotic flow. For example, the kidney membranes in

--- Page 415 ---

412 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
portions of Henle’s loop have permeabilities as high Ion channels. Most organisms contain a large
as 2500 µm s–1 (compared to 10–20µm s–1in a 1:1 number of ion channels. One of these, which plays a
cholesterol / phospholipid bilayer).354-355a This high key role in nerve conduction, is the voltage-gated K+
permeability is provided by aquaporin-1 (AQP-1), channel. It is closed most of the time but opens when
formerly called CHIP (channel-forming integral mem- a nerve impulse arrives, dropping the membrane
brane protein) or AQP-CHIP. Aquaporin-1 was first potential from its resting 50 - to 70-mV (negative inside)
identified in erythrocyte membranes and is present in value to below zero. This voltage change opens the
many tissues. The 28-kDa subunits of the protein form channel, allowing a very rapid outflow of K+ ions.364– 367
six-helix bundles, each with a pore in the center. These The channels then close spontaneously. There are
are associated as tetramers in the membrane.356– 358 many different K+ channels but most have a similar
Other aquaporins with related sequences occur architecture.368– 370 The three-dimensional structure
broadly. There are at least ten in mammals.359,359a has been determined for the membrane-spanning part
Plants, which must accommodate to heavy loss of of the K+ channel of Streptomyces lividans (Fig. 8-21).
water in hot dry weather, have aquaporins in both The funnel-shaped tetrameric molecule has a narrow
plasma membranes and tonoplasts.360 Bacteria also conduction channel which contains the selectivity
have aquaporins.356,361 A defect in aquaporin-2 of the filter.
kidney collecting duct leads to nephrogenic diabetes The conduction channel is lined largely with
insipidus, in which the kidneys fail to concentrate hydrophobic groups. The selectivity filter, which
urine in response to secretion of the hormone discriminates between K+ and Na+, is a short (~ 1.2-
vasopressin.355a,362,363 nm-long) narrow (~ 1.0-nm-diameter) portion of the
A B
C
Figure 8-20 MolScript ribbon drawings of the OmpF porin
ofE. coli. (A) View of the 340-residue monomer. (B) View
of the trimer looking down the threefold axis. From Wa-
tanabeet al.348 From atomic coordinates of Cowan et al.349
(C) Molecular model of the constriction zone of the PhoE
porin. Locations of key residues are shown, with positions
of homologous residues in OmpF given in parentheses.
Extracellular loops have been omitted. Constructed from
coordinates of Cowan et al.349 by Samartzidou and Del-
cour.342 Courtesy of Anne Delcour.

--- Page 416 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 413
pore that is aligned roughly with A
the center of the bilayer. It is
formed by four extended peptide
chains, one from each subunit, each
having the “signature sequence”
for K+ channels, TVGYG. In this
sequence the peptide carbonyl
groups all point into the channel.
The consecutive groups of four
carbonyls along the channel form
binding sites for K+, whose ionic
diameter (Table 6-10) is 0.27 nm.
The K+ must lose its hydration
sphere to fit into the 1.0-nm chan-
nel. The site of strongest binding,
occupied by K+ in Fig. 8-21C, lies
just at the C-terminal ends of four B
helices, and the partial negative
charges of the helix dipoles proba-
bly contribute to the binding. The
pore may constrict to strengthen
the bonds. When a second K+ ion
enters the channel it appears to
bind ~ 0.75 nm from the central K+,
repelling it and weakening its
interaction with the filter, allowing
it to pass through the pore. Rb+
(0.30 nm diameter) and Cs (0.34 nm
diameter) also pass through.
How are the smaller Na+ (0.19
nm diameter) and Li+ (0.12 nm
diameter) excluded from the pore?
The pore is too small for the hydrated
ions and perhaps too large to bind
the dehydrated ion well enough
to let it escape from its hydration
C
sphere. Four negatively charged
side chains in the cytoplasmic
mouth of the pore presumably
discourage anions from entering.
At the other end, the extracellular
entryway is a site that can be blocked
specifically by 35- to 40-residue
scorpion toxins.368
TheS. lividans K+ channel is
not voltage gated. Voltage-gating
mechanisms must be learned from
study of other channels! The voltage-
dependent K+ channels from the rat
have an α β composition. The α
4 4
and β subunits coassemble in the
endoplasmic reticulum and remain
Figure 8-21 Views of the tetrameric K+ channel from Streptococcus lividans.
as a permanent complex,370a–c After
(A) Ribbon representation as an integral membrane protein. Aromatic amino
insertion into the plasma mem-
acids on the membrane-facing surface are also shown. (B) Stereoscopic view.
brane the α subunits form a chan- (C) Stereoscopic view perpendicular to that in (B) with a K+ ion in the center.
nel as in Fig. 8-21. However, an From Doyle et al.366
additional intracellular domain of

--- Page 417 ---

414 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
theα subunits, together with the β complex, provide low-molecular-mass lipid-soluble carrier, or ionophore
4
an elaborate and as yet poorly understood internal valinomycin (Fig. 8-22). The K+–valinomycin com-
structure. The β subunits are oxidoreductases contain- plex diffuses the short distance to the other side of the
ing bound NADH, whose function is also uncertain. membrane and discharges the bound ion. If the rates
There are many more pores and carriers of various of binding to a carrier and of release from the carrier
kinds in biological membranes. Some, like the S. lividans are greater than those of the diffusion process,
K+ channel, facilitate diffusion of a single ion or Michaelis–Menten kinetics are observed. The maxi-
compound. They are uniporters. Others promote mum velocity V and Michaelis constant K can
max m
cotransport in which an ion such as H+ or Na+ also be defined as in Eq. 9-15 for enzymatic catalysis.
passes through the carrier. In some cases a pore is Valinomycinis a depsipeptide which contains
formed by a single molecule. Other pores follow a ester linkages as well as amide linkages. The anti-
twofold, threefold, or fourfold axis (Fig. 8-21) of an biotic is made up of d- and l-valine,l-lactic acid, and
oligomeric protein.371 Two different conformations d-hydroxyisovaleric acid. When incorporated into an
for the protein, one in which a “gate” opens to one artificial membrane bathed in a K+-containing medium,
side of the membrane and one in which it opens to the valinomycin increases the conductance greatly and
other, are usually involved. Interconversion between when it is added to a suspension of Streptococcus
the two conformations is spontaneous but the equilib- faecalis cells the high ratio of [K+] / [K+] falls rapidly.383
i o
rium between them may be influenced by the binding The loss of K+ from cells probably explains the anti-
of the solute, by the membrane potential, or by bind- biotic activity. However, under suitable conditions,
ing of inhibitors or activators. The latter may bind with a high external [K+], the bacteria will continue
differently to the parts of the carrier (pore) protein to grow and reproduce in the presence of the anti-
exposed on the two sides of the membrane. biotic.384
Uncomplexed valinomycin has a more extended
Channel-forming toxins and antibiotics. Some conformation than it does in the potassium com-
of the bacterial toxins known as colicins (Box 8-D) kill plex.385,386 The conformational change results in the
susceptible bacteria by creating pores that allow K+ to breaking of a pair of hydrogen bonds and formation
leak out of the cells. One part of the complement of new hydrogen bonds as the molecule folds around
system of blood (Chapter 31) uses specific proteins to the potassium ion. Valinomycin facilitates potassium
literally punch holes in foreign cell membranes. Mel- transport in a passive manner. However, there are
litin, a 26-residue peptide of bee venom,372,373 as well as cyclic changes between two conformations as the
other hemolytic toxins and antibiotic peptides of insects, carrier complexes with ions, diffuses across the mem-
amphibians, and mammals (Chapter 31) form amphip- brane, and releases ions on the other side. The rate of
athic helices which associate to form voltage-depen- transport is rapid, with each valinomycin molecule
dent anion-selective channels in membranes.374– 377 being able to carry ~ 104 potassium ions per second
The polypeptide antibiotic gramicidin A consists across a membrane. Thus, a very small amount of this
of 15 nonpolar residues of alternating d- and l-config- ionophore is sufficient to alter the permeability and
uration; two molecules can form a channel with a the conductance of a membrane.
right-handedβ helix structure.378,379 The central 0.48-nm Because the stability constant of its complex with
hole in the β helix is large enough to allow unhydrated potassium is much greater than that with sodium,
cations such as Na+ or K+ to pass through. The same valinomycin is a relatively specific potassium ionophore.
peptide, under other conditions, forms left-handed In contrast, the mushroom peptide antamanide has a
helical channels whose structures are known.379 binding cavity of a different geometry and shows a
Aggregates of β helices may form channels between strong preference for sodium ions.388,390 The structure
10
helices of suzukacillin.380 For this antibiotic as well of the Na+–antamanide complex is also shown in
as for alamethicin (Chapter 30) the conductance Fig. 8-22B. The Streptomyces polyether antibiotic
depends upon the membrane potential, a characteristic monensin (Fig. 8-22D),389,391 a popular additive to
shared with the pores of nerve membranes. A variety animal feeds, is also an ionophore. However, its mode
of synthetic channel-forming peptides have been of action, which involves disruption of Golgi functions,
prepared. Some of these form α-helical bundles with is uncertain.392
a central pore. A five helix bundle of this type381 has Anions of lipid-soluble phenols such as 2,4-dini-
a structure reminiscent of the acetylcholine receptor trophenol can serve as effective carriers of protons
channel of neurons.382 (Chapter 18). However, proteins usually serve as the
natural carriers, both of protons and of other ions. A
Ionophores and other mobile carriers. Facili- protein is sometimes pictured as rotating to present
tated diffusion of a molecule or ion is sometimes the solute-binding surface first to one side, then to the
accomplished by binding to a mobile carrier. An other side of a membrane. However, gated pores or
example is the diffusion of a complex of K+ with the channels are probable for most biological transport.

--- Page 418 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 415
A H3C CH3
O O CH3
H H H H +
N N K
O O
H H
O O
H3C CH3 H3C CH3
3
l-Val d-Val
d-Hydroxy- l-Lactic acid
isovaleric acid
Valinomycin
B
Na+– antamanide
C CH3 CH3 CH3 OH
H
CH2 CH3
H3C H H H H CH3
O O O K +
O O OCH3
HO
CH2OH
K+
Monensin CH3 COOH
CH3
Figure 8-22 (A) Uncomplexed valinomycin and its complex with K+ (from Duax et al.387). (B) Stereodiagram of the Na–
[Phe4, Val6]antamanide complex. A molecule of C H OH, which forms the fifth ligand to the Na+, is omitted for clarity. From
2 5
Karleet al.388 (C) Monensin and its complex with K+. From Pangborn et al.389
3. The 12-Helix Major Facilitator Superfamily
permeability coefficient P for D-glucose across a lipid
bilayer is only 10–6 to 10–5µm s–1. For an intact eryth-
rocyte, P is much greater: ~ 1 µm s–1. This is the result
A large family of transmembrane facilitators from
of facilitated diffusion by a transport protein with a
bacteria and eukaryotes appear to consist largely of 12
high specificity for hexose and pentose sugars having
transmembrane helices with intervening cytosolic and
a pyranose ring in a C1 chain conformation.396 This
extracellular loops. Some of these transporters facili-
human erythrocyte glucose transporter, now known as
tate simple uniport diffusion, but others participate in
active transport of the symport or antiport type.393,394
GLUT1, has a K
m
of 1.6 mM for D-glucose but of >3 M
Several hundred members of the family are known.395
forL-glucose. It is a 55-kDa intrinsic membrane glyco-
protein migrating in band 4.5 of Fig. 8-14. From the
sequence of its cloned gene the unglycosylated carrier
Entrance of sugars into cells. It is important
was deduced to be a 54-kDa peptide of 492 residues.
that sugars be able to enter cells rapidly. However, the

--- Page 419 ---

416 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
CHO Hydrophobic
Polar
Lys, Arg
Asp, Glu
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
RXGRR
Cytoplasm
NH
2
COOH
Figure 8-23 Predicted topology of the human glucose transporter GLUT1. The 12 predicted helices are numbered and the
single external N-linked oligosaccharide is marked CHO. The sequence RXGRR (marked) is found in many 12-helix transporters.
Its occurrence in these two positions suggests that the transporters may have evolved by duplication of a 6-helix motif. How-
ever, the human glucose transporters otherwise show no sequence similarity to other 12-helix transporters. After Bell et al.398
See also Muekler.400
enarbmeM enarbmeM
The glucose transporter is specifically inhibited by the GLUT6 is an unexpressed pseudogene (see Chapter
fungal metabolite cytochalasinB which can also be 27) and GLUT7 has been found only in liver micro-
used for photoaffinity labeling of the transporter.397 somes. GLUT4 of skeletal and cardiac muscle and
adipose tissue has received a great deal of attention
because of its response to insulin400,404-405a and to
CH2 exercise406 (see Chapter 17).
All of the GLUT family appear to be 12-helix
H3C OH
CH3 transmembrane-regulated, gated-pore proteins407,408
H H with relatively short cytosolic N- and C-terminal ends.
The proposed topology of GLUT1, which has been
supported by much experimental data,400,406 is shown
HN O in Fig. 8-23. However, the helices are thought to be
bundled with the glucose channel centered within a
O OH
helix bundle. The structure is unknown, but it could
O
resemble the α,α-barrel of glucoamylase (Fig. 2-29),
Cytochalasin B
which has 12 helices, a glucose-binding site in the
center, and a structure that could easily be modified to
There are at least six closely related facilitative form a central pore.
sugar transporters in the human body.398– 400 GLUT1 is Dehydroascorbate, the oxidized form of vitamin C
found not only in red cells but also in brain401 and (Box 18-D) is also transported into cells by GLUT1 and
other tissues. GLUT2 is the principal liver transporter GLUT3.409 A related transporter carries L-fucose into
and GLUT3 is found along with GLUT1 and GLUT5 in mammalian cells.410 Another facilitates the uptake of
the brain.401 GLUT5 is primarily a fructose transport- galactose in yeast.411
er.402,403 The latter is present in spermatozoa, in which
fructose transport is especially important (Box 20-A), Cotransport of sugars and other nutrients with
and also in the small intestine. Both the GLUT1 and H+ or Na+. Epithelial cells of the small intestine or of
GLUT5 genes are overexpressed in breast cancer.403 kidney tubules must take up glucose at low concentra-

--- Page 420 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 417
tions and discharge it into the bloodstream at a higher arabinose that are homologous to the mammalian
concentration.412 This active transport is accomplished GLUT proteins.439
by cotransport of glucose with Na+ in a 1:2 ratio, with A series of specific H+-linked cotransporters are
the sodium ion concentration gradient across the found in the brush border membranes of small intes-
membrane providing a usable source of energy tine and in kidney epithelial cells.440,441 In green plants
amounting to 5.8 kJ / equivalent of Na+.413 The 662- H+-linked cotransport of amino acids is used in the
residue human, sodium-dependent transporter distribution of amino acids synthesized in the roots
SGLT1 may have 14 transmembrane helices, 5 of and leaves to other parts of the plants.442,443
which have been proposed to provide the sugar path- Antiporter or ion exchange transporters are also
way.414 common. For example, E. coli uses a metal ion–tetra-
Cotransport with Na+ is also observed for trans- cycline / H+ transporter to carry the antibiotic tetracy-
port of many other sugars, amino acids, neurotrans- cline out of cells. This protein, when present, provides
mitters, and cofactors.415 A confusing variety of a high level of antibiotic resistance to the bacteria.444
transporter molecules have been identified and are
now being classified into families based on gene se-
quences as well as function.416,417 Transporters from 4. Active Transport Systems
intestinal mucosal cells, kidney membranes, and syn-
aptic endings of neurons have been studied most and Both bacteria and eukaryotes also possess complex
have been the source for many of the cloned genes.418 active transport systems for uptake of sugars, amino
The Na+-dependent transporters of neutral amino acids, and other nutrients and for pumping out toxic
acids from these tissues have long been classified as xenobiotics. One of the most important groups are the
system A, system B, and system ASC (alanine, serine, high affinity ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters,
cysteine) according to substrate specificities.417,419-420a also called traffic ATPases.445– 448a The E. coli genome
Both cationic amino acids and cystine are taken up by contains genes for 80 ABC transporters, 54 of which
kidney tubules and intestinal epithelial cells by anoth- had been identified before the genome sequence was
er Na+-dependent transporter which is defective in completed.447 In the human body an ABC transporter
humancystinuria, a common metabolic genetic prob- enables eukaryotic cells to pump out a large number of
lem.421,422 different drugs and other foreign compounds. This
The brain contains several transporters specialized multidrug resistance protein (or P-glycoprotein)
for rapid uptake of neurotransmitters glutamate and not only protects cells but also can seriously interfere
aspartate,423– 425 glycine,426γ-aminobutyrate with drug treatment. For example, cancer cells with
(Gaba),427,428 and catecholamines and also for taurine, increased amounts of this transporter often arise dur-
L-proline,429 serotonin,430 and other substances. Many ing chemotherapy. The transporter protein is a single
of these are not only Na+ dependent but also require 1280-residue, 170-kDa chain which probably has
cotransport of Cl–.428– 430 There are several different 12 transmembrane helices and two ATP-binding
glutamate transporter genes with specialized distribu- domains.448,449 Other human ABC transporters include
tion in the brain and other tissues.423,424 the antigen processing transporter TAP (Chapter 31),
Cotransport of sugars with H+is especially com- the 1480-residue anion transporter CFTR, which is
mon in bacteria431 but alsooccurs in eukaryotes. For defective in cystic fibroses (Box 26-C),450 the erythro-
example, the alga chlorella employs hexose / H+ cyte glutathione-conjugate exporter (Box 11-B), and
symporters.432 The most investigated H+ cotransport- a long-chain fatty acid transporter of peroxisomes.
er is probably the lactose (lac)permease from E. coli ABC transporters usually consist of four domains.
which enables E. coli to take up lactose and other β- Two are hydrophobic intrinsic membrane domains,
galactosides from very dilute solutions.433– 436 From a each with six membrane-spanning helices and two are
variety of measurements it has been possible to pro- peripheral membrane ATP binding domains. All four
pose a stacking arrangement for the 12 helices434 and domains may be in a single peptide chain, as in CFTR,
to identify groups that are essential for function of the or they may be separate smaller proteins as in bacterial
417-residue protein. Glutamates as well as an argin- periplasmic permeases.431,446
ine, and a histidine, all in transmembrane regions, are
essential and may be involved in the gating and trans- Periplasmic permeases. Gram-negative bacteria
port functions.436 The 469-residue melibiose permease contain numerous ABC transporters with components
ofE. coli transports α-D-galactopyranosides, including located on the periplasmic surfaces of their plasma
meliobiose (Galpα1→ 6 Glc) and raffinose (Galpα1→ membranes. Many of these can be dissociated from
6 Glcpα1→ 2 Fruf).437,438 This permease will couple the surfaces by osmotic shock, i.e., by sudden changes
sugar uptake to either the H+ or Na+gradient (or to a in the osmotic pressure of the medium.451,452 For
gradient of Li+ but not of K+).437 Cells of E. coli also example, cells of E. coli suspended in 0.5 M sucrose,
contain H+ symporters for D-galactose,D-xylose, and L- treated with 10–4 M EDTA for 10 min, and then diluted

--- Page 421 ---

418 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
with cold water release ~ 50 binding proteins that tioned LamB porin. Other periplasmic proteins bind
hold sugars, amino acids, ions, and other substances histidine,460 basic amino acids,461 branched chain
tightly with K = 106– 108 M–1.453,454 An example is the amino acids, only leucine, oligopeptides, polyamines,462
f
L-arabinose binding protein of E. coli, a 306-residue and the tetrahedral anions phosphate454 and sulfate.463
peptide organized into two large α /β units with a The sulfate2– anion is held to its binding protein by
deep cleft between them. The sugar is bound into this seven hydrogen bonds–one from a serine – OH, one
cleft455,456 by an extensive network of hydrogen-bond- from an indole ring NH, and five from peptide NH
ing interactions between polar groups in the sugar and groups, three of which are at the positive ends of
in the protein similar to the network that binds either α helices. No permanently charged groups nor
D-galactose (Fig. 4-18) or D-glucose to another of the cations nor water molecules come into contact with
periplasmic binding proteins.457,458 Proteins with the the SO 2–.463 The phosphate-binding protein also
4
same general architecture bind D-ribose,L-arabinose,458 binds a tetrahedral dianion HPO
4
2– but it doesn’t bind
and maltodextrins.459 The α1,4-linked maltodextrins, sulfate. It forms numerous hydrogen bonds with its
as well as maltose, are major nutrients for E. coli and ligand and also an ion pair with a guanidinium group.
enter the periplasmic space via the previously men- An aspartate carboxylate hydrogen bonds to the – OH
BOX 8-D COLICINS: ANTIBIOTIC PROTEINS
Certain strains of E. coli and related bacteria The N-terminal portion of the 522-residue
synthesize proteins known as colicins that kill cells polypeptide chain of colicin E1 appears to be re-
of other susceptible strains.a– c Three kinds of co- quired for transport into the membrane and the
licins, each encoded in its own small DNA plasmid central part for binding to the receptor; the channel-
(colicinogenic factor), are known. Colicin E3 is a forming property is characteristic of the C-terminal
58-kDa ribonuclease (RNase) that attacks 26S ribo- region.k A similar organization has been established
somal RNA of susceptible bacteria;dcolicin E2 is a for the smaller colicin N:translocation domain,
deoxyribonuclease (DNase) that cleaves the bacteri- (residues 1– 66), receptor domain, (residues 67–182),
al chromosome.e Colicin E1 and its relatives, co- and pore-forming domain (residues 183 – 387).
licins A, B and Ia, Ib and N, attack the bacterial The colicin E1 plasmid is a 4.43 MDa circular
inner membranes and form lethal pores which allow double stranded DNA molecule consisting of 6646
K+ and other ions to flow out of the cell. The pres- base pairs.l Only one site is susceptible to cleavage
ence of a single channel will kill the bacterium. The by the restriction endonuclease ECoR1 (Chapter 26)
effect is similar to that of valinomycin.f,g The small This feature has led to its widespread use in cloning
colicin V is an 88-residue peptide antibiotic that is of genes.
secreted by a dedicated ABC export system.h Co-
licins are members of a larger group of bacterio- a Luria, S. E. (1975) Sci. Am.233(Dec), 30 – 37
cins. One of these proteins, megacin Cx from b Parker, M. W., Tucker, A. D., Tsernoglou, D., and Pattus, F.
(1990)Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 126 – 129
Bacillus megaterium, kills bacteria of sensitive strains
c Parker, M. W., and Pattus, F. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 391–
by blocking protein synthesis.i 395
The channel-forming colicins bind to bacterial d Escuyer, V., Boquet, P., Perrin, D., Montecucco, C., and Mock,
surface molecules that serve as their receptors. For M. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 10891– 10898
e Dvhsllrt, K., and Nomura, M. (1976) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
example, colicin N binds to the abundant E. coli
73, 3989 – 3993
surface protein OmpF. Interaction with a complex f Wiener, M., Freymann, D., Ghosh, P., and Stroud, R. M. (1997)
of membrane proteins known as tol Q, R, A, and B Nature (London)385, 461– 464
then leads to translocation across both outer and g Evans, L. J. A., Labeit, S., Cooper, A., Bond, L. H., and Lakey, J.
H. (1996) Biochemistry35, 15143 – 15148
inner membranes and refolding of the colicin in a
h Fath, M. J., Zhang, L. H., Rush, J., and Kolter, R. (1994) Biochem-
pore-forming conformation.g This mechanism is istry33, 6911– 6917
also used by colicins A, E, and K. The single-strand- i Brusilow, W. S. A., and Nelson, D. L. (1981) J. Biol. Chem.256,
ed bacteriophages M13, fd, and f1 “parasitize” the 159–164
j Derouiche, R., Bénédetti, H., Lazzaroni, J.-C., Lazdunski, C.,
same transport system. Colicins B, D, I, and M enter
and Lloubès, R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 11078 – 11084
bacteria with the aid of a second transport system k Griko, Y. V., Zakharov, S. D., and Cramer, W. A. (2000) J. Mol.
consisting of proteins TonB, ExbB, and ExbD which Biol.302, 941–953
participate in uptake of chelated iron (Chapter 16) l Chan, P. T., Ohmori, H., Tomizawa, J.-I., and Lebowitz, J. (1985)
J. Biol. Chem.260, 8925 – 8935
and of vitamin B . This system is also parasitized
12
by bacteriophages T1, T5, and φ80.j

--- Page 422 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 419
of the phosphate. Since the sulfate ion lacks the neces- transport systems are made more complex by the fact
sary H to form this bond it is excluded from the bind- that several of the binding proteins serve also as recep-
ing site.454 tors for stimulation of chemotaxis (Chapter 19).
All of these binding proteins have similar architec-
tures. The ligands fit into a groove between two do- The bacterial phosphotransferase system. A
mains as is seen in Fig. 8-24 for the histidine binding third system for uptake of sugars is utilized by E. coli
protein. The histidine is held by formation of carboxy- and by many other bacteria. This phosphoenolpyru-
late–arginine and –NH +–aspartate ion pairs and an vate-dependent phosphotransferase system converts
3
additional hydrogen bond to the imidazole. The glucose, mannose, fructose, other sugars, or mannitol
proteins are able to bend in the hinge region between into their 6-phosphate esters, at the same time trans-
the two domains to give a better fit to their ligands. porting the latter across the membrane (a group trans-
The periplasmic binding proteins function togeth- location).431,465 Four proteins form a cascade (Eq. 8-4).
er with the other subunits of the ABC transporter Phosphoenolpyruvate, an intermediate in sugar me-
system. One of the best understood systems is encod- tabolism whose high energy of hydrolysis provides the
ed by the histidine transport operon of Salmonella
typhimurium.445,453 There are four genes: hisJ (encoding
the histidine-binding protein), hisQ,hisM, and hisP. CH
2
The Q and M proteins are hydrophic integral mem-
Successive C
brane proteins which interact with two copies of the P transfers of –OOC O– PO2–
protein, which contains the ATP-binding motif, to a phospho 3
PEP (phosphoenolpyruvate)
form a His QMP membrane complex. The soluble group
2
HisJ transfers its bound histidine to this complex,
Enzyme I – N – PO2– (Phosphohistidine form)
which with the hydrolysis of ATP supplying the driv- 3
ing force transfers the histidine across the membrane,
presumably via a channel.445 In E. coli the gene malE HPr– N – PO 3 2– (Phosphate carrier protein)
encodes the periplasmic maltose binding protein,
whilemalF and malG are genes for the integral plasma E IIA – N – PO2– or (Carbohydrate-
3
m AT e P m - b b r in a d ne in c g o p m r p o o te n in en h ts o . m T o h lo e g m o a u l s K t g o e t n h e e e h n is c P o d p e ro s t a e n in. E III – N – PO 3 2– s o p r e d c o if m ic a p in ro ) tein
Sugar-specific
As with the histidine permease, a multiprotein complex
MalFGK 2 is formed. It accepts maltose or a maltodex- E IIB – S – PO 3 2– p co e m rm p e le a x se
trin and ATP is hydrolyzed to drive the transport.459 Sugar
MalT encodes a positive regulatory protein that stimu- (outside) E IIC(Integral membrane
domain)
lates transcription of the mal genes.464 Membrane
Sugar phosphate (inside) (8-4)
A B
Figure 8-24 (A) MolScript ribbon drawing of the periplasmic histidine-binding protein HisJ, a component of an ABC trans-
porter system of Salmonella. The bound L-histidine is shown as a ball-and-stick model. (B) Stereoscopic view of the histidine-
binding site showing hydrogen-bonding interactions of protein side chains with the histidine. From Oh et al.460 Courtesy of
Giovanna Ferro-Luzzi Ames.

--- Page 423 ---

420 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
driving force, phosphorylates N ε2 of a histidine side that of the low exterior [K+] and high exterior [Cl–].
chain on enzyme I, a large 64-kDa soluble membrane- The internal [Na+] and [Ca2+] are both low, while the
associated protein.466-467a internal [K+] is high. These differences are also linked
The phospho group is then transferred sequential- to the membrane potential (Eq. 8-2), which is ordinari-
ly to the small 88-residue dimeric phosphate carrier ly expressed as a negative voltage of the interior of a
protein HPr, to the carbohydrate-specific membrane cell, mitochondrion, plastid, etc. with respect to a
proteins IIA and IIB, and to the sugar being transport- reference electrode in the external medium.
ed. A histidine side chain at position 15 of HPr is The maintenance of both the membrane potential
phosphorylated by PEP to form N δ1 -phosphohistidine.468 and the steep gradients of ionic concentrations is
ε2
The NH of the same histidine forms a hydrogen essential to cells, both as a means of coupling meta-
bond to C-terminal glutamate 85, which is also hydro- bolic energy to transport and other processes and for
gen bonded to an arginine side chain. This chain of electrical signaling. The effects are most pronounced
interacting groups may function in the phospho trans- formitochondrial membranes for which E may attain
m
fer reactions.469 Both enzyme I and HPr function in –140 to –170 mV and for plasma membranes of excitable
the transport of many ligands but there are specific cells such as neurons (E = –70 to –90 mV). For liver
m
enzymes II (EIIs) for each sugar or other ligand.470 In and kidney cells E of plasma membranes may be
m
E. coli there are at least 13 different PTS transporters.471 approximately – 35 mV and for erythrocytes only
A complete EII usually consists of three domains–EIIA – 9 mV.480
(or EIII), EIIB, and EIIC. In some cases all three In excitable cells electrical impulses are initiated by
domains are in a single polypeptide chain, but in other opening or closing ion channels. They are propagated
cases they are individual proteins or some combina- along an axon by a complex sequence of opening and
tion of individual and bifunctional proteins. The 637- closing of voltaged-gated channels,481 a process that is
residue mannitol-specific EII contains all three domains. described in Chapter 30. All cells appear to also contain
Domains A and B are cytoplasmic while the N-terminal ATP-driven ion pumps as well as simple channels,
segments form the integral membrane C domain. The cotransporter proteins, and ion exchangers.
two phosphorylation sites are His 554 (EIIA) and Cys
384 (EIIB).472 The glucose-specific EII from E. coli Anions. Cell membranes have long been known
consists of two subunits, IIA and IICB.471,473– 475 The to be relatively permeable to Cl– and other small an-
mannose transporter has three subunits representing ions. However, the molecular basis of this permeabili-
domains IIAB, IIC, and an additional integral mem- ty is quite complex.482 Voltage-gated selective anion
brane subunit IID.476 In addition to their direct trans- channels, often called chloride channels, are impor-
port functions, components of the PTS system play tant in electrically excitable membranes, where they
regulatory roles in chemotaxis, transcription, and ensure a high resting chloride conductance and stabili-
control of other transporters.477,478 ty.483 The gene for one of these channel proteins was
first cloned from the electric ray Torpedo484,485 and is
designatedClc-0. Similar channels have been found in
5. Transport of Ions organisms ranging from bacteria to yeast, green plants,
and vertebrate animals. The yeast genome contains
Cell membranes are impermeable to most ions. just one Clcgene486 but mammals have at least nine.
Only a small number of ions can enter cells readily One of these, Clc-2, is defective in myotonia congenita,
and these usually do so with the assistance of protein a human disease of impaired muscle relaxation; and in
channels or pores. The principal anion of plasma (Box similar diseases of mice, goats, and horses.483,487 A
5A) is Cl–, which passes through membranes readily mutation in the chloride channel Clc-5 causes kidney
by virtue of the presence of channel-forming proteins. problems, including proteinuria, hypercalciuria, and
Chloride ions are often distributed across membranes kidney stones.483
passively according to Eq. 8-5, which describes the Erythrocyte membranes permit rapid transport of
Donnan equilibrium.167,479,480 anions to allow for the exchange of Cl– within the red
cells for HCO – generated by tissue metabolism. The
3
[K+][Cl–] = [K+] [Cl–] HCO – binds to deoxyhemoglobin (Eq. 7-47) and is
i i o o (8-5) 3
carried to the lungs, where it is released upon oxygen-
Here the subscripts i and o refer to the inside and the ation of the hemoglobin. Then the reverse exchange of
outside of the cell, respectively. The potassium ion internal HCO – for Cl– occurs. This electroneutral ion
3
concentration within a cell is maintained at a high exchange is mediated by the band 3 protein (Fig. 8-14)
value by the operation of the Na+ + K+ pump and by which contains a channel that allows anions but not
the presence of nondiffusible anions within the cell. cations to pass.238,239,488 The band 3 protein, also
According to Eq. 8-5, the internal chloride concentra- known as AE1 (anion exchanger 1), is found principally
tion must be low, with the product of [K][Cl] equaling in red blood cells but is also present in kidney tubules.489
i i

--- Page 424 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 421
Related proteins occur in other tissues.488 The 911- time as a result of changes in membrane potential
residue band 3 protein consists of two distinct parts of induced by the advancing wave of the action potential
nearly equal size. The N-terminal portion is attached (Chapter 30). We have already considered the struc-
to the membrane skeleton (Fig. 8-16). The C-terminal ture of a potassium ion channel (Fig. 8-21). However,
part, which is embedded in the membrane, is thought there are at least 30 types of K+ channels that can be
to form 14 transmembrane helices and to contain the distinguished.502 Many of these appear to have similar
ion exchange channel or channels.489a As previously channel structures but to serve a variety of purposes.
mentioned, defects in the N-terminal portion cause While the K+ channels of neurons are voltage gated
spherocytosis. The mutation Arg 589 His in the many others are controlled by hormones, neurotrans-
C-terminal half causes renal tubular acidosis in mitters, or mechanical stimuli.503 One of the most
which the kidneys do not adequately remove acids investigated K+ channels, known as K , sets the
ATP
from the body.238,489 Band 3 proteins can also exchange resting potential in the insulin-secreting β cells of the
phosphate, sulfate, and phosphoenolpyruvate for Cl– pancreas by facilitating a flow of K+into cells. Such
or bicarbonate. channels, which help equilibrate intracellular and
Another chloride channel, which is regulated by extracellular K+ at near equilibrium, are found in cells
cyclic AMP (Chapter 11), functions in secretory epithe- with low negative values of E . They are called in-
m
lia. Its regulation is faulty in cystic fibrosis (Box 26-A), wardly rectifying. When the internal glucose concentra-
one of the most common human genetic defects, tion in the β cells rises it initiates a complex signaling
especially among persons of European descent.490 As sequence involving blockage of the K channels by
ATP
was previously mentioned, this cystic fibrosis trans- ATP, opening of voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels, and
membrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a mem- insulin secretion.504– 506 The K channel is also
ATP
ber of the ABC superfamily of transporters. The large blocked by sulfonylureas. As a result, these com-
1480-residue protein apparently has two 6-helix mem- pounds induce insulin release and are useful in treat-
brane-spanning domains, two cytoplasmic nucleotide- ment of diabetes meltitus (Box 17-G). When its gene
binding domains,491 and another large cytoplasmic was cloned the sulfonylurea receptor was found to
regulatory domain. be a transmembrane protein of the ABC transporter
In addition to AE1 (band 3 protein), kidneys family.505 The potassium channel protein is another
depend upon other modes of reabsorption of HCO – subunit of the transporter. Similar K channels are
3 ATP
from the proximal tubules. These include a Na+/ found in the kidneys507 and also in embryonic cells in
HCO –cotransporter, which seems to be related to the which they may participate in regulation of the cell
3
AE family of ion exchangers. However, it transfers cycle.508
three HCO – ions per Na+ and is therefore highly Voltage-regulated sodium channels are the major
3
electrogenic.492,493 Transporters for phosphate, sul- participants in propagation of nerve impulses. The
fate, and small organic anions are found in many large 260-kDa α subunit of the sodium channel of nerve
organisms. Bacterial periplasmic transporters have membranes contains four homologous repeat sequences,
already been described. Plants employ H+/ phos- each of which may form transmembrane helices and
phate,494 H+/ sulfate,495 and H+/ nitrate496 cotransport- also contain a loop that may participate in forming a
ers. Phosphate transporters are probably essential to pore similar to the K+ pore of Fig. 8-21.509-510a How-
all organisms. One of the best known is the mitochon- ever, the structure is uncertain.511 The channel complex
drial P/ H+ cotransporter which carries phosphate also contains 36- or 33-kDa β and β subunits that
i 1 2
ions originating from hydrolysis of ATP to ADP + P appear to be members of the Ig superfamily.
i
back into the mitochondria.497,498 See also Table 18-8. Epithelial cells contain a quite different Na+ chan-
A human Na+/ P cotransporter in the kidney is also nel that participates in reabsorption of urinary Na+
i
essential. An X-linked trait leading to inadequate and in control of blood pressure (Box 22-D). The
synthesis of the transporter causes hypophosphatemic channel consists of at least three structurally similar
vitamin D-resistant rickets.499 subunits, each with two predicted transmembrane
Monocarboxylates such as lactate and pyruvate helices and a large extracellular domain.512 These
enter animal cells with the aid of monocarboxylate / channels are blocked specifically by the diuretic com-
H+ cotransporters of low specificity.500 A Cl–/ oxalate poundamiloride.513
transporter is one of several ion exchange proteins in
the kidney.501 Transport systems for ADP, phosphate, O NH2
dicarboxylates, and other anions are very active in
mitochondrial membranes (Chapter 18). Cl N C C +
N NH2
H
Cation channels. When a nerve impulse passes
along an axon gated pores or channels specifically H2N N NH2
permeable to Na+ and K+ open for short periods of Amiloride, a diuretic

--- Page 425 ---

422 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
The best known sodium channel is, in fact, a gen- ins is formation of Ca2+ channels, a function that is
eral cation channel which is part of the “nicotinic” suggested by the modular three-dimensional struc-
acetylcholine receptor. Acetylcholine is the principal tures.525,526 Other suggested functions include roles in
excitatory transmitter in the peripheral nervous sys- membrane fusion, exocytosis, and adhesion.
tem and upon release from synaptic endings or neuro-
muscular junctions occupiesreceptors on the Active transport of cations. Most organisms
“postsynaptic” membranes of one or more adjacent take up ions from their surroundings by active trans-
neurons. When acetylcholine binds in the ion pore, port. Green plants extract essential nutrients from the
the acetylcholine receptor opens and cations flow out, extremely dilute solutions in contact with their roots.
depolarizing the membrane. Under favorable circum- Microorganisms such as yeast and bacteria have the
stances, this initiates a nerve impulse (action potential) same ability, and specific concentrating systems for
in the postsynaptic neuron. The receptor gene was many ions such as K+, Ca2+, sulfate, and phosphate
first cloned from Torpedo and the receptor protein has have been identified. The skin of a frog can take up
been studied extensively.382 The 290-kDa protein Na+ from a 10–5 M solution of NaCl and extrude it into
consists of five similar-sized subunits with an α βγ the internal fluids whose Na+ concentration may be
2
structure. These form a nearly symmetric fivefold greater than 0.1 M. Ions can also be concentrated from
oligomer with a pore in the center. Images of both the internal fluids and excreted at higher concentrations.
open and the closed states, obtained by electron mi- Some seabirds and marine animals rid their bodies of
croscopy at a resolution of 0.9 nm, suggest that the excess salt by secretion from salt glands. The lining of
inner pore of ~ 2.6 nmdiameter is formed by five α the human stomach is able to concentrate hydrogen
helices, one from each subunit. It is open when acetyl- ions in gastric juice to ~ 0.16 M.
choline binds to the two α subunits and closes to a Organelles within cells have their own ion-concen-
much smaller diameter when the acetylcholine leaves trating mechanisms. Thus, mitochondria can concen-
(and is destroyed by hydrolysis). trate K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, and other divalent metal ions as
Calcium channels are a third major group of well as dicarboxylic acids (Chapter 18). The entrance
cation-selective channels.514 As pointed out in Box 6-D, and exit of many substances from mitochondria ap-
calcium ions are involved in a very wide range of pear to occur by exchange diffusion, i.e., by secondary
signaling functions. These are discussed in several active transport. Such ion exchange processes may
places in this book. Several of these functions depend also occur in other membranes.
upon voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. Muscle is rich in
L-type or DHP-sensitive channels (Box 6-D) which ATP-driven ion pumps. Within virtually all cells
play a role in transmission of nerve impulses to muscles the sodium concentration is relatively low, while that
by allowing rapid flow of calcium ions into cells from of potassium is high (Box 5-A). One theory528 regards
outside.515 the cytoplasm as analogous to an ion exchange resin
The structure appears to be homologous to that with fixed charges in a lattice. Highly crosslinked ion
of voltage-gated Na+ channels with a large 170-kDa exchange resins exhibit specificity toward binding of
subunit with a fourfold repeat plus smaller subunits. certain ions; e.g., sulfonic acid resins tend to bind K+
Theryanodine receptors of muscle control the preferentially, while phosphonic acid resins tend to
release of Ca2+ from stores in the endoplasmic reticu- bind Na+. Do proteins also prefer K+ to Na+?
lum516,517 (see also Chapter 19). These receptors are In contrast to the ion exchange theory, much evi-
ligand gated, being activated by cyclic ADP-ribose dence indicates that cells have an active ion pump
(Chapter 11). Two additional types of voltage-sensi- that removes Na+ from cells and introduces K+. For
tive Ca2+ channels, N and P, are found in the central example, the cytoplasm of the giant axons of nerves of
nervous system.514,518 Another ligand gated calcium squid can be squeezed out and replaced by ionic solu-
channel has been found in endothelial cells.519 It is tions. Erythrocyte ghosts can be allowed to reseal with
activated by sphingosylphosphocholine519 rather various materials inside. Ion transport into or out of
than by cAMP-ribose or inositol triphosphate.520 A cells has been demonstrated with such preparations
sodium / calcium ion exchanger and cotransporter521 and also with intact cells of many types. Such trans-
utilizes the Na+ gradient to exchange three external port is blocked by such inhibitors as cyanide ion,
Na+ ions for one internal Ca2+. which prevents nearly all oxidative metabolism. How-
Many aspects of calcium function are poorly un- ever, the cyanide block can be relieved by introduction
derstood. Among these is the role of a group of pro- into the cells of ATP and other phosphate compounds
teins known as annexins (formerly lipocortins, of high group-transfer potential.
calpactins, endonexins, etc.).522 The ten or more mem- Uptake of K+ by cells and extrusion of Na+ from
bers of the annexin family523– 527 share the property of cells are also specifically blocked by “cardiac glyco-
binding to phospholipid membranes in the presence of sides” such as ouabain (Fig. 22-12). Ouabain labeled
Ca2+. One of the several proposed functions of annex- with3H binds to the outer surface of cells, and from

--- Page 426 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 423
this binding it was estimated that erythrocytes possess pumping of sodium and potassium ions is one of the
100– 200 ion pumping sites per cell (~ 1 site / µm2).529 most important energy-requiring activities of cells. It
For the HeLa cell (a widely studied strain of human is said to account for 23 % of the ATP utilization in a
cancer cells) 105 to 106 sites / cell (~ 10 / µm2) were resting human. Thus, it constitutes an important fraction
found. Further experiments showed that in the pres- of the basal metabolic activity.
ence of Na+ within the cell and K+ on the outside of The Na+,K+- ATPase is one of a family of over 50
the cell, ATP is hydrolyzed. The rate of hydrolysis was ion pumps that are characterized by transfer of a
directly related to the concentrations of these two ions phospho group from ATP to an aspartate side chain
and to the number of ouabain binding sites and also carboxylate in the invariant sequence DKTG to give an
required the presence of Mg2+. These observations led intermediate phosphoenzyme + ADP.530,537
to the concept of an (Na+ + K+)- activated ATPase
(often abbreviated Na+, K+-ATPase) as synonymous
with the membrane-bound ion pump. Within the cell H N O
Na+ must be located on one side of the membrane and H Phosphoenzyme
K+ on the other to activate this enzyme. However, the C
CH2
C
O PO3
2– i
N
n
a
te
+
r
,K
m
+
e
-
d
A
ia
T
t
P
e
a
o
s
f
e
purified enzyme would be expected to hydrolyze ATP O C
in the test tube in the presence of Na+ + K+ + Mg2+.
Such a protein was isolated from several sources and
has been studied intensively. It is an αβ mixed dimer TheseP-type ATPases are characterized by phospho-
with molecular masses of ~ 113 kDa for the α chains enzyme intermediates, by a conserved consensus
and ~ 55 kDa for the glycoprotein β chains.530,531 sequence, and through inhibition by vanadate ion.537– 539
The proteins may associate to α β tetramers in The structures are poorly known. Some consist of
2 2
membranes. The genes for various isoforms of the single chains (perhaps dimerized) and some have
proteins from several sources have been cloned and more than one chain. However, the major subunit
sequenced.531,532 The large α subunit may span the always appears to have about ten transmembrane
bilayer of the membrane as many as ten times; the helices with a large ~ 430-residue cytoplasmic domain
glycoprotein β subunit is thought to be largely on between the fourth and fifth helices. This domain
the outer surface and may have only one membrane- contains the ATP binding site and the phosphoaspartyl
spanning helix.533,534 A small 68-residue γ subunit group of the phosphoenzyme.534 This is Asp 369 for
copurifies with the pump protein. It may be involved the Na+,K+- ATPase.
in control of the ATPase, which has complex regulatory In addition to the Na+,K+- ATPases there is a very
properties.535,536 Sulfatides (ceramide galactose-3- activeCa2+-ATPase which transports two Ca2+ from
sulfate) may also play a role in the enzymatic the inside of cells to the outside while returning two
activity.535 H+ from outside per ATP.540– 543a This is the primary
The sodium–potassium pump displays a curious transporter by which cells maintain a low internal
stoichiometry. Three sodium ions are pumped from the [Ca2+]. During its action it becomes phosphorylated
inside and two potassium ions from the outside of a cell for on Asp 351. However, in neurons, in which the mem-
each molecule of ATP cleaved. Thus, an excess of positive brane potential is maintained at a high negative value
ions is pumped out with the result that a negative by the sodium pump, an Na+/ Ca2+ ion exchange plays
charge develops inside the cell and a positive charge an even more important role.540
accumulates on the outside. This action of the Na+, Other P-type ATPases include the gastric H+,
K+-ATPase is the primary source of the membrane K+- ATPase, which acidifies the stomach and has a
potential for most eukaryotic cells and is said to be high degree of sequence homology with the Na+,
electrogenic. Because the cell membrane is somewhat K+- ATPase.544 Secretion of HCl into the stomach
permeable to K+, outward diffusion of K+ through the apparently involves diffusion of K+ together with Cl–
“leaky” membrane along its concentration gradient from the bloodstream through the cells lining the
helps to maintain the membrane potential as does stomach. The K+ is then pumped back into these cells
inward leakage of Cl–. At the same time, Na+ diffuses in exchange for H+ by H+,K+-ATPase.545 The chloride
inward, aided by the membrane potential. Even channel may be in the same protein as the (K+ + H+)
though the permeability of Na+ is low, a steady state pump.546 The kidney is the principle acid excretory
is reached at which the rate of passive inward diffu- organ of the body and as such also contains proton
sion of cations just balances the membrane potential pumps. An electrogenic H+- ATPase pumps H+ alone
set up by the active transport. outward through the plasma membranes of fungi and of
The energy for transport of Na+ and K+ by the ion green plants.547,548 The resulting proton gradient may
pump is supplied by ATP. The Na+,K+- ATPase does be used to provide energy for transport of other materials
not merely catalyze the hydrolysis of ATP but also into cells. A group of metal ion P-type transporters
couples its cleavage to the pumping of the ions. The carry copper and other nutrient ions into cells and

--- Page 427 ---

424 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
extrude Cd2+ and other toxic ions.539 Some alkaliphilic for Na+ is decreased over 100-fold and the sodium ions
bacteria pump Na+ to create a sodium ion gradient.539a dissociate on the outside. The affinity for Na+ may
All of these ion pumping systems require MgATP as decrease because the diameter of the pore is increased
the source of energy and function via phosphoenzyme to accommodate the larger 0.27-nm diameter of K+
intermediates. The ionic gradients generated can be ions, perhaps by a twisting motion of the peptide
used to move other ions or nonionic compounds into chains that form the channel.
or out of cells by exchange or cotransport processes. The next step is loading with two K+ ions. The
For example, internal H+ may be exchanged for exter- affinity for K+ in the second conformation is high. The
nal Na+ in an exchanger-mediated process that assists return to conformation 1 with release of K+ to the inside
in control of cytoplasmic pH.549,549a The reverse process is triggered by hydrolytic removal of the phospho group
inE. coli549b and many other bacteria provides the as inorganic phosphate (P). It may seem surprising
i
principal mechanism by which those cells export Na+. that a channel could be opened and closed so readily
This exchange is driven by the electrochemical gradi- with synchronous changes in the number and speci-
ent of the H+ ion created by oxidative phosphorylation ficity of ion binding sites. However, recall the type of
(Chapter 18). The Na+ ion, in turn, can be used by structural alteration occurring upon oxygenation of
bacterial cells to drive other uptake processes, e.g., hemoglobin (Fig. 7-25). Rotation of the hemoglobin
sugar or amino acid-Na+ cotransport. subunits with respect to one another causes small
What is the mechanism by which ATPase trans- changes in the geometrical relationships of groups
porters function? We still do not know.550 The pump- protruding into the central channel. This strongly
ing cycles for the Na+,K+- ATPase
and the Ca2+- ATPase are similar
Outside Inside
although different in details. The
ATPases are reversible and with Large ATP The Na+-binding conformation 1. E 1 ATP
suitable ionic gradients will work subunit Projecting groups create 0.2 nm
O
as ATP synthases.551 A strictly C binding sites in central pore
3Na+
hypothetical model for the Na+, O–
K+-ATPase is shown in Fig. 8-25. Glycoprotein ATP The Na+ions are now bound in E 1 ATP (Na+) 3
There are at least two conformations O the pore
of the ion pump proteins.552,552a In C
one conformation the protein binds
O–
three sodium ions tightly, while in MgADP–
the other conformation it binds two The carboxyl group has been E–P (Na+)
1 3
potassium ions. The ATP operates O phosphorylated. The negative
C charge may help to bind the
the“motor” that carries out the Na+ ions more tightly
conformational changes. In Fig. 8-25 OPO 3 2–
A conformational change
the ion pump, in conformation A, is
alters geometry
shown embedded in a membrane.
3Na+ The K+-binding conformation 2. E–P
In the center, perhaps between three 2K+ 0.3 nm K+-binding sites are now 2
or more transmembrane helices, C O present; Na+ ions diffuse out
Ouabain
there is a narrow cavity, perhaps OPO2–
binds and 3
resembling that of the K+ channel inhibits
Two potassium ions are now E–P (K+)
(Fig. 8-21), into which chelating 2 2
bound
groups (e.g., C = O groups of the
C O
peptide chain) protrude. These
OPO2–
groups form the three binding sites H 2 O 3 Hydrolysis of acyl phosphate E (K+)
for the 0.19-nm-diameter Na+ ion. P linkage induces a change to 2 2
The spontaneous binding of the i original conformation 1
MgATP
sodium ions triggers a phosphoryla-
ATP
tion reaction by which a phospho O Potassium ions diffuse into cells EATP
group from the MgATP2– complex is 2K+ C 1
transferred to the side chain carboxyl
O–
of the active site aspartate. This
phosphorylation in turn triggers a
EATP
change to the second conformation 1
in which the channel to the outside
Figure 8-25 A strictly hypothetical model of a Na+ + K+ pump which operates
is open and that to the inside is
by ATP-driven opening and closing of a channel at opposite ends and with
closed. At the same time the affinity alternate tight binding of Na+ and K+.

--- Page 428 ---

C. The Transport of Molecules through Membranes 425
affects the binding of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Very Images of both the Ca2+-ATPase (Fig. 8-26)553 and
small movements could open up the Na+ binding the H+-ATPase of Neurospora plasma membranes548 at
groups and create new binding sites for the larger K+ 0.8 nm resolution reveal similar transmembrane re-
ion, using in part the same chelating groups. gions and large cytoplasmic domains which are some-
what differently organized. The picture in Fig. 8-26
has been greatly clarified by determination of the
A structure by X-ray diffraction to a resolution of
400 0.26 nm.553a,b,c Two calcium-binding sites have been
located in the transmembrane domain between the
helices marked M4, M5, M6, and M8. The Ca2+ ions
are apparently coordinated by side chains of Asp, Glu,
ATP
110 Gln, and Thr. There are three cytosolic domains. The
N
site of phosphorylation, Asp 351, lies within a large
~ 27 kDa P (phosphorylation) domain adjacent to the
membrane. The ATP is held by a nucleotide-binding
56 C N domain which must at some point in the cycle move
21 11 11 cytoplasm close to Asp 351 for phosphorylation to occur. The
third cytosolic (A, actuator) domain is thought to be
membane involved in control of the conformational alterations.
The nucleotide-binding domain lacks the “P loop”
9 11 6 9 lumen characteristic of many ATPases and GTPases (see p. 648),
32
but is homologous in its sequence to L-2-haloacid
dehalogenase (Eq. 12-2)
Two other types of proton-pumping ATPases are
B
considered in Chapter 18. One is the mitochondrial
F F ATPase, which ordinarily operates in the reverse
1 0
direction as the body’s principal ATP synthase. The
other type, which in some ways resembles the mito-
chondrial F F ATPase, is the vacuolar ATPase (V-
1 0
ATPase). These are true proton pumps which acidify
vacuoles of plants and also lysosomes and phagocytic
vacuoles.554,555 They are also considered in Chapter 18.
6. Exocytosis, Endocytosis, and the Flow of
Membrane Constituents
Observation of cells under the microscope with
time-lapse photography reveals that the plasma
membrane as well as the mitochondria and other
organelles are in a constant state of motion. Mitochon-
dria twist and turn and the surface membrane undu-
lates continuously. Vesicles empty their contents to the
outside of the cells, while materials are taken into cells
through endocytosis. In addition, chemical evidence
indicates a directed flow of the materials of which
membranes are constructed from the endoplasmic
Figure 8-26 The structure of the 994-residue Ca2+-ATPase
reticulum (ER) to the Golgi vesicles, excretion gran-
of the endoplasmic reticulum of rabbit muscle at 0.8-nm
resolution. (A) Predicted topology diagram organized to ules, and plasma membrane (see Fig. 10-8). Along this
correspond to the electron density map prepared by electron route new materials are inserted from the cytoplasmic
crystallography of frozen-hydrated tubular crystals. The side of the membrane, while enzymes within the
number of amino acid residues in each connecting loop is vesicles add glycosyl units and make other modifica-
marked. (B) The electron density map with the predicted tions. The plasma membrane surface area grows quite
structure embedded. The relationships of the helices in (B)
rapidly. In secretory cells fusion of secretion granules
to those in (A) are not unambiguous. The helices marked B,
with the plasma membrane also adds additional
D, E, and F in (B) may form the Ca2+ channel. The large
material to the membrane.
cytoplasmic loops, which are black in (A), were not fitted.
From Zhang et al.553 Courtesy of David L. Stokes. Counterbalancing this expansion of the plasma
1M
2S
2M 3M 4M 5M 6M 7M 8M 9M 01M
S1
3S 4S 5S

--- Page 429 ---

426 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
membrane is active endocytosis of fluids and of solid ly occurs with the aid of specific receptor proteins
materials from outside the cell. This not only brings located in or on the outside of the plasma membrane.
new materials into the cell but also accomplishes Some of these, e.g., receptors for the low-density lipo-
removal of material from the plasma membrane and protein of plasma (Chapter 22), are clustered in coated
partial recycling of its components. One form of pits. Other receptors, such as those for insulin or epi-
endocytosis is seen with the ameba.555a The cytoplasm dermal growth factor, are spread more evenly across the
flows around a smaller organism or other particle of membrane but collect in coated pits when the hormone
food enclosing it in an internal membrane-bound binds. Endocytosis provides a means for the cell to
compartment (endocytic vacuole or endosome). take up and in some cases destroy the hormone or the
This vacuole then fuses with lysosomes which supply receptor or both.
the necessary enzymes to digest the food. In a similar Transmembrane proteins, including hormone
way phagocytic cells of our bodies engulf micro- receptors, are incorporated into coated vesicles with
organisms or other particles to form phagosomes the help of clathrin adapter proteins (APs). These
which, over a period of more than 24 hours, undergo
extensive biochemical changes.556 They acquire
digestive enzymes, vacuolar ATPase,557 other proteins
needed to kill bacteria, and other parasites. A
Uptake of smaller particles including protein
molecules occurs by micropinocytosis, a process that
can be seen only by electron microscopy. This often
takes place via coated pits, indentations of ~ 0.3 µm
diameter underlain by a thickened membrane.558– 559b
The pit membrane is also coated with protein mol-
ecules and appears to have many short bristles or
spikes protruding into the cytoplasm (Fig. 8-27A).
After endocytosis the coated pits become coated
vesicles of 0.15 – 0.25 nm (Fig. 8-27B). Within a few
seconds, however, these vesicles lose their coat and
become endosomes.
The major protein making up the coat is the 180-
kDaclathrin, but smaller 33 - to 36-kDa peptides of
several types also contribute.561 The coat forms a
“basket” with pentagonal and hexagonal faces sur- ~ 0.1 µm
rounding the lipid bilayer of the vesicle. At each
vertex of the basket is a “triskelion,” a trimer of
clathrin together with an equal number of the smaller
chains. The smallest baskets consist of 12 pentagons B (a) (b) (c)
plus 4, 8 or more hexagons, a relationship that allows
formation of a variety of larger baskets.562,563 Addi-
tional 50- and 100-kDa accessory proteins form a shell
around the clathrin cage. That clathrin is essential for
normal cell growth has been established by the
observation that deletion of its structural gene from
yeast is lethal.564 The addition of more trimer units
from a reserve of soluble clathrin in the cytoplasm
Figure 8-27 (A) Region of a coated membrane from fibro-
allows the vesicles to develop and break off from the
blasts at an intermediate stage of the budding process,
membrane. From studies with inhibitors it is evident
demonstrated by deep etching and rotary replication (by
that metabolic energy is required to drive the process. J. E. Heuser559b). From Pearse and Bretscher.560 Courtesy of
Other vesicles are surrounded by nonclathrin mem- Barbara Pearse. (B) Three structures identified among the
brane coats. Some of these originate from caveolae smallest coated vesicles. Structure (a) contains 12 pentagons
(little caves), which act in endocytosis, exocytosis, and and four hexagons, the latter lying at the vertices of a tetra-
transmembrane signaling.564a,b,c A coatomer complex hedron; (b) has a barrel shape built of 12 pentagons and eight
of eight subunits with molecular masses from 20 to 60 hexagons; structure (c) also has twelve pentagons and eight
hexagons, but the latter are arranged in two arcs of four,
kDa coats vesicles involved in transport between
related in the same way as the two parts of a tennis ball.
compartments of the Golgi.565– 567
Larger coats seem to be constructed on similar principles,
What is inside a coated vesicle? Cells take up a
with the addition of further hexagons. From Pearse and
variety of peptide hormones and proteins. This usual- Bretscher.560

--- Page 430 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 427
complex oligomeric proteins bind to recognition or interior of the cell and sometimes to adjacent cells.
“sorting” sequences such as dileucine on YXXφ (Y = Tyr, These signals may be about changes in pH or nutrient
X = any amino acid, φ = bulky hydrophobic).567a– d The concentration or the presence of hormones, neuro-
adapter proteins also bind to clathrin, the N-terminal transmitters, or harmful materials. For these reasons
β-propeller domain associating with the sequence cell membranes contain many embedded receptors
LφXφD / E of some AP adapters.567c Completion of a and signaling complexes. These are discussed in
coated vesicle requires membrane fusion as the vesicle Chapter 11 and later sections of the book.
is pinched off from the membrane surface. A GTPase The plasma membrane also contains many “mark-
(Chapter 11) called dynamin as well as another pro- ers” of the individuality of the species or of an indi-
teinendophilin I are required. Endophilin I is an vidual. These are chemical groupings that, in higher
acyltransferase able to transfer the fatty acyl group animals, can be recognized by the immune system as
of arachidonoyl-coenzyme A to lysophosphatidic acid “self” rather than as a foreign invader. These surface
in the cytosolic surface of the membrane. This may markers may also be used by parasites as camouflage
change the curvature of the membrane, assisting in to evade the immune response of the host. Such
vesicle formation.567e chemical groupings on cell surfaces are often de-
Once inside a cell the vesicles lose their coats to scribed as antigenic determinants and the molecules
become endosomes which may then fuse with lysosomes that carry them as antigens. Each antigenic determi-
or with Golgi membranes. The removal of a clathrin nant elicits the production of antibodies that will bind
coat requires ATP as well as the chaperonin Hsp 70 specifically to it. Over 250 different antigenic groups
(Chapter 10) and a coat protein called auxilin.568 have already been described for the surface of the red
Triskelion is distorted and displaced from the clathrin blood cell. They determine the blood type. Groups on
cage. The interior of the newly formed endosome is the surfaces of other cells determine whether a trans-
quickly acidified by the action of a proton pump in the planted tissue will be rejected. Various proteins from
vesicle walls.554,569 This sometimes leads to dissociation plant and other sources act as agglutinins by binding
of enclosed receptors from their ligands and permits to surface groups much as do antibodies. Viruses that
recycling of receptors and lipids of the vesicle mem- attack cells may also become adsorbed onto specific
branes to the cell surface. This is the case for the low- surface molecules, which act as receptors.
density lipoprotein receptor.570,571 Immunoglobulins can also be receptors. For
Exocytosis, by which the content of a secretion example, molecules of IgE bound to basophils and the
vesicle is released to the outside of a cell, is just as related mast cells of tissues serve as receptors for
important as endocytosis. The process is sometimes allergens. Binding of an allergen to the IgE molecules
very specialized. For example, the release of a nema- stimulates the release of granules containing histamine
tocyst from Hydra (Fig. 1-13) can occur in about 3 ms.572 and other substances (Chapter 31).
Exocytosis involves fusion of membranes,562,573 a
process also occurring during the movement of endo-
somes along the endocytic pathway,574 during vesicular E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls
transport between Golgi compartments, and in many
other biological processes. Exocytosis is often triggered The surroundings of cells are extremely complex
by the binding of Ca2+ to specific proteins of the and vary from one organism to another and from one
vesicle wall and of the cytoskeleton (Chapter 7).575 tissue to another. The principal function of cell walls
The fusion of membranes at several stages in the and other surface coats is to protect cells against attack
vesicle-mediated transport of materials between by organisms and against physical disruption.
Golgi compartments requires a specific protein known
as the N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein
(NSF).576,577 A host of other specialized proteins are 1. The Structure of Bacterial Cell Walls
also involved562,578 and are discussed in Chapter 10. See
also Chapters 20 and 29. The plasma membrane of bacterial cells, other
than the wall-less mycoplasmas and some
archaebacteria, is surrounded by a multilayered wall
D. Communication which may be separated from the membrane by a thin
periplasm (or periplasmic space). This can be seen
External coats and cell walls help to control the most clearly in suitably prepared thin sections of cells
access of materials to a cell. However, it is the outer ofE. coli or other gram-negative bacteria as a relatively
surface of the plasma membrane that makes the cell’s empty space of 11- to 25-nm thickness (Fig. 8-28).579– 581
first contact with nutrients, hormones, and other The volume of this space (which may be filled with
important chemicals. The membrane must often not gelled material) depends upon the osmotic pressure of
only detect these materials but also send signals to the the medium. In E. coli it contains 20 – 40% of the total

--- Page 431 ---

428 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
cell water. In gram-negative bacteria the innermost O
layer of the walls lies within the periplasm (Fig. 8-28).
H C Peptide COO –
It is a porous network of a highly crosslinked material N
N
known as peptidoglycan or murein. The backbone of R3 C H
the peptidoglycan is a β-1,4-linked polymer of alter-
O H
natingN-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic
S
acid residues. Alternate units of the resulting chitin- O
like molecule carry unusual peptides attached to the
lactyl groups of the N-acetylmuramic acid units (Fig.
R2 C O Glycerylcysteine at N-terminus
of lipoprotein and linked to
8-29). The peptide side chains are crosslinked as
H 3 acyl groups
indicated in the figure. The peptides vary consider-
ably in structure and crosslinkages.582,583 In E. coli and R1 C O
other gram-negative bacteria the peptidoglycan forms
a thin (2-nm) continuous network around the cell, but O
in gram-positive bacteria the highly crosslinked
peptidoglycan forms a layer as much as 10 nm thick.584 The fatty acid chains are evidently embedded in the
The peptidoglycan layer is surrounded by other layers outer membrane as an anchor. About one-third of the
whose structures vary from one organism to another, lipoprotein molecules are attached covalently to the
with the outermost antigenic layers being the most peptidoglycan through an amide linkage between the
variable. side chain amino group of the C-terminal lysine of the
protein and a diaminopimelic acid residue of the
The outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria. peptidoglycan (Fig. 8-29). Thus, the protein replaces
Outside the murein layer of E. coli and other gram- one of the terminal D-alanine residues of about one in
negative organisms is a phospholipid-containing ten of the murein peptides. There are ~ 2.5 x 105
outer membrane which has the thickness and some- molecules of the bound form of the lipoprotein per cell
thing of the structure of a typical biological membrane spread over a surface area of peptidoglycan of ~ 3 µm2.
(Fig. 8-28).585,586 This membrane is attached to the They appear to be associated as trimers located
peptidoglycan layer with the aid of a small hydropho- primarily in the periplasmic space.589
bic 58-residue lipoprotein whose N terminus contains About 105 copies per cell of the previously men-
aglycerylcysteine which carries three fatty acids tioned (Section C,2) larger 325-residue structural
connected by ester and amide linkages: protein, OmpAprotein,350 after its gene symbol ompA
O-Antigen
Outer core
Lipopoly-
saccharide
Heptose
Porin
KDO
Lipid A
Outer
Figure 8-28 Schematic membrane
molecular structure of the
E. coli envelope. Sugar Lipoprotein
Peptidoglycan
residues are represented by
ovals and rectangles. Periplasm
Circles represent polar head MDO
groups of phospholipids.
MDO, membrane-derived
oligosaccharides; KDO, 3- Inner Phospholipids
deoxy-manno-octulosonic membrane
acid (structures for KDO
and heptose are in Fig. 4-
Proteins
15). From Raetz and Cytoplasm
Dowhan.587

--- Page 432 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 429
A The—COOH of this d-Ala is (outer membrane protein A), are also
linked to the free —NH2 of the present. The outer membrane contains
diamino acid in another chain This—NH2 group is linked to —COOH
almost the same number of molecules of
ofd-Ala in another chain. In gram
negative bacteria the linkage is direct two porins. Together with phospholip-
HHOO but in many bacteria a short chain ids or with the lipopolysaccharide
(up to 5) of amino acids intervenes
discussed in the next paragraphs, the
C O
H3C porins and OmpA protein associate in
d-Ala
hexagonal arrays which provide the
H
NH H meso-Diaminopimelic basic framework structure of the outer
acid; sometimes replaced
O H NH byl,l-diaminopimelic, membrane.585 Two of the outer mem-
H Lys, ornithine, brane proteins have been shown to
– diaminobutyric contain some of the modified lysine α-
Note peptide COO acid, or homoserine
linkage to HN aminoadipic acid 5-semialdehyde
γ-COOH of γ d (allysine).590 The aldehyde groups of
glutamic acid O In some cases converted
to—CONH2 allysine are able to form crosslinks to
other proteins as has been well estab-
d-Glu; sometimes replaced
lished for collagen and elastin in the
– OOC byd-Gln or 3-hydroxy-d-Gln
human body.
H A characteristic feature of the outer
NH surface of gram-negative bacteria is a
O lipopolysaccharide586 that is anchored
CH3
l-Ala; sometimes replaced in the outer membrane. It was discussed
byl-Ser or Gly
H briefly in Chapter 4 where the structures
N N of the repeating oligosaccharides known
O CH3 as O-antigens are given. Figures 8-28
H3C
and 8-30 show the manner in which the
O
oligosaccharide bearing the O antigen is
CH2OH O H O NH attached to a lipophilic anchoring group
O
O O Polysaccharide that is embedded in the outer membrane
HO NH O “backbone” of the bacteria.591 The anchor, which is
O
CH2OH
calledlipid A, is a β-1,6-linked disaccha-
ride of N-acetylglucosamine. It is also
CH3
linked both to phosphate groups and to
—[β-d-GlcNAc-(1→4)-β-d-MurNAc-(1→4)]—(n = 10–70)
n the fatty acyl groups that fit into the
lipid bilayer of the membrane. In E. coli
B andSalmonella typhimurium four mol-
ecules of 3-D-hydroxymyristic acid are
(Gly)5 MurNAc joined by ester and amide linkages to the
two GlcN units (Fig. 8-30). Other fatty
l-Ala
acids, including lauric, myristic, and
GlcNAc d-Glu·NH2
GlcNAc palmitic acids, are esterified to the
l-Lys
hydroxyl groups of two or three residues
d-Ala of hydroxymyristic acid (Fig. 8-30).
(Gly)5 MurNAc
MurNAc Lipid A from other gram-negative
l-Ala (Gly)5
l-Ala
bacteria is similar but with variations in
GlcNAc d-Glu·NH2 the fatty acyl group composition and
l-Lys
GlcNAc d-Glu·NH2
linkages to the carbohydrate.592– 594
l-Lys
d-Ala
d-Ala
MurNAc
(Gly)5 d-Ala
l-Ala
GlcNAc d-Glu·NH2
l-Lys
Figure 8-29 (A) Repeating unit of structure of a bacterial peptidoglycan
d-Ala
(murein). Some connecting bridges are pentaglycine (Staphylococcus aureus),
trialanylthreonine (Micrococcus roseum), and polyserine (S. epidermis).
(Gly)5 (B) Schematic drawing of the peptidoglycan of S. aureus. From Osborn.588

--- Page 433 ---

430 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
α1,3
GlcNAc
β1,4 Col
Col
α1,6
Glc
α1,3
O-Antigen
α1,4
Gal
α1, n = 0–40
Glc
α1,2
Glc
GlcNHα1
α1,2
3Gal
α1,3
P
Glc Core oligosaccharide
4 α1,3
Hepα1 7Hep
α1,3
Et–NH–P–P 4Hep Hep = l-glycero-d-mannoheptose
α1,5 KDO = 3-deoxy-d-manno-2-octulosonic acid
(Fig. 4-15)
KDO
α2,7
α2,4
EtNH–P–KDO KDO
O
O
HO P O
O
O
HO O
O
O NH HO
O O O O
O O O HO O O NH O P OH
OH Lipid A
HO
(Enterotoxin)
Figure 8-30 Structures of the lipopolysac-
charides of the outer membrane of E. coli
andS. typhimurium including the bilayer
anchor lipid A. For structures of L-glycero-
D-mannoheptulose, KDO, and colitose, see
Fig. 4-15.
InBacillus subtilusd-alanine is attached to one of Many differences are also found in the “core” oligo-
the green oxygen atoms in at least half of the units saccharide (Fig. 8-30) and in the O-antigens.594– 596
HHOO H O O – Why do cells of Salmonella have a thousand
distinguishable surface antigens, many based on
P
differences in the O-antigens? The ends of these
O O O
n carbohydrate clusters are the groups to which the
O H H OOHH antibodies in animals clamp themselves if the bacteria
H
Ribitolteichoic acids enter the bloodstream. Mutants known as R forms
InB. subtilus (because of the growth as rough colonies on agar
β-d-glucose is O O – plates) completely lack the outer O-antigen. The R
attached here
mutants of Salmonella are nonpathogenic, whereas the
P
O O smooth strains with intact O-antigen often cause
n illness. Perhaps, if the O-antigen has the right cluster
O H
H of sugar rings at the ends, the host organism does not
Glycerolteichoic acids
recognize it as dangerous. This is only part of a con-
InLactobacillus arabinosusd-alanine in ester tinuous battle between the immune system of the
linkage occupies this position but is replaced
byβ-d-glucose on about one unit in nine body and camouflaged surfaces of attacking pathogens.

--- Page 434 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 431
The lipopolysaccharides of bacterial surfaces have
been identified as the “endotoxins” that cause many
of the worst effects of gram-negative bacterial infec-
tions and that are often lethal.597 Although the name
endotoxin came from the assumption that there was
an internal heat-resistant toxin that was released from
the bacteria, the toxin is part of the bacterial cell wall.
While the O-antigens provide for innumological
recognition, it is the lipid A part that is responsible for
the toxicity and unusually strong fever-inducing
properties of the lipopolysaccharide.592– 594,597
Teichoic and teichuronic acids. The cell walls of
gram-positive bacteria are composed of a thick pepti-
doglycan layer which also contains proteins and
additional polymers known as teichoic acids and
teichuronic acids. In some species these account for
50% of the dry weight of the cells.598,599 Teichoic acids
are high polymers of the following general types:
They are often attached through phosphodiester
linkages to N-acetylglucosamine or a disaccharide
which, in turn, is attached to muramic acid residues of
the peptidoglycan. Since the teichoic acid is uniformly
distributed in its attachment to the peptidoglycan, it
must be intimately associated with peptidoglycan
throughout the wall.
Teichoic acids are often covalently attached to
glycolipids which are part of the plasma membrane.
For example, the glycerolteichoic acid of Streptococcus
faecium contains about 28 monomer units of glycerol
phosphate, approximately 60% of which carry residues
of kojibiose (Gluα1→ 2Glu) as a phosphatidylkojibiosyl
diacylglycerol membrane anchor.600 Teichuronic acids
contain uronic acids:
[→4(N-acetyl)–ManAβ1→6Glcα1–]
n
From Micrococcus luteus601
→4Glcβ1→3Rhaα1→4Rhaα1–
3
From Bacillus megaterium602
Nearly 800 of the foregoing tetrasaccharide units
are joined to give a large, densely packed, ~ 500-kDa
polymer. The reducing end of the polymer is
covalently attached to the peptidoglycan layer.
Mycobacteria. Most mycobacterial species seem
to be harmless saprophytic soil bacteria of the gram-
positive group. However, tuberculosis (caused by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis) may infect one-third of the
inhabitants of the earth603 and kills about three million
→
people per year.604 Leprosy, caused by M. leprae,
affects 10 million or more.605 Most antibiotics are not
effective against mycobacteria because of the unusual
nature of their multilayered cell walls. The muramic
acid of their peptidoglycans contains glycolyl groups
instead of acetyl groups, perhaps providing extra
hydrogen bonding within the wall.604 Most character-
istically, they are rich in lipid materials. Among these
are a unique polysaccharide, a highly branched
arabinogalactan, that is covalently attached to
muramic acid residues of the peptidoglycan.
Clusters of arabinofuranosyl units at the nonreducing
ends of the chains are esterified with mycolic acids
(Section A,1).10,604,605 Mycobacteria also contain
lipoarabinomannans that act as major antigens.603,606
Some mycobacterial species synthesize small
glycopeptidolipids that may disrupt cell membranes
of hosts.607 Mycobacteria don’t produce toxins of
usual types but cause slow, long-lasting infections.
Other bacterial coats. Archaebacteria not only
have unusual plasma membranes that contain
phytanyl and diphytanyl groups (Section A,3)608 but
also have special surface layers (S-layers) that may
consist of many copies of a single protein that is
anchored in the cell membrane.609 The surface protein
of the hypothermic Staphylothermus marius consists of a
complex structure formed from a tetramer of 92-kDa
rods with an equal number of 85-kDa “arms.”610,611 S-
layers are often formed not only by archaebacteria but
also by eubacteria of several types and with quite
varied structures.612– 614 While many bacteria carry
adhesins on pili, in others these adhesive proteins are
also components of surface layers.615 Additional
sheaths, capsules, or slime layers, often composed of
dextrans (Chapter 4) and other carbohydrates, sur-
round some bacteria.
2. The Surroundings of Animal Cells
Cells in the external epithelial layers are always
GlcAβ1
surrounded by a protective covering of some kind.
n
Our own skin is made up of specialized cells which
become filled with microfibrils of keratin as they move
outward and become the relatively dry nonliving
external surface (Box 8-F). Internal epithelial cells
secrete protein and carbohydrate materials that form a
thinbasement membrane around the exposed parts
of the cells. The connective tissue that lies between
organs and which also includes tendons, cartilage, and
bone consists of a relatively small number of cells
surrounded by a “matrix” consisting of the protein
fibers collagen and elastin in a “ground substance”
rich in proteoglycans (Chapter 4).616– 618 In bone, the
calcium phosphate is deposited within this matrix.

--- Page 435 ---

432 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
Figure 8-31 Schematic representation of type
I procollagen. The molecule is composed of
two identical proα1 chains (solid lines) and
one proα2 chain (dashed line). In addition to
Collagen-like segment the central triple-helical region that gives rise
Nonhelical segment to the collagen molecule, as portrayed in Fig.
2-23(C), the precursor contains amino- and
300 nm carboxyl-terminal non-triple-helical domains.
0.93 nm S The amino-terminal domain is composed of a
S presumably globular region, a short collagen-
S like segment, and a non-triple-helical region in
which cleavages by the amino-terminal
S
protease occur. Interchain disulfide bonds are
~1.4 nm
limited to the carboxyl-terminal domain. The
Globular
short telopeptides at the ends of collagen α
domain
chains represent the residual sequences of the
Amino-terminal Triple-helical domain Carboxyl- linkage regions between the collagen helix and
propeptide terminal the terminal domains. After Prockop628 and
propeptide Byers.625
The collagens. The most abundant proteins in ensures that the three chains remain in proper register
the body are the collagens,619– 624 a family of closely in the triple helix while the procollagen is converted
related materials that account for 20% of the total into collagen, a process involving additional
protein in higher animals. Collagens make up much crosslinking.
of the organic mass of skin, tendons, blood vessels, Before this “maturation” can occur there must be
bone, the cornea, vitreous humor of the eye, and other modifications to procollagen. These begin while
basement membranes. They are found in every the peptide chains are still attached to ribosomes of the
metazoan phylum studied. There are at least 16 types rough ER. Hydroxylases (Chapter 18) localized in the
in the human body.625 Type I collagen, which accounts membranous vesicles of the ER convert some of the
for 90% of the total, is the major form occurring in proline and lysine residues of the procollagen chains
skin, tendon, and bone. It is synthesized by the into4-hydroxyproline625,629,630 and hydroxylysine
fibroblasts and is excreted into the extracellular space (Eqs. 8-6 and 8-7). Lesser amounts of 3-hydroxypro-
where it is polymerized into a durable long-lived line are formed. About 100 molecules of 4-hydrox-
material. Collagen II is found exclusively in cartilage yproline and 50 of 5-hydroxylysine are created in each
and the vitreous humor of the eyes. Form III is located α1 chain.
in blood vessels and intestines and is prominent in
embryonic tissues. Collagen IV is the major form H OH
found in basement membranes. Some other collagens
and characteristic features are listed in Table 8-4.
All collagens contain the triple-helical structure H
O2
H
N N N N
shown in Fig. 2-23. Collagen I consists of two chains
C C C C
of one kind (α1) and one of another (α2), while most H H
other collagens have three identical chains. In these O O O O
chains over 1000 residues have the characteristic Proline residue 4-Hydroxyproline residue
GlyXY sequence.624,626 At each end of the rodlike (8-6)
molecules short segments of the peptides fold into
globular domains. For type I collagen 16 residues at
the N termini and 25 at the C termini form these H OH
domains. Collagens are synthesized as intracellular α NH3 + O2 NH3 +
precursors known as procollagens. The three chains
Lysine side chain (8-7)
of procollagens are much longer than in the mature
proteins and have larger non-triple-helical ends (Fig.
8-31). The C-terminal extensions are crosslinked by Galactosyl units are then transferred onto some of
S–S bridges.625,627 Synthesis of the collagen chains the hydroxyl groups of the hydroxylysine side chains,
requires at least six minutes after which they are and glucosyl groups are transferred onto some of the
released into the cisternal space of the ER, associate, galactosyl groups. This glycosylation may prevent
and become crosslinked (Fig. 8-32). This crosslinking incorrect association of the procollagen molecules.

--- Page 436 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 433
A B
A B
S
OH OH O Gal Glc S S
Gal O OH OH S
OH OH OH
S
S
Glc
(Man)n S
Gal OH Glc Nac S
O
OH OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
Gal
S
S
S
S
Figure 8-32 Scheme summarizing the biosynthesis of a fibrillar collagen by a fibroblast. (A) Assembly of pro-α chains in cisternae
of the rough endoplasmic reticulum; posttranslational hydroxylations and glycosylations; association and disulfide bonding of
C-propeptides; and zipper-like folding of the triple helix by nucleated growth. (B) Proteolytic processing of procollagen to collagen;
self-assembly of fibrils by nucleated growth; and covalent crosslinking of the fibrils. The collagen molecule is first shown as a triple
helix and then either as a wavy line to depict a molecule assembling on the surface of a fibril or as a rectangle to depict the quarter-
staggered assay of monomers in a fibril. The proteolytic processing of procollagen and assembly of fibrils may occur within crypts
of fibrils as shown here or perhaps at some distance from the cell. After D. J. Prockop.628
Within the extracellular space two procollagen left between the ends (Fig. 8-32). These gaps give rise
peptidases act to cleave a 35-kDa peptide from the C to the characteristic banding pattern seen in the fibrils
terminus631 and a 20-kDa peptide from the N-terminal in Fig. 2-23D. Finer analysis of the bands together
end of each of the three chains of the secreted with the known sequences shows that the bands also
procollagen. The amino acid composition of the reflect the locations of residues with charged side
peptides removed is quite unlike that of the remaining chains.632 These ionized groups are thought to pro-
collagen monomer (also called tropocollagen) which vide electrostatic stabilization to the fibrils.633 The
contains one-third glycine and much proline. exact packing of the collagen molecules into sheetlike
The three-stranded monomers of collagens I–III or microfibrillar crystalline arrays is still uncertain.634
are rods of dimensions ~ 1.4 x 300 nm (Fig. 8-23). However, there is agreement on the staggered
When they reach their final location they associate and arrangement634a and upon the fact that precisely
become crosslinked to form strong fibers with diam- formed crosslinks with neighboring rods prevent
eters ranging from 8 nm to 0.5 m. Tendons tend to the gaps from weakening the fibrils.
contain large fibrils, while those in bone are small. Crosslinking of collagen is initiated by oxidation
The smallest 8-nm fibrils must contain about 20 triple of some of the lysyl and hydroxylysyl side chains from
helices in a single cross section but the successive amino groups to aldehyde groups under the action of
monomers are staggered by 6.4 – 6.7 nm (234 residues a copper-containing oxidase (Eq. 8-8, Chapter 18). The
for type I collagen) in such a way that 3-nm gaps are aldehyde groups enter into a variety of reactions that

--- Page 437 ---

434 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
lead to crosslinking of the collagen monomers and to H
O
C
(OH)
H C
+ O H
α NH3
Aldol condensation,
a
Lysine side chain elimination of water
O2,Cu
Lysyl oxidase
(OH)
H
C
O
C
O
H (8-8) H N N b A on d α di c ti a o r n b o w n ith protonation
the formation of insoluble fibers.635 One reaction is His H2N
an aldol condensation followed by elimination of
c Formation of Schiff base
water (Eq. 8-9, step a). If one of the two aldehydes
involved in the condensation is derived from hydroxy-
lysine and the other from lysine, two isomeric conden-
sation products are formed. The aldol condensation
H
product can react further: An imidazole group from H
a histidine side chain can add to the carbon–carbon C
double bond and (either before or after this reaction)
N N
another lysine side chain can form a Schiff base with
the free aldehyde. The results of these two processes
N
are summarized in Eq. 8-9, step b. The final product
histidinohydroxymerodesmosine links four different
side chain groups. In other instances, simple Schiff
(8-9)
bases (aldimines) are formed between aldehyde and
Histidinohydroxymerodesmosine
ε-amino groups. If there is an adjacent hydroxyl group
these can isomerize to ketoamines (Eq. 8-10). Two
residues of hydroxylysine, one of which is glycosylated The crosslinkages in collagen are not located at
as shown in Eq. 8-10, are often involved. Borohydride random but are found in certain positions, often toward
reduction (Eq. 4-2) and hydrolysis leads to isolation of the ends of the collagen monomers. Thus, histidine
dihydroxylysinonorleucine, the predominant product residues are found only at positions 89, 929, and 1034
of such treatment of bone or cartilage. in the α1(I) peptide chains. Residue 9 in the N-terminal
Crosslinkages reducible with borohydride are globular portion of one chain is linked to residue 946
characteristic of newly formed collagen but these of another while residue 103 is linked to 1047 in the
disappear and are replaced by more stable crosslinks as globular C-terminal peptide.640 The variety and number
collagen matures. For example, a 3-hydroxypyridine of crosslinkages vary among different species. As
that joins three triple helices may be formed from the collagen ages through a lifetime, glycation (Eq. 4-8)
reaction of two ketoamine groupings (with elimination leads to crosslinkages in which two ketoamines are
of one glycosylated hydroxylysine residue).636– 639 formed via glycation cyclize.641
Similar chemistry can also produce pyrrole crosslinks.639 Collagens I, II, and III form fibrils with similar
structures. However, other collagens are longer or
shorter and aggregate in different ways. A pepsin-
resistant part of the collagen V molecules resembles
O – collagens I, II, and III but it may contain an additional
non-collagenous segment at the N terminus. Collagens
V and XI are quantitatively minor components of the
extracellular matrix but are thought to provide a core
N+
Hydroxypyridine
around which the fibrils of collagens I and III may
(pyridinoline)
crosslink form.642 Types XII, XIV, IX, and XVI collagens contain
Glu Gal O interruptions in the helix which create bends, flexible
sites, and sites of increased proteolytic susceptibility.
They may link the fibrils to other components of the
surrounding matrix.643

--- Page 438 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 435
TABLE 8-4
Types of Vertebrate Collagen
Gene location:
Type human
number Location Characteristics chromosome
Forming quarter-staggered fibrils
Ia,b Skin, bone, tendon, dentin Most abundant, banded quarter-staggered fibrils 7, 17
IIIa,c Skin, blood vessels Abundant, small banded fibrils 2
Va,d Most interstitial tissues; cartilage, bone Abundant, small fibrils 2
Predominant in cartilage and bone
IIa Hyaline cartilage, vitreous humor Very abundant, small banded fibrils 12
XIa Hyaline cartilage
With interrupted triple helices
XIIa,e Embryonic tendon, periodental ligaments Fibril associated
XIVa,e Fetal skin, tendon Fibril associated
IXa,e Cartilage, vitreous humor Minor, contains attached glycosamino-
glycan, fibril associated
XVIf Cartilage Fibril associated
Forming sheets and networks
IVa,g All basement membranes Nonfibrillar network 13
Xa Mineralizing cartilage, growth plate Short chain
VIIIa,h Endothelial cells; Descemet’s Small helices linked in hexagonal arrays
membrane of the cornea
Forming beaded filaments
VIa Most interstitial tissues, intervertebral discs Beaded microfilaments
Forming anchoring fibrils
VIIa,i Basement membranes Long-chain, antiparallel dimers, anchoring fibrils
a Martin, G. R., Timpl, R., Müller, P. K., and Kühn, K. (1985) Trends e Shaw, L. M., and Olsen, B. R. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 191-194
Biochem. Sci.10, 285-287 f Myers, J. C., Yang, H., D’Ippolito, J. A., Presente, A., Miller, M. K.,
van der Rest, M., and Garrone, R. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2814-2823 and Dion, A. S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 18549-18557
Prockop, D. J., and Kivirikko, K. I. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, g Hudson, B. G., Reeders, S. T., and Tryggvason, K. (1993) J. Biol.
403-434 Chem.268, 26033-26036
b Prockop, D. J. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 15349-15352 h Benya, P. D., and Radilla, S. R. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 4160-4169
c Nah, H.-D., Niu, Z., and Adams, S. L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, i Lunstrum, G. P., Sakai, L. Y., Keene, D. R., Morris, N. P., and
16443-16448 Burgeson, R. E. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 9042-9048
d Myers, J. C., Loidl, H. R., Stolle, C. A., and Seyer, J. M. (1985)
J. Biol. Chem.260, 5533-5541

--- Page 439 ---

436 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
within a shorter 18-kb length of
DNA.651 A collagen gene from
Drosophila is much less fragmented.
Collagens are found in all meta-
H
OH O zoan organisms.652 Invertebrate
OH collagens play a variety of special-
ized roles.653 For example, minicol-
N NH NH lagens from Hydra strengthen the
walls of their nematocysts.572
Glu Gal O Glu Gal O Glu Gal O Elastic fibers. The elastic
properties of lung, skin, and large
blood vessels are provided by elastic
fibers in the extracellular matrix.654
The fibers consist of amorphous
Aldimine Ketoamine
material together with the insoluble
(8-10)
protein elastin, which is rich in
glycine, proline, and hydrophobic
The basement membrane collagen IV forms a non- amino acids. Its special structure (Chapter 2) provides
fibrillar network.644,645 The 400-nm-long molecules elasticity to the fibers. A 72-kDa precursor tropoelastin
aggregate via their identical ends. Four molecules are is secreted into the extracellular space where it is acted
held together through their triple-helical N termini, upon by lysyl oxidase (Eq. 8-7) and crosslinked into
while the C-terminal globular domains connect pairs a rubber-like network.654 Remarkable crosslinkages
of molecules. Type IV collagen is also a proteoglycan are formed. Three aldehyde groups derived by oxi-
with a glycoaminoglycan chain attached to one of its dation of lysine side chains combine with one lysine
nonhelical domains. It may become covalently attached amino group through aldol condensations, dehydration,
to type II collagen via a hydroxypyridine linkage.646 and oxidation to form residues of desmosine and
Dimers of the microfibrillar collagen VI are formed isodesmosine.
from 105-nm-long monomers by antiparallel and
staggered alignment, with the 75-nm overlapping
helical segments twisting around each other to form – OOC NH3 + This group
coiled dimers. After a symmetrical association of dimers shifted to C-2
to tetramers, fibrillar structures are formed by end-to- in isodesmosine
H
end aggregation. The connection of monomers to
dimers, tetramers, and polymers occurs by disulfide
bonds between triple-helical segments and globular + +
domains. The 450-nm-long collagen VII molecules
H3N H H NH3
associate into antiparallel dimeric structures which show
– –
OOC COO
a 60-nm overlap and which subsequently assemble
laterally with their ends in register.622
2
At least 32 genes encode the α peptide chains of N+
vertebrate collagens.647,648 These chains are assembled
into the 19 known types of collagen. Alternative splicing
of the mRNAs provides additional isoforms.649 The
collagenα2(I) gene from both the chick and human
DNA is ~ 38 kb in length and consists of 52 exons
separated by introns ranging in length from 80 to 2000 H
base pairs.647,650 At least nine of the exons that encode
+
the triple-helical regions have exactly 54 bp. All are H3N
COO
–
multiples of 9 bp, i.e., the length needed to encode one
Desmosine
Gly-X-Y triplet (Chapter 2, Section D,4). The signifi-
cance of these observations is unclear but the presence
of so many introns does suggest ways in which col- Cartilage and basement membranes. Tendons
lagen sequences could have been transferred into the consist largely of collagen, but in most tissues the
genes for such proteins as acetylcholineesterase and the collagen fibrils are embedded in a matrix of proteogly-
C1q component of complement.647 The human α1(I) cans and various other proteins.655– 657 Both the core
collagen gene also consists of 51 segments but they lie proteins of the proteoglycans and the attached

--- Page 440 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 437
A C VI
NH (A)
2
V
IVb
IIIb
IVa
NH 2 (B1) IIIa NH 2 (B2)
VI V IV’ III III IV V VI
200 nm
α
B
Figure 8-33 (A) Electron micrograph
of polygonal network formed by associ-
ation of collagen type IV monomers.
(B) Electron micrographs of single
molecules of laminin. (A) and (B) from
Yurchenko and Schittny.663,663a Courtesy
I
of Peter Yurchenko (C) Structural model
of the three-chain laminin molecule
with domain designations. From Beck
et al.670 Domains I and II are a triple-
helical coiled coil rod which, in the B1
chain, is interrupted by a small cysteine-
100 nm G5 rich domain α. Sites of cleavage by
G1
G2 G3 G4 cathepsin are marked by arrows.
polysaccharides interact with collagen fibrils and with 8-33B).664– 666 Laminin is one of a series of extracellular
fibronectin and other (previously discussed) cell sur- proteins which appear to have arisen by shuffling of
face proteins. The cartilage matrix658,659 consists large- structural modules during evolution.667 It contains
ly of proteoglycans (Fig. 4-16)660 and of several sites for binding to heparin, to integrins,668 to the
difficult to study, insoluble proteins. One of these is heparin sulfate proteoglycan agrin (see also Fig. 4-11),
the 148-kDa cartilage matrix protein, which yields and to the 150-kDa sulfated glycoprotein nidogen
52-kDa subunits upon reduction.661,662 It interacts with (entactin).669 At least seven isoforms of laminin, with
both proteoglycans and collagen and may help to varying tissue distributions, are formed, in part as a
integrate the cartilage matrix. result of alternative splicing of the mRNA tran-
Basement membranes (Fig. 1-6)663 function in part scripts.666 Laminin is rich in EGF-like modules.665 An
as an exoskeleton that helps keep cells positioned. X-ray structure of three of them shows that they form
However, the thick basement membranes of the capil- a continuous rod of complex structure.321 A smaller
lary walls of the glomeruli of the kidney provide the 100 kDa basement membrane fibulinalso contains
ultrafilters that prevent most proteins from entering multiple EGF-like repeats.671 As with other extracellu-
the urine. Basement membranes contain large lar structures, crosslinking of laminin and other com-
amounts of collagen IV, which forms a polygonal ponents of basement membranes by transglutaminase
network (Fig. 8-33A). A second macromolecular net- provides additional stability.672
work is formed by the very large 950-kDa cross-
shaped multisubunit protein called laminin (Fig.

--- Page 441 ---

438 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
BOX 8-E GENETIC DEFECTS OF COLLAGEN STRUCTURE
Any major protein of the body is likely to be The biochemical problem has been traced to the pres-
associated with a number of genetic problems. In the ence in the seeds of (cid:2)-cyanoalanine and of its decar-
case of collagen, the possibility for harmful mutations boxylation product (cid:2)-aminopropionitrile.
is enhanced by the existence of a large number of
genes that encode the more than 16 types of collagen N C CH CH NH +
2 2 3
which are expressed differently in different tissues.
There are known human disorders resulting from Although the mode of action is not certain, this com-
defects in synthesis, secretion, or structure of types I, pound is an inhibitor of lysyl oxidase essential to the
II, III, IV, and VII collagens. Other defects involve crosslinking of both collagen and elastin. A hereditary
lysyl hydroxylase and procollagen N-proteinase.a– d defect with a similar effect in the mouse involves a
In the severe lethal form of osteogenesis defect in lysyl oxidase.k,l
imperfecta (brittle bone syndrome) the victims’ Collagen defects account for a variety of other
collagen I may contain an α1 chain lacking as many as skeletal problemsm including some cases of the com-
100 residues or a shortened α2 chain. In other cases a monosteoarthritis.n Mice lacking the α1 chain of
cysteine, arginine, or other amino acid has been sub- collagen IX develop a degenerative joint disease
stituted for glycine in the triple-helical region of an α1 resembling human osteoarthritis.o An inherited defect
chain.e,f The cloning of collagen genes has permitted in the basement membrane collagen IV is responsible
an exact description and precise location of the defects for the inherited Alport disease in which kidney
in these genes. Alterations toward the N-terminus of filtration is defective.p,q Similar symptoms are observed
theα1 chain or in the α2 chain often cause a milder with the acute autoimmune disease Goodpasture
type of osteogenesis imperfecta.g Some patients have syndrome and in diabetic nephropathy.p
deletions in the pro-α2 chains of collagen I causing the
chain to be incorporated into the collagen without a Prockop, D. J. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 15349 – 15352
removal of the N-terminal or C-terminal peptide to b Kuivaniemi, H., Tromp, G., and Prockop, D. J. (1991) FASEB J.
give a protein with poor stability.h In other cases 5, 2052 – 2060
amino acid substitutions in the α2 chain cause forma- c Prockop, D. J., and Kivirikko, K. I. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64,
403– 434
tion of chains with excessive posttranslational modifi- d Byers, P. H. (1995) in The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of
cation. Sometimes the α2 chain is not incorporated Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 3 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L.,
into the triple helix and the collagen I formed contains Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 4029 – 4077, McGraw-Hill,
three α1 chains. New York
e Cohen-Solal, L., Zylberberg, L., Sangalli, A., Gomez Lira, M.,
Another well established abnormality of collagen
and Mottes, M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 14751– 14758
is found in cattle suffering from dermatosparaxis, a f Lightfoot, S. J., Atkinson, M. S., Murphy, G., Byers, P. H., and
disease in which the skin is extremely brittle. The Kadler, K. E. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 30352 – 30357
collagen chains are disorganized and have poor fiber- g Marini, J. C., Lewis, M. B., Wang, Q., Chen, K. J., and Orrison,
forming properties. The procollagen peptidase that B. M. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 2667– 2673
h Mundlos, S., Chan, D., Weng, Y. M., Sillence, D. O., Cole, W. G.,
cleaves a peptide from the N termini of the chains of
and Bateman, J. F. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 21068 – 21074
procollagen is apparently defective. A similar human
i Holmes, D. F., Watson, R. B., Steinmann, B., and Kadler, K. E.
collagen disease is the Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 15758 – 15765
which in some instances is accompanied with recur- j Weil, D., D’Alessio, M., Ramirez, F., Steinmann, B., Wirtz, M. K.,
rent joint dislocations and curvature of the spine. At Glanville, R. W., and Hollister, D. W. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264,
least ten different types of the disorder are known.d 16804– 16809
k Pope, F. M., Martin, G. R., Lichtenstein, J. R., Penttinen, R.,
The procollagen peptidase is sometimes lacking.i In
Gerson, B., Rowe, D. W., and McKusick, V. A. (1975) Proc. Natl.
other cases a person synthesizes an abnormal pro-α2 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.72, 1314 – 1316
chain that is resistant to cleavage by the peptidase l Rowe, D. W., McGoodwin, E. B., Martin, G. R., and Grahn, D.
because of deletion of the normal cleavage site. In (1977)J. Biol. Chem.252, 939 – 942
mFreisinger, P., Ala-Kokko, L., LeGuellec, D., Franc, S., Bouvier,
others collagen is formed in only small amounts or
R., Ritvaniemi, P., Prockop, D. J., and Bonaventure, J. (1994)
is degraded rapidly. Some individuals lack lysyl
J. Biol. Chem.269, 13663 – 13669
hydroxylase and others have a defect in mRNA n Ala-Kokko, L., Baldwin, C. T., Moskowitz, R. W., and Prockop,
splicing which causes loss of an exon from the mRNA D. J. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.87, 6565 – 6568
and synthesis of shortened pro-α2 chains.j o Fässler, R., Schnegelsberg, P. N. J., Dausman, J., Shinya, T.,
Muragaki, Y., McCarthy, M. T., Olsen, B. R., and Jaenisch, R.
Somewhat similar symptoms are observed in
(1994)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 5070 – 5074
lathyrism, a disease which arises when animals ingest
p Zhou, J., Hertz, J. M., Leinonen, A., and Tryggvason, K. (1992)
seeds of Lathyris odoratus, the common sweetpea. J. Biol. Chem.267, 12475 – 12481
Since lathyris peas form part of the diet of some peo- q Gunwar, S., Ballester, F., Noelken, M. E., Sado, Y., Ninomiya, Y.,
ples, the condition is also known in humans and often and Hudson, B. G. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 8767– 8775
causes curvature of the spine and rupture of the aorta.

--- Page 442 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 439
BOX 8-F SKIN
Mammalian skin must be tough, water-resistant, The dendrites of a melanocyte contact about 36
self-renewing, and rapidly healing. The outer keratinocytes and are able to transfer melanosomes
layers of cells or epidermis consist principally of to these adjacent cells. The numbers and sizes of the
keratinocytes, epithelial cells specialized for for- melanosomes as well as melanin structure determine
mation of keratin (Fig. 7-31). In the inner layer of differences in skin color.m Similar cells in amphibians,
the epidermis the basal stem cells divide, provid- themelanophores, also contain light receptors.p
ing a constant outward flow of cells which become Their melanosomes are not transferred to other cells
progressively flattened, dehydrated, and filled with but may be either clustered near the center of the
keratin fibrils.a The outer layers contain only dead cell or dispersed. The location can be changed
cells which are finally sloughed or abraded from the quickly by transport of the melanosomes along a
surface. Human epidermis is completely renewed network of microtubules allowing the animals to
in about 28 days! change in response to changes in light color.q
About 25 different human genes encode the Various stimuli, including ultraviolet irradiation of
keratins of skin and other soft tissues. Others specify melanocytes, cause increased synthesis of melanin
the keratins of hair and nails.b Both of these hard with a resultant tanningo and added protection
tissues as well as claws, hoofs, beaks, horns, scales, against sunburn.
quills, and feathers are largely keratin. However, Beneath the basement membrane of the epidermis
there are additional constituents. During the final is the dermis, a thick, tough, collagen-rich connec-
stages of keratinocyte differentiation a 15-nm-thick tive tissue. Blood vessels and nerve endings are
crosslinked sheath of protein, the cornified cell found in this layer, as are roots of hairs and oil and
envelope (CE), forms beneath the plasma membrane.c sweat glands.r
Crosslinkages between keratin and other proteins Skin suffers from a variety of ailments includ-
are formed by the action of transglutaminases.d– f ing serious hereditary diseases.a One group of
A specialized protein involucrin, which contains keratinization disorders, known as ichthyoses,
glutamine-rich repeating sequences, provides many are characterized by thickened, scaly skin. Some
of the side chain amide groups for the crosslinking hereditary ichthyoses result from defects in type II
reaction (Eq. 2-23).g Loricin, a protein
containing glycine-rich flexible loops,h is
also a major partner in these cross- Stratum corneum
linkages.c,h The histidine-rich filaggrin
undergoes complex processing before
binding to keratin fibrils to provide
another form of crosslinkage.i,j Small Langerhans cell
proline-rich proteins, desmosonal pro-
teins, and others are also present in the
CE.c
As the final outer stratum corneum
is formed the phospholipid bilayer
deteriorates and intercellular lipid layers
are formed.k,l These contain principally
ceramides, cholesterol, and free fatty Basal layer
acids. Some sphingolipids are covalently
attached to proteins.a
Melanocyte
Also present in the epidermis are
Basement
embedded macrophage-like Langerhans membrane
cells as well as pigmented melanocytes,
Dermis
cells with highly branched dendrites,
which lie just above the basal stem cell
layer. Each melanocyte contains hun-
Diagram of a dendritic melanocyte surrounded by satellite kerati-
dreds of pigmented organelles called
nocytes. The Golgi area (G), where the melanosomes are synthesized, is
melanosomes. They contain not only
shown around the nucleus. The other branched cell, higher in the
the black or reddish melanin pigments epidermis, is a Langerhans cell with its tennis racquet-shaped granules.
but also the enzymes needed to form Courtesy of Dr. W. Quevedo, Jr. From Montagna et al.m
them (Chapter 25).n,o

--- Page 443 ---

440 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
BOX 8-F SKIN (continued)
keratin.b Lamellar ichthyosis reflects defects in g Yaffe, M. B., Beegen, H., and Eckert, R. L. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.
the crosslinking enzyme transglutaminase.e,f 267, 12233 – 12238
h Hohl, D., Mehrel, T., Lichti, U., Turner, M. L., Roop, D. R., and
Epidermolysis bullosa is a heterogeneous group
Steinert, P. M. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 6626 – 6636
of disorders characterized by easy formation of i Resing, K. A., Walsh, K. A., Haugen-Scofield, J., and Dale, B. A.
blisters. One form has been traced to a defect in the (1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 1837– 1845
anchoring fibrils of type VII collagen, which tie cells j Mack, J. W., Steven, A. C., and Steinert, P. M. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.
232, 50 – 66
of the basal layer to the basement membrane.s,t
k ten Grotenhuis, E., Demel, R. A., Ponec, M., Boer, D. R., van
Others are defects in keratins of the basal or inter- Miltenburg, J. C., and Bouwstra, J. A. (1996) Biophys. J.71,
mediate layers.a Yet others involve the lipid metab- 1389– 1399
olism of skin, e.g. a steroid sulfatase deficiency.a l Bouwstra, J. A., Thewalt, J., Gooris, G. S., and Kitson, N. (1997)
Biochemistry36, 7717– 7725
The most frequent skin disorder, which affects
mMontagna, W., Prota, G., and Kenney, J. A., Jr. (1993) Black Skin
about 2% of the world’s population is psoriasis. Structure and Function, Academic Press, San Diego, California
The thickened, scaly patches can cover much of the n Potterf, S. B., Muller, J., Bernardini, I., Tietze, F., Kobayashi, T.,
skin and become disabling. The inflammation and Hearing, V. J., and Gahl, W. A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 4002 –
4008
excessive epidermal growth are usually a T-cell
o Roméro-Graillet, C., Aberdam, E., Biagoli, N., Massabni, W.,
mediated immunologic response to antigenic Ortonne, J.-P., and Ballotti, R. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 28052 –
stimuli.p,u,v However, there is a hereditary form.u 28056
Other common skin disorders include actinic kera- p Greaves, M. W., and Weinstein, G. D. (1995) N. Engl. J. Med.332,
581– 588
tosis induced by light and cancer.
q Rogers, S. L., Tint, I. S., Fanapour, P. C., and Gelfand, V. I. (1997)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 3720 – 3725
a Roop, D. (1995) Science267, 474 – 475 r Martin, P. (1997) Science276, 75 – 81
b Takahashi, K., Paladini, R. D., and Coulombe, P. A. (1995) s Byers, P. H. (1995) in The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of
J. Biol. Chem.270, 18581– 18592 Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 3 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L.,
c Robinson, N. A., Lapic, S., Welter, J. F., and Eckert, R. L. (1997) Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 4029 – 4077, McGraw-Hill,
J. Biol. Chem.272, 12035 – 12046 New York
d Kim, S.-Y., Chung, S.-I., and Steinert, P. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. t Christiano, A. M., Ryynänen, M., and Uitto, J. (1994) Proc. Natl.
270, 18026 – 18035 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 3549 – 3553
e Huber, M., Rettler, I., Bernasconi, K., Frenk, E., Lavrijsen, S. P. u Tomfohrde, J., Silverman, A., Barnes, R., Fernandez-Vina, M. A.,
M., Ponec, M., Bon, A., Lautenschlager, S., Schorderet, D. F., Young, M., Lory, D., Morris, L., Wuepper, K. D., Stastny, P.,
and Hohl, D. (1995) Science267, 525 – 528 Menter, A., and Bowcock, A. (1994) Science264, 1141– 1145
f Candi, E., Melino, G., Lahm, A., Ceci, R., Rossi, A., Kim, I. G., v Boehncke, W.-H., Dressel, D., Zollner, T. M., and Kaufmann, R.
Ciani, B., and Steinert, P. M. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 13693 – (1996)Nature (London)379, 777
13702
Fibrillin and Marfan’s syndrome. Most connec- vertebrates and there are ~ 100 different genes whose
tive tissues contain insoluble, beaded microfibrils 10 – transcription gives rise to a large variety of similar
12 nm in diameter. A component of some of these proteins.652 Cuticles of some annelids have unusually
microfibrils, which are often found in elastic tissue, long collagens.653,677 In contrast, the epithelial cells of
was purified from media used to culture human fibro- insects and other arthropods secrete chitin which
blasts in 1986. This protein, called fibrillin, is a single- serves as the framework for development of a thick
chain 350-kDa glycoprotein which contains ~14% and often hard cuticle or exoskeleton. The cuticle also
cysteine.673–674 Using a DNA probe based on the par- contains a variety of proteins.678,679 In some instances
tially cloned fibrillin gene, the location of the gene was mineralization by calcium carbonate occurs. During
established on the long arm of chromosome 15 at a site the later phases of the cuticle development extensive
previously identified as that of a gene defective in crosslinking of the proteins takes place. This is largely
Marfan’s syndrome. This disorder often causes dislo- by reactions between modified aromatic side chains
cation of lenses of the eyes and aortic aneurysm as and resembles the chemistry of formation of melanin
well as elongated limbs and fingers. Point mutations and lignin (Chapter 25).680
in the fibrillin gene have been identified in both
Marfan’s patients and family members that carry the Bones, teeth, and shells. Living organisms are
defective gene.675,676 able to induce the formation of over 60 inorganic com-
pounds.681 Most of these are formed by animals. Two
The cuticles of invertebrates. The tough elastic forms of calcium carbonate, calcite and aragonite,
cuticle of the nematode Caenorhabditis is largely col- predominate.682 These minerals form shells, exoskeleton
lagen. However, the molecules are smaller than in bones, bones, teeth, and other specialized structures.

--- Page 444 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 441
While some organisms promote mineral deposition
completely outside of their cell coats, the mineraliza-
b
tion is usually controlled by the proteins and polysac-
charides lying around and between cells.683– 687
Ca Ca
Bone deposition begins in the proteoglycan and
collagen II matrix of cartilage. Later these polymers
are largely replaced by collagen I which accounts for Ca
P
90% of the organic material in mature bone. Bone P
collagen has a distinctive pattern of crosslink-
Ca OH Ca
ing.639,688,689 Some borohydride-reducible crosslinks
Ca Ca
remain throughout adult life.639 However, complex
hydroxypyridine and pyrrole linkages are more char-
a
acteristic of bone collagen. Embedded in the bone P
matrix are spidery cells, the osteocytes. Among
Ca Ca
these are osteoblasts,689a which secrete the collagen
and other proteins that promote the laying down of
calcium phosphate. Also present are large multinucleate
Figure 8-34 An end-on view of a crystallite of hydroxy-
osteoclasts689b which dissolve bone and reabsorb
lapatite. The shaded atoms of Ca, P, and O represent an
calcium and phosphate. Cells of both types remain underlying layer. The OH– groups form a longitudinal
active in mature bone, which is both a structural H-bonded array in the center. From J. A. Weatherell and
material and a store of calcium and phosphorus. C. Robinson,705 p. 55. A small amount of Mg2+ is present in
How do osteoblasts induce calcium phosphate place of Ca2+ and a very small fraction of the OH– is replaced
deposition? The first crystals laid down within the by fluoride ion which has a bone strengthening effect.
cartilage matrix are of carbonate apatite only 2 – 3 nm
thick and tens of nanometers in length. They are
intimately associated with the collagen and other the 24 kDa propeptide cut from the N-terminal end of
components of the matrix690 and may be formed with- theα1 chain of type I procollagen.702 Another bone
in matrix vesicles.691 From observations with large protein, the sialic acid-containing osteopontin has
biologically formed calcium carbonate crystals it is the cell-binding sequence GRGDS identical to that in
known that proteins or other organic initiators of fibronectin.703,704 Since it also binds to hydroxylapatite
crystallization can be found embedded in mature this protein may form a bridge between cell surfaces
crystals. If the same is true in bone what are the initia- and the mineral matrix.
tors? The answer is uncertain but it is known that The mineral phase of bone is largely hydroxylapatite,
without osteoblasts the partially mineralized cartilage Ca (PO ) (OH) (Fig. 8-34), which is essentially in
10 4 6 2
will not become bone.692 chemical equilibrium with the calcium and phosphate
A key to the development of osteoblasts appears ions present in the blood serum. Thus, bone cells can
to be an osteoblast-specific transcription factor easily promote either the deposition or dissolution of
OS/2 or Cbfa1.693– 695 Mutations in human Cbfa1 are the mineral phase by localized change in pH, concen-
linked to a series of skeletal defects.696 A unique trations of Ca2+ or HPO 2–, or of chelating compounds
4
change accompanying conversion of a precursor cell such as ATP or inorganic pyrophosphate. Small 100
into an osteoblast is the formation of a 49-residue nm vesicles rich in acidic phospholipids and contain-
γ-carboxyglutamate (Gla)-containing protein called ing both Ca2+ and the enzymes alkaline phosphatase
osteocalcin.697 (See also Box 15-F). It is the most and pyrophosphatase, may play an essential role in
abundant noncollagenous protein of bone. Its three calcification. Perhaps they release the calcium and
Gla residues doubtless help to bind calcium ions and enzymes that generate inorganic phosphate.691
osteocalcin may be an initiator of crystallization. Bone is noted for its continual “remodeling”
Osteocalcin has also been found in fish scales.698 Also caused by the action of both osteoblasts and osteo-
present in bone is a 74-residue matrix Gla protein clasts.704a,b The latter are large multinuclear cells
which has 5 Gla residues.699 derived from the same precursors as give rise to macro-
Other phosphoproteins, glycoproteins, and phages.689b,704 Osteoclasts generate a sealed, acidic
proteoglycans may also be required for mineral- compartment on a bone surface, using a vacuolar
ization. For example, the 286-residue glycoprotein ATPase to pump protons from the cytosol of the osteo-
osteonectin323,700,701 accounts for 3% of total bone clast, using H CO as a source of protons.706 The HCO -
2 3 3
protein. It contains two Ca2+-binding motifs and then leaves cells in exchange for Cl- which then also enters
inhibits growth of hydroxylapatite crystals, but its role the acidified compartment. Not only is the calcium
in bone development is not clear. One of the phos- phosphate dissolved but lysomal enzymes digest the
phoproteins of developing bone has been identified as organic materials. Each osteoclast creates a long tun-

--- Page 445 ---

442 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
BOX 8-G THE BIOCHEMISTRY OF TEETH
Like other bones, mammalian teeth are com- rated with respect to these ions. As a result the
posed largely of collagen and hydroxylapatite. The enamel surface is continuously recalcified. The 43-
much studied rat incisor is 65% mineral; about 85% residue salivary protein statherin retards precipita-
of the organic material is type I collagen. A tooth tion of calcium phosphates from the saliva,
consists of three mineralized tissues together with preventing excessive build-up of calcified deposits
the internal blood vessels and nerves of the pulp.a on the teeth.j Other proline-rich proteins may play a
The outer layer of enamel is formed by secretion role in recalcification repair.k
from a thin layer of epithelial cells, the ameloblasts. A freshly cleaned tooth surface quickly becomes
The enamel matrix is devoid of collagen but con- coated with a thin pellicle of salivary proteins. This
tains two characteristic groups of proteins, the provides a surface for growth of dental plaque,
amelogenins and the enamelins. which contains many bacteria and adhesive
polysaccharides such as dextrans.l The latter are
generated from dietary sucrose by such bacteria as
Streptococcus mutans. (Chapter 20) and others.m
Enamel
Crown Pellicle Many factors affect the probability of tooth decay.
Plaque A high sucrose diet promotes decay.n While most
Dentin
people have some trouble with tooth decay, 1 or 2
Gum
Pulp per thousand remain totally free of caries and seem
to be immune. Many factors must affect resistance
Bone to caries. For example, individuals vary in the kinds
Pulp canal and numbers of bacteria present on teeth and in the
Root structure of tooth enamel.o Addition of fluoride ion
Cementum
to water supplies at a level of 1ppm (0.05 mM) is
generally believed to reduce the incidence of tooth
Periodontal
decay. However, caries has been declining in many
membrane
developed countries at rates that are the same for
water with or without fluoride.p,q If teeth escape
This cross section of a human molar cariesperiodental disease, caused by bacteria, is
shows deposits of pellicle and plaque often a major problem for older people.r
near the gum lineh
The amelogenins are hydrophobic but are also rich a Krebsbach, P. H., Lee, S. K., Matsuki, Y., Kozak, C. A., Yamada,
in proline, histidine, and glutamic acid.a,b They K. M., and Yamada, Y. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 4431– 4435
b Renugopalakrishnan, V., Strawich, E. S., Horowitz, P. M., and
account for 90% of the matrix proteins but are
Glimcher, M. J. (1986) Biochemistry25, 4879 – 4887
replaced by the initially less abundant enamelinsc c Deutsch, D., Palmon, A., Fisher, L. W., Kolodny, N., Termine,
in fully mineralized teeth.a,d Another protein J. D., and Young, M. F. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 16021– 16028
d Robinson, C., Weatherell, J. A., and Höhling, H. J. (1983) Trends
present in developing enamel is ameloblastin,
Biochem. Sci.8, 284 – 287
which appears to be unique to amyloblasts.a As e Ritchie, H. H., Hou, H., Veis, A., and Butler, W. T. (1994) J. Biol.
mineralization of the enamel progresses the matrix Chem.269, 3698 – 3702
is lost and 98% of the enamel is hydroxylapatite.a f Arzate, H., Olson, S. W., Page, R. C., Gown, A. M., and
Narayanan, A. S. (1992) FASEB J.6, 2990 – 2995
Dentin is of epithelial-mesenchymal origin.
g Yamauchi, M., Katz, E. P., and Mechanic, G. L. (1986)
Theodontoblasts secrete an extracellular matrix
Biochemistry25, 4907– 4913
that is rich in collagen I and which also contains all h Sanders, H. J. (1980) Chem. Eng. News(Feb. 25)58(8) 30 – 39
of the other major bone proteins as well as a dentin i Shaw, J. H. (1987) N. Engl. J. Med.317, 996 – 1004
sialoproteine and poorly characterized phosphate j Schlesinger, D. H., and Hoy, D. I. (1977) J. Biol. Chem.252, 1689 –
1695
carriers, the phosphophoryns. k Clements, S., Mehansho, H., and Carlson, D. M. (1985) J. Biol.
The third hard tissue of teeth is cementum, Chem.260, 13471– 13477
which binds teeth to the periodental ligaments. The l Kolenbrander, P. E., Ganeshkumar, N., Cassels, F. J., and
Hughes, C. V. (1993) FASEB J.7, 406 – 408
ligaments contain fibrillar collagen which inserts
mAbeygunawardana, C., and Bush, C. A. (1990) Biochemistry29,
into the cementum.f,g
234–248
Except for the common cold, tooth decay (caries) n Newbrun, E. (1982) Science217, 418 – 423
is the most prevalent disease in the United States.h,i o Cevc, G., Cevc, P., Schara, M., and Skaleric, U. (1980) Nature
(London)286, 425 – 426
Caries is initiated by attack of acids produced by
p Diesendorf, M. (1986) Nature (London)322, 125 – 129
bacterial fermentations on the enamel. The saliva q Hileman, B. (1988) Chem. Eng. NewsAug. 1, 26 – 42
contains calcium and phosphate and is supersatu- r Williams, R. C. (1990) N. Engl. J. Med.322, 373 – 382

--- Page 446 ---

E. The Extracellular Matrix and Cell Walls 443
nel into the interior of the bone. However, the tunnel crystallization under supersaturating conditions.
is soon lined with new osteoblasts and new bone is For example, normal urine is supersaturated with
laid down.707 In osteoporosis, a very common disease calcium oxalate. To prevent formation of renal calculi
of older persons, the rate of resorption of bone by (stones)719 an inhibitory glycoprotein is present and
osteoclasts exceeds that of bone formation by osteo- slows the formation and growth of crystals.720 Under
blasts. Women typically lose 50% and men ~30% of some disease conditions calcium carbonate stones may
their calcium phosphate from vertebrae and ends of form in pancreatic ducts. A 17 kDa lectinlike glycopro-
long bones as they age.708 In osteopetrosis (marble tein called lithostatine has been proposed to inhibit
bone disease) excessive calcification of bone and other stone formation by binding to certain planes on CaCO
3
tissues occurs as a result of a deficiency of carbonic microcrystals just as antifreeze proteins (Box 4-D) inhibit
anhydrase.709 See also Chapter 13. A disease of pro- ice formation.721 However, this proposed function for
gressive calcification of soft tissues710 results from an lithostatine is doubtful.722,723 Pathological deposits of
excess of bone morphogenic factor-4, one of a group crystalline calcium pyrophosphate and basic calcium
of protein factors acting on bone development (Chapter phosphates are sometimes present in joints,724 even in
32).631 Paget’s disease is another disorder of bone Neanderthal skeletons.725
remodeling that leads to overproduction of bone of
poor quality.711 As discussed in Box 22-C, the circulating
level of Ca2+ as well as the cellular uptake of this ion 3. Cell Walls of Fungi and Green Plants
are controlled by vitamin D and its metabolites and
by calcitonin and the parathyroid hormones. The cell walls of yeasts and other fungi are made
Lack of a pyrophosphate ion pump in cartilage up largely of glucans, chitin, and a mannan-protein
cells may cause a deficit in pyrophosphate in the complex. Yeasts contain predominately glucans but
surroundings of the forming bone. In mice with a chitin is the major polysaccharide in many other fungi.
defect in this pump bony spurs, similar to those in The most abundant glucan is a β1,3 linked polymer
human osteoarthritis, are formed.711a Over half of the with about 3% β1,6 linkages to the branches and a
world’s population of persons over 65 years of age are molecular mass of ~ 240 kDa. In addition there is about
afflicted by arthritis, over 100 types being known.711b 15% of a highly branched 1,6 linked glucan containing
Calcium carbonate in several different crystalline 1,3 linked branches. At the outer surface of the wall
forms arises biologically.705,712 Sometimes the mineral are mannoproteins726– 728 which carry small serine- or
is deposited within vesicles inside the cell. Thus some threonine-linked oligomannans as well as large highly
species of the protozoan Hymenomonas use Golgi vesicles branched mannans linked to asparagine through the
as sites for construction of segments of plantlike cell usualN-acetylglucosamine-containing core structure.
walls complete with crystalline calcium carbonate Some of these highly branched mannan chains serve as
plates attached to the outer surface.713 These wall species-specific antigens.727 Like those of the bacterial
segments are then transported to their final locations. and animal cell surfaces, the antigens vary in structure,
The intricately sculptured spicules of sea urchins and a fact with important medical implications. Curiously,
sponges are single crystals of calcium carbonate which many fungi have surface fimbriae which are composed
have grown within intracellular vesicles.687,714 Diatoms ofcollagen, which is usually regarded as exclusively
also form their shells of nearly pure, hydrated SiO (See an animal protein.729
2
Box 4-B) entirely within membrane-bound vesicles.715 Cell walls of higher plants (Fig. 1-7, 4-14) are com-
On the other hand, shells of molluscs are usually posed largely of polysaccharides. They are discussed
deposited outside the cells of the organism but again briefly in Chapter 20.
under the influence of a protein matrix.716,717 The
animals apparently actively pump bicarbonate outward
where it reacts with Ca2+ (Eq. 8-11).718
Ca2+ + HCO –→ CaCO + H+ (8-11)
3 3
The protons released then react with more bicarbonate
to form carbonic acid which is converted to CO and
2
water (Eq. 8-12) by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase.
Carbonic
anhydrase
H CO CO + H O
2 3 2 2 (8-12)
A problem that arises within organisms is avoiding

--- Page 447 ---

444 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
References
1. Christie, W. W. (1973) Lipid Analysis; Isolation, 31. Tupper, S., Wong, P. T. T., Kates, M., and 63. Quinn, P. J., and Cherry, R. J., eds. (1992)
Preparation, Identification and Structural Tanphaichitr, N. (1994) Biochemistry33, Structural and Dynamic Properties of Lipids and
Analysis of Lipids, Pergamon, Oxford 13250–13258 Membranes, Portland Press, London
2. Hitchcock, C., and Nichols, B. W. (1971) Plant 32. Andersson, A.-S., Rilfors, L., Bergqvist, M., 64. Disalvo, E. A., and Simon, S. A., eds. (1995)
Lipid Biochemistry, Academic Press, New York Persson, S., and Lindblom, G. (1996) Permeability and Stability of Lipid Bilayers, CRC
3. Kates, M. (1972) in Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry35, 11119–11130 Press, Boca Raton, Florida
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Vol. 3, Part 32a. Vikström, S., Li, L., and Wieslander, Å. (2000) 65. Jacobson, K., Sheets, E. D., and Simson, R.
II (Work, T. S., and Work, E., eds), North- J. Biol. Chem.275, 9296–9302 (1995)Science268, 1441–1442
Holland Publ., Amsterdam 33. Nishihara, M., Utagawa, M., Akutsu, H., and 66. Pascher, I., Lundmark, M., Nyholm, P.-G., and
4. Weete, J. W. (1980) Lipid Biochemistry of Fungi Koga, Y. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 12432–12435 Sundell, S. (1992) Biochim. Biophys. Acta.1113,
and Other Organisms, Plenum, New York 34. Powles, T. J., Easty, D. M., Easty, G. C., Bondy, 339–373
5. Gurr, M. I., and James, A. T. (1975) Lipid P. K., and Munro-Neville, A. (1973) Nature 67. Cameron, D. G., Gudgin, E. F., and Mantsch,
Biochemistry, an Introduction, 2nd ed., Cornell (London), New Biol.245, 83 H. H. (1981) Biochemistry20, 4496–4500
Univ. Press, Ithaca, New York 35. Lynch, D. V. (1993) in Lipid Metabolism in 68. Zasadzinski, J. A. N., Helm, C. A., Longo, M.
6. Porter, K. R., and Bonneville, M. A. (1973) Fine Plants (Moore, T. S., Jr., ed), pp. 285–308, CRC L., Weisenhorn, A. L., Gould, S. A. C., and
Structure of Cells and Tissues, 4th ed., Lea & Press, Boca Raton, Florida Hansma, P. K. (1991) Biophys. J.59, 755–760
Febiger, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 36. Araki, S., Satake, M., Ando, S., Hayashi, A., 69. Wiener, M. C., and White, S. H. (1992) Biophys.
7. Aveldaño, M. I., and Sprecher, H. (1987) J. and Fujii, N. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 5138– J.61, 428–433
Biol. Chem.262, 1180–1186 5144 70. Smith, D. P. E., Bryant, A., Quate, C. F., Rabe,
8. Gunstone, F. D. (1967) An Introduction to the 37. Araki, S., Abe, S., Odani, S., Ando, S., Fujii, J. P., Gerber, C. H., and Swalen, J. D. (1987)
Chemistry and Biochemistry of Fatty Acids and N., and Satake, M. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 969–972
Their Glycerides, 2nd ed., Chapman and Hall, 14141–14145 71. Yang, J., Tamm, L. K., Tillack, T. W., and Shao,
London (Chapter 6) 38. Song, W., and Rintoul, D. A. (1989) Z. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.229, 286–290
9. Steck, P. A., Schwartz, B. A., Rosendahl, M. S., Biochemistry28, 4194–4200 72. Nagle, J. F., Zhang, R., Tristram-Nagle, S.,
and Gray, G. R. (1978) J. Biol. Chem.253, 5625– 39. Hsieh, T. C.-Y., Lester, R. L., and Laine, R. A. Sun, W., Petrache, H. I., and Suter, R. M.
5629 (1981)J. Biol. Chem.256, 7747–7755 (1996)Biophys. J.70, 1419–1431
10. McNeil, M., Daffe, M., and Brennan, P. J. 40. Barr, K., and Lester, R. L. (1984) Biochemistry 73. Mueller, P., Rudin, D. O., Tien, H. T., and
(1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 13217–13223 23, 5581–5588 Wescott, W. C. (1962) Nature (London)194,
11. Qureshi, N., Takayama, K., and Schnoes, H. 41. Dickson, R. C., Nagiec, E. E., Wells, G. B., 979–980
K. (1980) J. Biol. Chem.255, 182–189 Nagiec, M. M., and Lester, R. L. (1997) J. Biol. 74. Howard, K. P., and Prestegard, J. H. (1995)
11a. Adlof, R. O., Duval, S., and Emken, E. A. Chem.272, 29620–29625 J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 5031–5040
(2000)Lipids35, 131 – 135 42. Yamakawa, T., and Nagai, Y. (1978) Trends 75. Ostro, M. J. (1987) Sci. Am.256(Jan), 103 – 111
12. Cravatt, B. F., Prospero-Garcia, O., Siuzdak, Biochem. Sci.3, 128–131 76. Philippot, J. R., and Schuber, F., eds. (1995)
G., Gilula, N. B., Henriksen, S. J., Boger, D. L., 43. Hansson, G. C. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 9612– Liposomes as Tools in Basic Research and
and Lerner, R. A. (1995) Science268, 1506–1509 9615 Industry, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
13. Hummel, H. E., Gaston, L. K., Shorey, H. H., 44. Clausen, H., Holmes, E., and Hakomori, S.-I. 77. Harwood, J. L. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17,
Kaae, R. S., Byrne, K. J., and Silverstein, R. M. (1986)J. Biol. Chem.261, 1388–1392 203–204
(1973)Science181, 873–874 45. Farooqui, A. A. (1981) Adv. Lipid Res.18, 159– 77a. Schröder, M. (1980) Chem. Rev.80, 187–213
14. Klun, J. A., Chapman, O. L., Mattes, K. C., 202 77b. Mohapatra, S. K., and Behrman, E. J. (1982) J.
Wojtkowski, P. W., Beroza, M., and Sonnet, P. 46. Godchaux, W., III, and Leadbetter, E. R. (1984) Inorg. Biochem16, 85–89
E. (1973) Science181, 661–663 J. Biol. Chem.259, 2982–2990 77c. Deetz, J. S., and Behrman, E. J. (1981) Intl. J.
15. Moolenaar, W. H. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 47. Abbanat, D. R., Leadbetter, E. R., Godchaux, Peptide Prot. Res.17, 495–500
12949–12952 W., III, and Escher, A. (1986) Nature (London) 78. Norrby, P.-O., Becker, H., and Sharpless, K. B.
16. Wells, W. W., and Eisenberg, F., Jr., eds. (1978) 324, 367–369 (1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 35–42
Cyclitols and Phosphoinositides, Academic 48. Jones, M. N., and Chapman, D., eds. (1994) 79. Montal, M., and Mueller, P. (1972) Proc. Natl.
Press, New York Micelles, Monolayers and Biomembranes, Wiley, Acad. Sci. U.S.A.69, 3561–3566
17. DeBuch, H. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 44–45 New York 80. Ladha, S., Mackie, A. R., Harvey, L. J., Clark,
18. Chilton, F. H., and Connell, T. R. (1988) J. Biol. 49. Jain, M. (1988) Introduction to Biological D. C., Lea, E. J. A., Brullemans, M., and
Chem.263, 5260–5265 Membranes, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York Duclohier, H. (1996) Biophys. J.71, 1364–1373
19. Ford, D. A., and Gross, R. W. (1994) 50. Lofan, R., and Nicolson, G. L. (1981) in 81. Jones, M. N., and Chapman, D. (1995)
Biochemistry33, 1216–1222 Advanced Cell Biology (Schwartz, L. M., and Micelles, Monolayers, and Biomembranes, Wiley-
20. Friedman, S. M., ed. (1978) Biochemistry of Azar, M. M., eds), Van Nostrand Reinhold Liss, New York
Thermophily, Academic Press, New York Co., New York 81a. Knobler, C. M. (1990) Adv. Chem. Phys.77,
21. Kushwaha, S. C., Kates, M., Sprott, G. D., and 51. Storch, J., and Kleinfeld, A. M. (1985) Trends 397–449
Smith, I. C. P. (1981) Science211, 1163–1164 Biochem. Sci.10, 418 – 421 82. Bryce, M. R., and Petty, M. C. (1995) Nature
22. Luzzati, V., Gambacorta, A., DeRosa, M., and 52. Robertson, R. N. (1983) The Lively Membranes, (London)374, 771–776
Gulik, A. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 83. Zasadzinski, J. A., Viswanathan, R., Madsen,
Chem.16, 25–47 53. Starzak, M. (1984) The Physical Chemistry of L., Garnaes, J., and Schwartz, D. K. (1994)
23. Goldfine, H., and Langworthy, T. A. (1988) Membranes, Academic Press, San Diego, Science263, 1726–1733
Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 217–221 California 84. Fettiplace, R., Andrews, D. M., and Haydon,
24. Ferrante, G., Ekiel, I., and Sprott, G. D. (1986) 54. Gennis, R. B. (1989) Biomembranes: Molecular D. A. (1971) J. Membr. Biol.5, 277–296
J. Biol. Chem.261, 17062–17066 Structure and Function, Springer-Verlag, New 85. White, S. W., and King, G. I. (1985) Proc. Natl.
25. Pond, J. L., Langworthy, T. A., and Holzer, G. York Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 6532–6536
(1986)Science231, 1134–1136 55. Morell, P., and Norton, W. T. (1980) Sci. Am. 86. Snyder, R. G., Maroncelli, M., Qi, S. P., and
26. Florin-Christensen, J., Florin-Christensen, M., 242(May), 88–116 Strauss, H. L. (1981) Science214, 188–190
Knudson, J., and Rasmussen, L. (1986) Trends 56. Martenson, R. E., ed. (1992) Myelin: Biology 87. Di, L., and Small, D. M. (1995) Biochemistry34,
Biochem. Sci.11, 354–355 and Chemistry, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 16672–16677
27. Cooney, R. V., Mumma, R. O., and Benson, A. 57. Weimbs, T., and Stoffel, W. (1994) Biochemistry 88. Tu, K., Tobias, D. J., Blasie, J. K., and Klein, M.
A. (1978) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.75, 4262– 33, 10408–10415 L. (1996) Biophys. J.70, 595–608
4264 58. Korn, E. D. (1966) Science153, 1491–1498 89. Katsaras, J., Raghunathan, V. A., Dufourc, E.
28. Renou, J.-P., Giziewicz, J. B., Smith, I. C. P., 59. Tanford, C. (1980) The Hydrophobic Effect: J., and Dufourcq, J. (1995) Biochemistry34,
and Jarrell, H. C. (1989) Biochemistry28, 1804– Formation of Micelles and Biological Membranes, 4684–4688
1814 2nd ed., Wiley, New York 90. Snyder, R. G., Liang, G. L., Strauss, H. L., and
29. Gounaris, K., and Barber, J. (1983) Trends 60. Danielli, J. F., and Davsen, H. (1985) J. Cell. Mendelsohn, R. (1996) Biophys. J.71, 3186–
Biochem. Sci.8, 378–381 Comp. Physiol.5, 495–508 3198
30. Knowles, F. C., and Benson, A. A. (1983) 61. Singer, S. J., and Nicolson, G. L. (1972) Science 91. Chen, S. C., Sturtevant, J. M., and Gaffney, B.
Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 178–180 175, 720–731 J. (1980) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 5060–
62. Bretscher, M. S., and Raff, M. C. (1975) Nature 5063
(London)258, 43–49

--- Page 448 ---

445
References
92. Sun, W.-J., Tristram-Nagle, S., Suter, R. M., 127. Hübner, W., Mantsch, H. H., Paltauf, F., and 162. Zhao, J., Zhou, Q., Wiedmer, T., and Sims, P. J.
and Nagle, J. F. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Hauser, H. (1994) Biochemistry33, 320–326 (1998)Biochemistry37, 6361–6366
U.S.A.93, 7008–7012 128. Léger, C. L., Daveloose, D., Christon, R., and 163. Wolff, D., Canessa-Fischer, M., Vargas, F., and
93. Mou, J., Yang, J., and Shao, Z. (1994) Viret, J. (1990) Biochemistry29, 7269–7275 Diaz, G. (1971) J. Membr. Biol.6, 304–314
Biochemistry33, 4439–4443 129. Jakobsson, E. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 164. Sherbet, G. V. (1978) The Biophysical
94. Wang, Z.-q, Lin, H.-n, Li, S., and Huang, C.-h. 339–344 Characterisation of the Cell Surface, Academic
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 2014–2023 130. Berger, O., Edholm, O., and Jähnig, F. (1997) Press, London
95. Wang, G., Lin, H.-n, Li, S., and Huang, C.-h. Biophys. J.72, 2002–2013 165. Jones, M. N. (1975) Biological Interfaces,
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 22738–22746 131. Chiu, S.-W., Clark, M., Balaji, V., Elsevier, Amsterdam
96. Wang, Z.-q, Lin, H.-n, Li, S., and Huang, C.-h. Subramaniam, S., Scott, H. L., and Jakobsson, 166. McLaughlin, S. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biophys.
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 23491–23499 E. (1995) Biophys. J.69, 1230–1245 Biophys. Chem.18, 113–136
97. Dufourc, E. J., Parish, E. J., Chitrakorn, S., and 132. Browning, J. L. (1981) Biochemistry20, 7144– 167. Aidley, D. J. (1971) The Physiology of Excitable
Smith, I. C. P. (1984) Biochemistry23, 6062–6071 7151 Cells, Cambridge Univ. Press, London and
98. Maulik, P. R., and Shipley, G. G. (1996) 133. Cevc, G., Watts, A., and Marsh, D. (1981) New York
Biochemistry35, 8025–8034 Biochemistry20, 4955–4965 168. Nystrom, R. A. (1973) Membrane Physiology,
99. McMullen, T. P. W., and McElhaney, R. N. 134. Harlos, K., and Eibl, H. (1980) Biochemistry19, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey
(1997)Biochemistry36, 4979–4986 895–899 169. Nicholls, D. G., and Ferguson, S. J. (1992)
100. Finegold, L., ed. (1993) Cholesterol in 135. Koynova, R. D., Kuttenreich, H. L., Tenchov, Bioenergetics 2, Academic Press, London
Membrane Models, CRC Press, Boca Raton, B. G., and Hinz, H.-J. (1988) Biochemistry27, 170. Wood, P. M. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10,
Florida 4612–4619 106–107
101. Recktenwald, D. J., and McConnell, H. M. 136. Hayakawa, E., Naganuma, M., Mukasa, K., 171. Teissié, J., Prats, M., LeMassu, A., Stewart, L.
(1981)Biochemistry20, 4505–4510 Shimozawa, T., and Araiso, T. (1998) Biophys. C., and Kates, M. (1990) Biochemistry29, 59–65
102. Needham, D., McIntosh, T. J., and Evans, E. E. J.74, 892–898 172. Teissié, J., Gabriel, B., and Prats, M. (1993)
(1988)Biochemistry27, 4668–4673 137. Katsaras, J., Jeffrey, K. R., Yang, D. S.-C., and Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 243–246
103. Goldfine, H., Johnston, N. C., and Phillips, M. Epand, R. M. (1993) Biochemistry32, 10700– 173. Heberle, J., Riesle, J., Thiedemann, G.,
C. (1981) Biochemistry20, 2908–2916 10707 Oesterhelt, D., and Dencher, N. A. (1994)
104. Lewis, R. V. A. H., Pohle, W., and McElhaney, 138. Srisiri, W., Sisson, T. M., O’Brien, D. F., Nature (London)370, 379– 382
R. N. (1996) Biophys. J.70, 2736–2746 McGrath, K. M., Han, Y., and Gruner, S. M. 174. Gabriel, B., and Teissié, J. (1996) Proc. Natl.
105. Shimshick, E. J., and McConnell, H. M. (1973) (1997)J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 4866–4873 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 14521–14525
Biochemistry12, 2351–2360 139. Siegel, D. P., and Epand, R. M. (1997) Biophys. 175. Devaux, P. F. (1991) Biochemistry30, 1163–1173
106. Almeida, P. F. F., Vaz, W. L. C., and Thompson, J.73, 3089–3111 176. Victorov, A. V., Janes, N., Taraschi, T. F., and
T. E. (1992) Biochemistry31, 7198–7210 140. Thurmond, R. L., Lindblom, G., and Brown, Hoek, J. B. (1997) Biophys. J.72, 2588–2598
107. Träuble, H., and Eibl, H. (1974) Proc. Natl. M. F. (1993) Biochemistry32, 5394–5410 177. Shiffer, K. A., Rood, L., Emerson, R. K., and
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.71, 214–219 141. Siegel, D. P., Banschbach, J., and Yeagle, P. L. Kuypers, F. A. (1998) Biochemistry37, 3449–
108. Basánez, G., Nieva, J. L., Rivas, E., Alonso, A., (1989)Biochemistry28, 5010–5019 3458
and Goni, F. M. (1996) Biophys. J.70, 2299–2306 142. Siegel, D. P., and Banschbach, J. L. (1990) 178. Michel, H. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 56–59
109. Smith, R. L., and Oldfield, E. (1984) Science Biochemistry29, 5975–5981 179. Cowan, S. W., and Rosenbusch, J. P. (1994)
225, 280–288 143. Landau, E. M., and Rosenbusch, J. P. (1996) Science264, 914–916
109a.Smith, I. C. P. (1983) in NMR of Newly Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 14532–14535 180. von Heijne, G. (1994) Annu. Rev. Biophys.
Accessible Nuclei, Vol. 2 (Laslo, P., ed), pp. 1–26, 144. Delacroix, H., Gulik-Krzywicki, T., and Biomol. Struct.23, 167–192
Academic Press, New York Seddon, J. M. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.258, 88–103 181. Bloom, M. (1995) Biophys. J.69, 1631–1632
110. Marassi, F. M., and Macdonald, P. M. (1992) 144a.Tenchov, B., Koynova, R., and Rapp, G. (1998) 182. Weimbs, T., and Stoffel, W. (1992) Biochemistry
Biochemistry31, 10031–10036 Biophys. J.75, 853–866 31, 12289–12296
111. Oldfield, E., Bowers, J. L., and Forbes, J. 145. Russell, N. J. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 183. Yamaguchi, Y., Ikenaka, K., Niinobe, M.,
(1987)Biochemistry26, 6919–6923 108–112 Yamada, H., and Mikoshiba, K. (1996) J. Biol.
112. Bruzik, K. S., and Nyholm, P.-G. (1997) 146. deMendoza, D., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1983) Chem.271, 27838–27846
Biochemistry36, 566–575 Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 49–52 184. Jennings, M. L. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biochem.58,
113. Hong, M., Schmidt-Rohr, K., and Nanz, D. 147. Mantsch, H. H., Madec, C., Lewis, R. N. A. H., 999–1027
(1995)Biophys. J.69, 1939–1950 and McElhaney, R. N. (1987) Biochemistry26, 185. Bowie, J. U. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.272, 780–789
114. Thurmond, R. L., Niemi, A. R., Lindblom, G., 4045–4049 186. Gafvelin, G., Sakaguchi, M., Andersson, H.,
Wieslander, Å., and Rilfors, L. (1994) 148. Bechtel, D. B., Mueller, D. D., Whaley, T. W., and von Heijne, G. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
Biochemistry33, 13178–13188 and Bulla, L. A., Jr. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 6119–6127
115. Boden, N., Jones, S. A., and Sixl, F. (1991) 9784–9792 187. Jähnig, F. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 93–95
Biochemistry30, 2146–2155 149. Bérubé, L. R., and Hollingsworth, R. I. (1995) 188. Jones, D. T., Taylor, W. R., and Thornton, J. M.
116. Davis, J. H. (1993) in Cholesterol in Membrane Biochemistry34, 12005–12011 (1994)Biochemistry33, 3038–3049
Models (Finegold, L., ed), pp. 67–157, CRC 150. Huster, D., Jin, A. J., Arnold, K., and 189. Persson, B., and Argos, P. (1996) Protein Sci.5,
Press, Boca Raton, Florida Gawrisch, K. (1997) Biophys. J.73, 855–864 363–371
117. Baenziger, J. E., Jarrell, H. C., and Smith, I. C. 151. Träuble, H. (1971) J. Membr. Biol.4, 193–208 190. Fasman, G. D., and Gilbert, W. A. (1990)
P. (1992) Biochemistry31, 3377–3385 152. Wilson, M. A., and Pohorille, A. (1996) J. Am. Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 89–92
118. De Boeck, H., and Zidovetzki, R. (1992) Chem. Soc.118, 6580–6587 191. Milpetz, F., Argos, P., and Persson, B. (1995)
Biochemistry31, 623–630 153. Ho, C., and Stubbs, C. D. (1997) Biochemistry Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 204–205
119. de Kruijft, B., Cullis, P. R., and Verkleij, A. J. 36, 10630–10637 192. Shai, Y. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 460–464
(1980)Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 79–81 154. Bretscher, M. S. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 192a.Killian, J. A., and von Heijne, G. (2000) Trends
120. Peng, X., and Jonas, J. (1992) Biochemistry31, VI–VII Biochem.Sci.25, 429–434
6383–6390 155. Devaux, P., and McConnell, H. M. (1972) J. 192b.Lew, S., Ren, J., and London, E. (2000)
121. Hong, M., Schmidt-Rohr, K., and Am. Chem. Soc.94, 4475–4481 Biochemistry39, 9632–9640
Zimmermann, H. (1996) Biochemistry35, 156. Kell, D. B. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 86–88 193. Popov, M., Tam, L. Y., Li, J., and Reithmeier, R.
8335–8341 157. Picard, F., Paquet, M.-J., Dufourc, E. J., and A. F. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 18325–18332
122. Lu, D., Singh, D., Morrow, M. R., and Grant, Auger, M. (1998) Biophys. J.74, 857–868 194. Lee, G. F., Burrows, G. G., Lebert, M. R.,
C. W. M. (1993) Biochemistry32, 290–297 158. Schmidt, T., Schütz, G. J., Baumgartner, W., Dutton, D. P., and Hazelbauer, G. L. (1994) J.
123. Salmon, A., and Hamilton, J. A. (1995) Gruber, H. J., and Schindler, H. (1996) Proc. Biol. Chem.269, 29920–29927
Biochemistry34, 16065–16073 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 2926–2929 195. Lee, G. F., Dutton, D. P., and Hazelbauer, G. L.
124. Ruocco, M. J., Siminovitch, D. J., Long, J. R., 159. Sheets, E. D., Lee, G. M., Simson, R., and (1995)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 5416–
Das Gupta, S. K., and Griffin, R. G. (1996) Jacobson, K. (1997) Biochemistry36, 12449– 5420
Biophys. J.71, 1776–1788 12458 196. Yu, H., Kono, M., McKee, T. D., and Oprian,
125. Bruzik, K. S., and Harwood, J. S. (1997) J. Am. 160. Hopkins, C. R. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, D. D. (1995) Biochemistry34, 14963–14969
Chem. Soc.119, 6629–6637 27–32 197. Sansom, M. S. P., Son, H. S.,
126. Casal, H. L., and McElhaney, R. N. (1990) 161. Kleinfeld, A. M., Chu, P., and Storch, J. (1997) Sankararamakrishnan, R., Kerr, I. D., and
Biochemistry29, 5423–5427 Biochemistry36, 5702–5711 Breed, J. (1995) Biophys. J.68, 1295–1310

--- Page 449 ---

446 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
References
198. Stopar, D., Jansen, K. A. J., Páli, T., Marsh, D., 231. Inaba, M., and Maede, Y. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 265. Wolfe, L. C., John, K. M., Falcone, J. C., Byrne,
and Hemminga, M. A. (1997) Biochemistry36, 263, 17763–17771 A. M., and Lux, S. E. (1982) N. Engl. J. Med.
8261–8268 232. Steck, T. L. (1974) J. Cell Biol.62, 1–19 307, 1367–1374
199. Nikaido, H. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 3905– 233. Luna, E. J., Kidd, G. H., and Branton, D. 266. Diakowski, W., and Sikorski, A. F. (1995)
3908 (1979)J. Biol. Chem.254, 2526–2532 Biochemistry34, 13252–13258
200. Mishra, V. K., and Palgunachari, M. N. (1996) 234. Viitala, J., and Järnefelt, J. (1985) Trends 267. Marfatia, S. M., Lue, R. A., Branton, D., and
Biochemistry35, 11210–11220 Biochem. Sci.10, 392–395 Chishti, A. H. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 715–719
201. Mishra, V. K., Palgunachari, M. N., Lund- 235. Marchesi, V. T., Furthmayr, H., and Tomita, 268. Krauss, S. W., Chasis, J. A., Rogers, C.,
Katz, S., Phillips, M. C., Segrest, J. P., and M. (1976) Ann. Rev. Biochem.45, 667–698 Mohandas, N., Krockmalnic, G., and Penman,
Anantharamaiah, G. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 236. Jay, D., and Cantley, L. (1986) Ann. Rev. S. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 7297–
270, 1602–1611 Biochem.55, 511–538 7302
202. Casey, P. J. (1995) Science268, 221–225 237. Murthy, S. N. P., Wilson, J., Zhang, Y., and 269. Khodadad, J. K., Waugh, R. E., Podolski, J. L.,
203. McIlhinney, R. A. J. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci. Lorand, L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 22907– Josephs, R., and Steck, T. L. (1996) Biophys. J.
15, 387–391 22911 70, 1036–1044
204. Buss, J. E., Mumby, S. M., Casey, P. J., Gilman, 238. Tanner, M. J. A. (1996) Nature (London)382, 270. Hansen, J. C., Skalak, R., Chien, S., and Hoger,
A. G., and Sefton, B. M. (1987) Proc. Natl. 209–210 A. (1996) Biophys. J.70, 146–166
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 7493–7497 239. Müller-Berger, S., Karbach, D., König, J., 271. Rice-Evans, C. A., and Dunn, M. J. (1982)
205. Johnson, D. R., Bhatnagar, R. S., Knoll, L. J., Lepke, S., Wood, P. G., Appelhans, H., and Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 282–286
and Gordon, J. I. (1994) Ann. Rev. Biochem.63, Passow, H. (1995) Biochemistry34, 9315–9324 272. Mohandas, N., and Evans, E. (1994) Annu.
869–914 240. Erickson, H. K. (1997) Biochemistry36, 9958– Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23, 787–818
206. Peseckis, S. M., and Resh, M. D. (1994) J. Biol. 9967 273. Agre, P., Casella, J. F., Zinkham, W. H.,
Chem.269, 30888–30892 241. Fukuda, M., Lauffenburger, M., Sasaki, H., McMillan, C., and Bennett, V. (1985) Nature
207. McLaughlin, S., and Aderem, A. (1995) Trends Rogers, M. E., and Dell, A. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. (London)314, 380–383
Biochem. Sci.20, 272–276 262, 11952–11957 274. Baines, A. J., and Bennett, V. (1985) Nature
208. Milligan, G., Parenti, M., and Magee, A. I. 242. MacKenzie, K. R., Prestegard, J. H., and (London)315, 410–413
(1995)Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 181–186 Engelman, D. M. (1997) Science276, 131–133 275. Clark, E. A., and Brugge, J. S. (1995) Science
209. Wilson, P. T., and Bourne, H. R. (1995) J. Biol. 243. Challou, N., Goormaghtigh, E., Cabiaux, V., 268, 233–239
Chem.270, 9667–9675 Conrath, K., and Ruysschaert, J.-M. (1994) 276. Dejana, E., Corada, M., and Lampugnani, M.
210. Duncan, J. A., and Gilman, A. G. (1996) J. Biol. Biochemistry33, 6902–6910 G. (1995) FASEB J.9, 910–918
Chem.271, 23594–23600 244. Huang, C.-H., Reid, M., Daniels, G., and 277. Malik, R. K., and Parsons, J. T. (1996) J. Biol.
211. Marshall, C. J. (1993) Science259, 1865–1866 Blumenfeld, O. O. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, Chem.271, 29785–29791
212. Glomset, J. A., Gelb, M. H., and Farnsworth, 25902–25908 278. Lo, S. H., An, Q., Bao, S., Wong, W.-K., Liu, Y.,
C. C. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 139–142 245. Marchesi, V. T. (1985) Ann. Rev. Cell Biol.1, Janmey, P. A., Hartwig, J. H., and Chen, L. B.
213. Casey, P. J., and Seabra, M. C. (1996) J. Biol. 531–561 (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 22310–22319
Chem.271, 5289–5292 246. Fujita, T., Ralston, G. B., and Morris, M. B. 279. Horwitz, A. F. (1997) Sci. Am.276(May), 68–75
214. Shipton, C. A., Parmryd, I., Swiezewska, E., (1998)Biochemistry37, 264–271 280. de Pereda, J. M., Wiche, G., and Liddington,
Andersson, B., and Dallner, G. (1995) J. Biol. 247. Yan, Y., Winograd, E., Viel, A., Cronin, T., R. C. (1999) EMBO J.18, 4087–4095
Chem.270, 566–572 Harrison, S. C., and Branton, D. (1993) Science 281. Springer, T. A. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
215. Wedegaertner, P. B., Wilson, P. T., and Bourne, 262, 2027–2030 U.S.A.94, 65–72
H. R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 503–506 248. Cherry, L., Menhart, N., and Fung, L. W.-M. 282. Bazzoni, G., and Hemler, M. E. (1998) Trends
216. Kikuchi, A., Sagami, H., and Ogura, K. (1999) (1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 2077–2084 Biochem. Sci.23, 30–34
J. Biol. Chem.274, 18011–18016 249. Begg, G. E., Harper, S. L., Morris, M. B., and 283. Emsley, J., King, S. L., Bergelson, J. M., and
217. Turner, A. J. (1994) in Essays in Biochemistry, Speicher, D. W. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 3279– Liddington, R. C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
Vol. 28 (Tipton, K. F., ed), pp. 113–128, 3287 28512–28517
Portland Press, London 250. Fujita, T., Ralston, G. B., and Morris, M. B. 284. Luscinskas, F. W., and Lawler, J. (1994) FASEB
218. Low, M. G. (1987) Biochem. J.244, 1–13 (1998)Biochemistry37, 272–280 J.8, 929–938
219. Lisanti, M. P., and Rodriguez-Boulan, E. 250a.Rief, M., Pascual, J., Saraste, M., and Gaub, H. 285. Simon, K. O., Otey, C. A., Pavelko, F. M., and
(1990)Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 113–118 E. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.286, 553–561 Burridge, K. (1991) Curr. Top. Membr. Transp.
220. Thomas, J. R., Dwek, R. A., and Rademacher, 251. Fowler, V. M. (1986) Nature (London)322, 777– 38, 57–64
T. W. (1990) Biochemistry29, 5413–5422 778 286. Edelman, G. M. (1983) Science219, 450–457
221. Brewis, I. A., Ferguson, M. A. J., Mehlert, A., 252. Carraway, K. L. (1975) Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 287. Becker, J. W., Erickson, H. P., Hoffman, S.,
Turner, A. J., and Hooper, N. M. (1995) J. Biol. 415, 379–410 Cunningham, B. A., and Edelman, G. M.
Chem.270, 22946–22956 253. Byers, T. J., and Branton, D. (1985) Proc. Natl. (1989)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.86, 1088–
222. Previato, J. O., Jones, C., Xavier, M. T., Wait, Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 6153–6157 1092
R., Travassos, L. R., Parodi, A. J., and 254. Elgsaeter, A., Stokke, B. T., Mikkelsen, A., and 288. Cunningham, B. A., Hemperly, J. J., Murray,
Mendonça-Previato, L. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. Branton, D. (1986) Science234, 1217–1223 B. A., Prediger, E. A., Brackenbury, R., and
270, No 13, 7241–7250 255. Pantazatos, D. P., and MacDonald, R. I. (1997) Edelman, G. M. (1987) Science236, 799–806
223. Heinz, D. W., Ryan, M., Smith, M. P., Weaver, J. Biol. Chem.272, 21052–21059 289. Kudo, M., Kitajima, K., Inoue, S., Shiokawa,
L. H., Keana, J. F. W., and Griffith, O. H. 256. Luna, E. J., and Hitt, A. L. (1992) Science258, K., Morris, H. R., Dell, A., and Inoue, Y. (1996)
(1996)Biochemistry35, 9496–9504 955–964 J. Biol. Chem.271, 32667–32677
224. Williams, A. F., and Gagnon, J. (1982) Science 257. Reichstein, E., and Blostein, R. (1975) J. Biol. 290. Newman, P. J., Berndt, M. C., Gorski, J.,
216, 696–703 Chem.250, 6256–6263 White, G. C., II, Lyman, S., Paddock, C., and
225. Mehlert, A., Richardson, J. M., and Ferguson, 258. Bennett, V. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 8703– Muller, W. A. (1990) Science247, 1219–1222
M. A. J. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.277, 379–392 8706 291. DeLisser, H. M., Yan, H. C., Newman, P. J.,
225a.Eisenhaber, B., Bork, P., Yuan, Y., Löffler, G., 259. Michaely, P., and Bennett, V. (1993) J. Biol. Muller, W. A., Buck, C. A., and Albelda, S. M.
and Eisenhaber, F. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci. Chem.268, 22703–22709 (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 16037–16046
25, 340–341 260. Kordeli, E., Lambert, S., and Bennett, V. (1995) 291a.Chen, H. A., Pfuhl, M., McAlister, M. S. B.,
226. Reynolds, J. A., and Trayer, H. (1971) J. Biol. J. Biol. Chem.270, 2352–2359 and Driscoll, P. C. (2000) Biochemistry39,
Chem.246, 7337–7342 261. An, X.-L., Takakuwa, Y., Nunomura, W., 6814–6824
227. Pryde, J. G. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, Manno, S., and Mohandas, N. (1996) J. Biol. 292. Casasnovas, J. M., Stehle, T., Liu, J.-h, Wang,
160–163 Chem.271, 33187–33191 J.-h, and Springer, T. A. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad.
228. Bennett, V. (1985) Ann. Rev. Biochem.54, 273– 262. Workman, R. F., and Low, P. S. (1998) J. Biol. Sci. U.S.A.95, 4134–4139
304 Chem.273, 6171–6176 293. Wang, J.-H., Pepinsky, R. B., Stehle, T., Liu, J.-
229. Justice, J. M., Murtagh, J. J., Jr., Moss, J., and 263. Malik, S., Sami, M., and Watts, A. (1993) H., Karpusas, M., Browning, B., and Osborn,
Vaughan, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 17970– Biochemistry32, 10078–10084 L. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92,
17976 264. Azim, A. C., Knoll, J. H. M., Beggs, A. H., and 5714–5718
230. Neville, D. M., Jr., and Glossmann, H. (1971) Chishti, A. H. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 17407– 294. Springer, T. A. (1990) Nature (London)346,
J. Biol. Chem.246, 6335–6338 17413 425–434

--- Page 450 ---

447
References
295. Wagner, G. (1995) Science267, 342 321. Stetefeld, J., Mayer, U., Timpl, R., and Huber, 350. Stathopoulos, C. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 170–173
296. Nagar, B., Overduin, M., Ikura, M., and Rini, R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.257, 644–657 351. Mannella, C. A. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17,
J. M. (1996) Nature (London)380, 360–364 322. Colognato, H., MacCarrick, M., O’Rear, J. J., 315–320
297. Shapiro, L., Fannon, A. M., Kwong, P. D., and Yurchenco, P. D. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 352. Li, A. Z., Huang, H., Re, X., Qi, L. J., and
Thompson, A., Lehmann, M. S., Grübel, G., 29330–29336 Marx, K. A. (1998) Biophys. J.74, 964–973
Legrand, J.-F., Als-Nielsen, J., Colman, D. R., 323. Lane, T. F., and Sage, E. H. (1994) FASEB J.8, 353. Reumann, S., Maier, E., Benz, R., and Heldt,
and Hendrickson, W. A. (1995) Nature 163–173 H. W. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 17559–17565
(London)374, 327–336 324. Venstrom, K. A., and Reichardt, L. F. (1993) 354. Chrispeels, M. J., and Agre, P. (1994) Trends
298. Overduin, M., Harvey, T. S., Bagby, S., Tong, FASEB J.7, 996–1003 Biochem. Sci.19, 421–425
K. I., Yau, P., Takeichi, M., and Ikura, M. 325. Gherzi, R., Carnemolla, B., Siri, A., Ponassi, 355. Knepper, M. A. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(1995)Science267, 386–389 M., Balza, E., and Zardi, L. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. U.S.A.91, 6255–6258
298a.Nollet, F., Kools, P., and van Roy, F. (2000) J. 270, 3429–3434 355a.Borgnia, M., Nielsen, S., Engel, A., and Agre,
Mol. Biol.299, 551–572 326. Ruoslahti, E., and Pierschbacher, M. D. (1987) P. (1999) Ann. Rev. Biochem.68, 425–458
298b.Pertz, O., Bozic, D., Koch, A. W., Fauser, C., Science238, 491–497 356. Ringler, P., Borgnia, M. J., Stahlberg, H.,
Brancaccio, A., and Engel, J. (1999) EMBO J. 327. D’Souza, S. E., Ginsberg, M. H., and Plow, E. Maloney, P. C., Agre, P., and Engel, A. (1999) J.
18, 1738–1747 F. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 246 – 250 Mol. Biol.291, 1181–1190
299. Bella, J., Kolatkar, P. R., Marlor, C. W., Greve, 328. Leahy, D. J., Hendrickson, W. A., Aukhil, I., 357. de Groot, B. L., Heymann, J. B., Engel, A.,
J. M., and Rossmann, M. G. (1998) Proc. Natl. and Erickson, H. P. (1992) Science258, 987–991 Mitsuoka, K., Fujiyoshi, Y., and Grubmüller,
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 4140–4145 329. Stanley, K. K., Newby, A. C., and Luzio, J. P. H. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.300, 987–994
300. Patel, D. J., and Gumbiner, B. M. (1995) Nature (1982)Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 145–147 358. Cheng, A., van Hoek, A. N., Yeager, M.,
(London)374, 306–307 330. Roberts, M. F. (1996) FASEB J.10, 1159–1172 Verkman, A. S., and Mitra, A. K. (1997) Nature
301. Berx, G., Cleton-Jansen, A.-M., Nollet, F., de 331. Han, S. K., Yoon, E. T., Scott, D. L., Sigler, P. B., (London)387, 627–630
Leeuw, W. J. F., van de Vijver, M. J., and Cho, W. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 3573– 359. Ma, T., Song, Y., Gillespie, A., Carlson, E. J.,
Cornelisse, C., and van Roy, F. (1995) EMBO J. 3582 Epstein, C. J., and Verkman, A. S. (1999) J.
14, 6107–6115 332. Caruthers, A., and Melchior, D. L. (1986) Biol. Chem.274, 20071–20074
302. Vartio, T., and Vaheri, A. (1983) Trends Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 331–335 359a.Zeuthen, T., and Klaerke, D. A. (1999) J. Biol.
Biochem. Sci.8, 442–444 333. Gutknecht, J. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Chem.274, 21631–21636
303. Hynes, R. O. (1986) Sci. Am.254(Jun), 42 – 51 U.S.A.84, 6443–6446 360. Barone, L. M., Shih, C., and Wasserman, B. P.
304. Ruoslahti, E. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biochem.57, 334. Paula, S., Volkov, A. G., and Deamer, D. W. (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 30672–30677
375–413 (1998)Biophys. J.74, 319–327 361. Calamita, G., Bishai, W. R., Preston, G. M.,
305. Engel, J., Odermatt, E., Engel, A., Madri, J. A., 335. Stein, W. D. (1990) Channels, Carriers and Guggino, W. B., and Agre, P. (1995) J. Biol.
Furthmayr, H., Rohde, H., and Timpl, R. Pumps: an Introduction to Membrane Transport, Chem.270, 29063–29066
(1981)J. Mol. Biol.150, 97–120 Academic Press, San Diego, California 362. Deen, P. M. T., Verdijk, M. A. J., Knoers, N. V.
306. Ingham, K. C., Brew, S. A., Huff, S., and 335a.Paulsen, I. T., Nguyen, L., Sliwinski, M. K., A. M., Wieringa, B., Monnens, L. A. H., van
Litvinovich, S. V. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, Rabus, R., and Saier, M. H., Jr. (2000) J. Mol. OS, C. H., and van Oost, B. A. (1994) Science
1718–1724 Biol.301, 75–100 264, 92–95
307. Johnson, K. J., Sage, H., Briscoe, G., and 336. Fox, R. O., Jr., and Richards, F. M. (1982) 363. Bai, L., Fushimi, K., Sasaki, S., and Marumo,
Erickson, H. P. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, Nature (London)300, 325–330 F. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 5171–5176
15473–15479 337. Kempf, C., Klausner, R. D., Weinstein, J. N., 364. Jan, L. Y., and Jan, Y. N. (1994) Nature (London)
308. Grant, R. P., Spitzfaden, C., Altroff, H., Van Renswoude, J., Pincus, M., and 371, 119–122
Campbell, I. D., and Mardon, H. J. (1997) J. Blumenthal, R. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257, 2469– 365. Armstrong, C. (1998) Science280, 56–57
Biol. Chem.272, 6159–6166 2476 366. Doyle, D. A., Cabral, J. M., Pfuetzner, R. A.,
309. Hynes, R. O. (1990) Fibronectins, Springer- 338. Klebba, P. E., Hofnung, M., and Charbit, A. Kuo, A., Gulbis, J. M., Cohen, S. L., Chait, B.
Verlag, New York (1994)EMBO J.13, 4670–4675 T., and MacKinnon, R. (1998) Science280, 69–77
310. Moyano, J. V., Carnemolla, B., Domínguez- 339. Schirmer, T., Keller, T. A., Wang, Y.-F., and 367. Heginbothan, L., Odessey, E., and Miller, C.
Jiménez, C., García-Gila, M., Albar, J. P., Rosenbusch, J. P. (1995) Science267, 512–514 (1997)Biochemistry36, 10335–10342
Sánchez-Aparicio, P., Leprini, A., Querzé, G., 340. Meyer, J. E. W., Hofnung, M., and Schulz, G. 368. MacKinnon, R., Cohen, S. L., Kuo, A., Lee, A.,
Zardi, L., and Garcia-Pardo, A. (1997) J. Biol. E. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.266, 761–775 and Chait, B. T. (1998) Science280, 106–109
Chem.272, 24832–24836 341. Jordy, M., Andersen, C., Schülein, K., Ferenci, 369. Aidley, D. J., and Stanfield, P. R. (1996) Ion
311. Greenberg, C. S., Birckbichler, P. J., and Rice, T., and Benz, R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, 666–678 Channels, Molecules in Action, Cambridge
R. H. (1991) FASEB J.5, 3071–3077 341a.Dumas, F., Koebnik, R., Winterhalter, M., and Univ. Press, New York
312. Jeong, J.-M., Murthy, S. N. P., Radek, J. T., and Van Gelder, P. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 19747– 370. Kreusch, A., Pfaffinger, P. J., Stevens, C. F.,
Lorand, L. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 5654–5658 19751 and Choe, S. (1998) Nature (London)392, 945–
313. An, S. S. A., Jiménez-Barbero, J., Petersen, T. 342. Samartzidou, H., and Delcour, A. H. (1998) 948
E., and Llinás, M. (1992) Biochemistry31, EMBO J.17, 93–100 370a.Gulbis, J. M., Zhou, M., Mann, S., and
9927–9933 343. Pauptit, R. A., Schirmer, T., Jansonius, J. N., MacKinnon, R. (2000) Science289, 123–127
314. Spitzfaden, C., Grant, R. P., Mardon, H. J., and Rosenbusch, J. P., Parker, M. W., Tucker, A. D., 370b.Kobertz, W. R., Williams, C., and Miller, C
Campbell, L. D. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.265, 565– Tsernoglou, D., Weiss, M. S., and Schulz, G. E. (2000)Biochemistry39, 10347–10352
579 (1991)J. Structural Biol.107, 136–145 370c.Roux, B., Bernèche, S., and Im, W. (2000)
315. Kornblihtt, A. R., Pesce, C. G., Alonso, C. R., 344. Kreusch, A., Neubüser, A., Schiltz, E., Biochemistry39,
Cramer, P., Srebrow, A., Werbajh, S., and Weckesser, J., and Schulz, G. E. (1994) Protein 371. Klingenberg, M. (1981) Nature (London)290,
Muro, A. F. (1996) FASEB J.10, 248–257 Sci.3, 58–63 449–454
316. Yoneda, A., Ogawa, H., Kojima, K., and 344a.Müller, D. J., and Engel, A. (1999) J. Mol. Biol. 372. Prince, R. C., Gunson, D. E., and Scarpa, A.
Matsumoto, I. (1998) Biochemistry37, 6351– 285, 1347–1351 (1985)Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 99
6360 345. Bainbridge, G., Mobasheri, H., Armstrong, G. 373. Smith, R., Separovic, F., Milne, T. J.,
317. Fischer, D., Chiquet-Ehrismann, R., A., Lea, E. J. A., and Lakey, J. H. (1998) J. Mol. Whittaker, A., Bennett, F. M., Cornell, B. A.,
Bernasconi, C., and Chiquet, M. (1995) J. Biol. Biol.275, 171–176 and Makriyannis, A. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.241,
Chem.270, 3378–3384 346. Van Gelder, P., Saint, N., Phale, P., Eppens, E. 456–466
318. Yokosaki, Y., Matsuura, N., Higashiyama, S., F., Prilipov, A., van Boxtel, R., Rosenbusch, J. 374. Dathe, M., Schümann, M., Wieprecht, T.,
Murakami, I., Obara, M., Yamakido, M., P., and Tommassen, J. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.269, Winkler, A., Beyermann, M., Krause, E.,
Shigeto, N., Chen, J., and Sheppard, D. (1998) 468–472 Matsuzaki, K., Murase, O., and Bienert, M.
J. Biol. Chem.273, 11423–11428 347. Lyer, R., Wu, Z., Woster, P. M., and Delcour, A. (1996)Biochemistry35, 12612–12622
319. Denda, S., Müller, U., Crossin, K. L., Erickson, H. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.297, 933–945 375. Kiyota, T., Lee, S., and Sugihara, G. (1996)
H. P., and Reichardt, L. F. (1998) Biochemistry 348. Watanabe, M., Rosenbusch, J., Schirmer, T., Biochemistry35, 13196–13204
37, 5464–5474 and Karplus, M. (1997) Biophys. J.72, 2094–2102 376. Monette, M., and Lafleur, M. (1996) Biophys. J.
320. Oberhauser, A. F., Marszalek, P. E., Erickson, 349. Cowan, S. W., Schirmer, T., Rummel, G., 70, 2195–2202
H. P., and Fernandez, J. M. (1998) Nature Steiert, M., Ghosh, R., Pauptit, R. A., 377. Ojcius, D. M., and Young, J. D.-E. (1991)
(London)393, 181–185 Jansonius, J. N., and Rosenbusch, J. P. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 225–229
Nature (London)358, 727–733 378. Langs, D. A. (1988) Science241, 188–191

--- Page 451 ---

448 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
References
379. Doyle, D. A., and Wallace, B. A. (1997) J. Mol. 411. Kasahara, M., Shimoda, E., and Maeda, M. 441. Brandsch, M., Thunecke, F., Küllertz, G.,
Biol.266, 963–977 (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 16721–16724 Schutkowski, M., Fischer, G., and Neubert, K.
380. Iqbal, M., and Balaram, P. (1981) Biochemistry 412. Turk, E., Kerner, C. J., Lostao, M. P., and (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 3861–3864
20, 7278–7284 Wright, E. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 1925– 442. Boorer, K. J., Frommer, W. B., Bush, D. R.,
381. Malashkevich, V. N., Kammerer, R. A., 1934 Kreman, M., Loo, D. D. F., and Wright, E. M.
Efimov, V. P., Schulthess, T., and Engel, J. 413. Chen, X.-Z., Coady, M. J., Jackson, F., (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 2213–2220
(1996)Science274, 761–765 Berteloot, A., and Lapointe, J.-Y. (1995) 443. Boorer, K. J., and Fischer, W.-N. (1997) J. Biol.
382. Unwin, N. (1995) Nature (London)373, 37–43 Biophys. J.69, 2405–2414 Chem.272, 13040–13046
383. Harrold, F. M., and Baarda, J. R. (1967) J. 414. Panayotova-Heiermann, M., Eskandari, S., 444. Someya, Y., Niwa, A., Sawai, T., and
Bacteriol.94, 53–60 Turk, E., Zampighi, G. A., and Wright, E. M. Yamaguchi, A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 7–12
384. Harold, F. M., and Van Brunt, J. (1977) Science (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 20324–20327 445. Nikaido, K., Liu, P.-Q., and Ames, G. F.-L.
197, 372–373 415. Prasad, P. D., Wang, H., Kekuda, R., Fujita, T., (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 27745–27752
385. Pressman, B. C. (1976) Ann. Rev. Biochem.45, Fei, Y.-J., Devoe, L. D., Leibach, F. H., and 446. Létoffé, S., Delepelaire, P., and Wandersman,
501–530 Ganapathy, V. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 7501– C. (1996) EMBO J.15, 5804–5811
386. Hamilton, J. A., Sabesan, M. N., and Steinrauf, 7506 447. Blattner, F. R., Plunkett, G., III, Bloch, C. A.,
L. K. (1981) J. Am. Chem. Soc.103, 5880–5885 416. Malandro, M. S., and Kilberg, M. S. (1996) Perna, N. T., Burland, V., Riley, M., Collado-
387. Duax, W. L., Hauptman, M., Weeks, C. M., Ann. Rev. Biochem.65, 305–336 Vides, J., Glasner, J. D., Rode, C. K., Mayhew,
and Norton, D. A. (1972) Science176, 911–914 417. Utsunomiya-Tate, N., Endou, H., and Kanai, G. F., Gregor, J., Davis, N. W., Kirkpatrick, H.
388. Karle, I. L., Karle, J., Wieland, T., Y. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 14883–14890 A., Goeden, M. A., Rose, D. J., Mau, B., and
Burgemeister, W., Faulstich, H., and Witkop, 418. Kong, C.-T., Yet, S.-F., and Lever, J. E. (1993) Shao, Y. (1997) Science277, 1453–1462
B. (1973) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.70, 1836– J. Biol. Chem.268, 1509–1512 448. Decottignies, A., Lambert, L., Catty, P.,
1840 419. Su, T.-Z., Wang, M., Syu, L.-J., Saltiel, A. R., Degand, H., Epping, E. A., Moye-Rowley, W.
389. Pangborn, W., Duax, W., and Langs, D. (1987) and Oxender, D. L. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, S., Balzi, E., and Goffeau, A. (1995) J. Biol.
J. Am. Chem. Soc.109, 2163–2165 3173–3179 Chem.270, 18150–18157
390. Karle, I. L. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 420. Yao, D., Mackenzie, B., Ming, H., Varoqui, H., 448a.Driessen, A. J. M., Rosen, B. P., and Konings,
82, 7155–7159 Zhu, H., Hediger, M. A., and Erickson, J. D. W. N. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 397–401
391. Inabayashi, M., Miyauchi, S., Kamo, N., and (2000)J. Biol. Chem.275, 22790–22797 449. Sharom, F. J., DiDiodato, G., Yu, X., and
Jin, T. (1995) Biochemistry34, 3455–3460 420a.Reimer, R. J., Chaudhry, F. A., Gray, A. T., and Ashbourne, K. J. D. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
392. Ledger, P. W., and Tanzer, M. L. (1984) Trends Edwards, R. H. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 10334–10341
Biochem. Sci.9, 313–314 U.S.A.97, 7715–7720 450. Ko, Y. H., and Pedersen, P. L. (1995) J. Biol.
393. Marger, M. D., and Saier, M. H., Jr. (1993) 421. Mosckovitz, R., Udenfriend, S., Felix, A., Heimer, Chem.270, 22093–22096
Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 13–20 E., and Tate, S. S. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1069–1074 451. Nossal, N. G., and Heppel, L. A. (1966) J. Biol.
394. Goswitz, V. C., and Brooker, R. J. (1995) 422. Chillarón, J., Estévez, R., Mora, C., Wagner, C. Chem.241, 3055–3062
Protein Sci.4, 534–537 A., Suessbrich, H., Lang, F., Gelpí, J. L., Testar, 452. Ames, G. F.-L. (1986) Ann. Rev. Biochem.55,
395. Seidel, H. M., and Knowles, J. R. (1994) X., Busch, A. E., Zorzano, A., and Palacín, M. 397–425
Biochemistry33, 5641–5646 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 17761–17770 453. Ames, G. F.-L., and Higgins, C. F. (1983)
396. Cloherty, E. K., Sulzman, L. A., Zottola, R. J., 423. Trotti, D., Rossi, D., Gjesdal, O., Levy, L. M., Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 97–100
and Carruthers, A. (1995) Biochemistry34, Racagni, G., Danbolt, N. C., and Volterra, A. 454. Yao, N., Ledvina, P. S., Choudhary, A., and
15395–15406 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 5976–5979 Quiocho, F. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 2079–
397. Shanahan, M. F., and D’Artel-Ellis, J. (1984) J. 424. Peghini, P., Janzen, J., and Stoffel, W. (1997) 2085
Biol. Chem.259, 13878–13884 EMBO J.16, 3822–3832 455. Quiocho, F. A., and Vyas, N. K. (1984) Nature
398. Bell, G. I., Burant, C. F., Takeda, J., and Gould, 425. Lebrun, B., Sakaitani, M., Shimamoto, K., (London)310, 381–386
G. W. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 19161–19164 Yasuda-Kamatani, Y., and Nakajima, T. (1997) 456. Gilliland, G. L., and Quiocho, F. A. (1981) J.
399. Silverman, M. (1991) Ann. Rev. Biochem.60, J. Biol. Chem.272, 20336–20339 Mol. Biol.146, 341–362
757–794 426. Ponce, J., Biton, B., Benavides, J., Avenet, P., 457. Vyas, N. K., Vyas, M. N., and Quiocho, F. A.
400. Mueckler, M. (1994) Eur. J. Biochem.219, 713– and Aragón, C. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, (1988)Science242, 1290–1295
725 13856–13862 458. Vyas, N. K., Vyas, M. N., and Quiocho, F. A.
401. Maher, F., Vannucci, S. J., and Simpson, I. A. 427. Pantanowitz, S., Bendahan, A., and Kanner, B. (1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 5226–5237
(1994)FASEB J.8, 1003–1011 I. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 3222–3225 459. Shilton, B. H., Shuman, H. A., and Mowbray,
402. Burant, C. F., Takeda, J., Brot-Laroche, E., Bell, 428. Bennett, E. R., and Kanner, B. I. (1997) J. Biol. S. L. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.264, 364–376
G. I., and Davidson, N. O. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. Chem.272, 1203–1210 460. Oh, B.-H., Kang, C.-H., De Bondt, H., Kim, S.-
267, 14523–14526 429. Velaz-Faircloth, M., Guadano-Ferraz, A., H., Nikaido, K., Joshi, A. K., and Ames, G. F.-
403. Zamora-León, S. P., Golde, D. W., Concha, I. Henzi, V. A., and Fremeau, R. T., Jr. (1995) J. L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 4135–4143
I., Rivas, C. I., Delgado-López, F., Baselga, J., Biol. Chem.270, 15755–15761 461. Oh, B.-H., Ames, G. F.-L., and Kim, S.-H.
Nualart, F., and Vera, J. C. (1996) Proc. Natl. 430. Chen, J.-G., Liu-Chen, S., and Rudnick, G. (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 26323–26330
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 1847–1852 (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 12675–12681 462. Sugiyama, S., Vassylyev, D. G., Matsushima,
404. Coderre, L., Kandror, K. V., Vallega, G., and 431. Nikaido, H., and Saier, M. H., Jr. (1992) Science M., Kashiwagi, K., Igarashi, K., and
Pilch, P. F. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 27584– 258, 936–942 Morikawa, K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 9519–
27588 432. Will, A., Grassl, R., Erdmenger, J., Caspari, T., 9525
405. Fischer, Y., Thomas, J., Sevilla, L., Munoz, P., and Tanner, W. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 463. Pflugrath, J. W., and Quiocho, F. A. (1988)
Becker, C., Holman, G., Kozka, I. J., Palacín, 11456–11462 J. Mol. Biol.200, 163–180
M., Testar, X., Kammermeier, H., and Zorzano, 433. Kaback, H. R., Bibi, E., and Roepe, P. D. (1990) 464. Manson, M. D., Boos, W., Bassford, P. J., Jr.,
A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 7085–7092 Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 309–314 and Rasmussen, B. A. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260,
405a.Shepherd, P. R., and Kahn, B. B. (1999) N. 434. Frillingos, S., Wu, J., Venkatesan, P., and Kaback, 9727–9733
Engl. J. Med.341, 248–257 H. R. (1997) Biochemistry36, 6408–6414 465. Reizer, J., Michotey, V., Reizer, A., and Saier,
406. Mueckler, M., and Makepeace, C. (1997) J. 435. Green, A. L., Anderson, E. J., and Brooker, R. M. H., Jr. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 440–450
Biol. Chem.272, 30141–30146 J. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 23240–23246 466. Garrett, D. S., Seok, Y.-J., Liao, D.-I.,
407. Cloherty, E. K., Diamond, D. L., Heard, K. S., 436. Zhao, M., Zen, K.-C., Hubbell, W. L., and Kaback, Peterkofsky, A., Gronenborn, A. M., and
and Carruthers, A. (1996) Biochemistry35, H. R. (1999) Biochemistry38, 7407–7412 Clore, G. M. (1997) Biochemistry36, 2517–2530
13231–13239 437. Zani, M. L., Pourcher, T., and Leblanc, G. 467. Chauvin, F., Brand, L., and Roseman, S. (1994)
408. Seatter, M. J., De La Rue, S. A., Porter, L. M., (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 24883–24889 J. Biol. Chem.269, 20263–20269
and Gould, G. W. (1998) Biochemistry37, 438. Pourcher, T., Bibi, E., Kaback, H. R., and 467a.Zhu, P.-P., Szczepanowski, R. H., Nosworthy,
1322–1326 Leblanc, G. (1996) Biochemistry35, 4161–4168 N. J., Ginsburg, A., and Peterkofsky, A. (1999)
409. Rumsey, S. C., Kwon, O., Xu, G. W., Burant, C. 439. McDonald, T. P., Walmsley, A. R., and Biochemistry38, 15470–15479
F., Simpson, I., and Levine, M. (1997) J. Biol. Henderson, P. J. F. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 468. Jones, B. E., Rajagopal, P., and Klevit, R. E.
Chem.272, 18982–18989 15189–15199 (1997)Protein Sci.6, 2107–2119
410. Wiese, T. J., Dunlap, J. A., and Yorek, M. A. 440. Fei, Y.-J., Liu, W., Prasad, P. D., Kekuda, R., 469. El-Kabbani, O. A. L., Waygood, E. B., and
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 22705–22711 Oblak, T. G., Ganapathy, V., and Leibach, F. H. Delbaera, L. T. J. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262,
(1997)Biochemistry36, 452–460 12926–12929

--- Page 452 ---

449
References
470. Reizer, J., Hoischen, C., Reizer, A., Pham, T. 497. Schroers, A., Burkovski, A., Wohlrab, H., and 527. Campos, B., Mo, Y. D., Mealy, T. R., Li, C. W.,
N., and Saier, M. H., Jr. (1993) Protein Sci.2, Krämer, R. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 14269– Swairjo, M. A., Balch, C., Head, J. F.,
506–521 14276 Retzinger, G., Dedman, J. R., and Seaton, B. A.
471. Eberstadt, M., Grdadolnik, S. G., Gemmecker, 498. Phelps, A., Briggs, C., Mincone, L., and Wohlrab, (1998)Biochemistry37, 8004–8010
G., Kessler, H., Buhr, A., and Erni, B. (1996) H. (1996) Biochemistry35, 10757–10762 528. Ling, G. N. (1984) In Search of the Physical Basis
Biochemistry35, 11286–11292 499. Collins, J. F., and Ghishan, F. K. (1996) FASEB of Life, Plenum, New York
472. Van Dijk, A. A., Scheek, R. M., Dijkstra, K., J.10, 751–759 529. Baker, P. F., and Willis, J. S. (1970) Nature
Wolters, G. K., and Robillard, G. T. (1992) 500. Garcia, C. K., Brown, M. S., Pathak, R. K., and (London)226, 521–523
Biochemistry31, 9063–9072 Goldstein, J. L. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 1843– 530. Kyte, J. (1972) J. Biol. Chem.247, 7642–7649
473. Gemmecker, G., Eberstadt, M., Buhr, A., Lanz, 1849 531. Lingrel, J. B., and Kuntzweiler, T. (1994) J.
R., Golic Grdadolnik, S., Kessler, H., and Erni, 501. Kuo, S.-M., and Aronson, P. S. (1996) J. Biol. Biol. Chem.269, 19659–19662
B. (1997) Biochemistry36, 7408–7417 Chem.271, 15491–15497 532. Lutsenko, S., Daoud, S., and Kaplan, J. H.
474. Pelton, J. G., Torchia, D. A., Remington, S. J., 502. Yellen, G. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 5249–5255
Murphy, K. P., Meadow, N. D., and Roseman, Chem.16, 227–246 533. Scheiner-Bobis, G., and Schreiber, S. (1999)
S. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 33446–33456 503. Miller, C. (1991) Science252, 1092–1096 Biochemistry38, 9198–9208
475. Lanz, R., and Erni, B. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 504. Philipson, L. H., and Steiner, D. F. (1995) 534. Gatto, C., Wang, A. X., and Kaplan, J. H.
12239–12243 Science268, 372–373 (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 10578–10585
476. Nunn, R. S., Markovic-Housley, Z., 505. Inagaki, N., Gonoi, T., Clement, J. P., IV, 535. Rossier, B. C., Geering, K., and Kraehenbuhl,
Génovésio-Taverne, J.-C., Flükiger, K., Namba, N., Inazawa, J., Gonzalez, G., J. P. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 483–487
Rizkallah, P. J., Jansonius, J. N., Schirmer, T., Aguilar-Bryan, L., Seino, S., and Bryan, J. 536. Minor, N. T., Sha, Q., Nichols, C. G., and
and Erni, B. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, 502–511 (1995)Science270, 1166–1170 Mercer, R. W. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
477. Roseman, S., and Meadow, N. D. (1990) J. Biol. 506. Bränström, R., Efendic, S., Berggren, P.-O., U.S.A.95, 6521–6525
Chem.265, 2993–2996 and Larsson, O. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 537. Lutsenko, S., and Kaplan, J. H. (1995)
478. Hurley, J. H., Faber, H. R., Worthylake, D., 14113–14118 Biochemistry34, 15607–15613
Meadow, N. D., Roseman, S., Pettigrew, D. W., 507. Ruknudin, A., Schulze, D. H., Sullivan, S. K., 538. Nelson, N., and Taiz, L. (1989) Trends Biochem.
and Remington, S. J. (1993) Science259, 673–677 Lederer, W. J., and Welling, P. A. (1998) J. Biol. Sci.14, 113–116
479. Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R. (1980) Chem.273, 14165–14171 539. Solioz, M., and Vulpe, C. (1996) Trends
Biophysical Chemistry, Freeman, San Francisco, 508. Day, M. L., Johnson, M. H., and Cook, D. I. Biochem. Sci.21, 237–241
California (1998)EMBO J.17, 1952–1960 539a.Ueno, S., Kaieda, N., Koyama, N. (2000) J.
480. Masuda, T., Dobson, G. P., and Veech, R. L. 509. McCormick, K. A., Isom, L. L., Ragsdale, D., Biol. Chem.275, 14537–14540
(1990)J. Biol. Chem.265, 20321–20334 Smith, D., Scheuer, T., and Catterall, W. A. 540. Carafoli, E. (1994) FASEB J.8, 993–1002
481. Catterall, W. A. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 3954–3962 541. MacLennan, D. H., Rice, W. J., and Green, N.
493–531 510. Favre, I., Moczydlowski, E., and Schild, L. M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 28815–28818
482. Valverde, M. A., Hardy, S. P., and Sepúlveda, (1996)Biophys. J.71, 3110–3125 542. Myung, J., and Jencks, W. P. (1995) Biochemis-
F. V. (1995) FASEB J.9, 509–515 510a.Lipkind, G. M., and Fozzard, H. A. (2000) try34, 3077–3083
483. Schmidt-Rose, T., and Jentsch, T. J. (1997) Proc. Biochemistry39, 8161–8170 543. Dode, L., De Greef, C., Mountian, I., Attard,
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 7633–7638 511. Pérez-García, M. T., Chiamvimonvat, N., M., Town, M. M., Casteels, R., and Wuytack,
484. Jentsch, T. J., Steinmeyer, K., and Schwarz, G. Marban, E., and Tomaselli, G. F. (1996) Proc. F. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 13982–13994
(1990)Nature (London)348, 510–514 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 300–304 543a.Menguy, T., Corre, F., Bouneau, L., Des-
485. Middleton, R. E., Pheasant, D. J., and Miller, 512. Kosari, F., Sheng, S., Li, J., Mak, D.-O. D., champs, S., Vuust Moller, J., Champeil, P., le
C. (1994) Biochemistry33, 13189–13198 Foskett, J. K., and Kleyman, T. R. (1998) J. Biol. Maire, M., and Falson, P. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.
486. Schwappach, B., Stobrawa, S., Hechenberger, Chem.273, 13469–13474 273, 20134–20143
M., Steinmeyer, K., and Jentsch, T. J. (1998) J. 513. Garty, H. (1994) FASEB J.8, 522–528 544. Melle-Milovanovic, D., Milovanovic, M.,
Biol. Chem.273, 15110–15118 514. Miller, R. J. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 1403–1406 Nagpal, S., Sachs, G., and Shin, J. M. (1998) J.
487. Gronemeier, M., Condie, A., Prosser, J., 515. Mitterdorfer, J., Sinnegger, M. J., Grabner, M., Biol. Chem.273, 11075–11081
Steinmeyer, K., Jentsch, T. J., and Jockusch, H. Striessnig, J., and Glossmann, H. (1995) 545. Rulli, S. J., Horiba, M. N., Skripnikova, E., and
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 5963–5967 Biochemistry34, 9350–9355 Rabon, E. C. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 15245–
488. Pucéat, M., Korichneva, I., Cassoly, R., and 516. McPherson, P. S., and Campbell, K. P. (1993) J. 15250
Vassort, G. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 1315–1322 Biol. Chem.268, 13765–13768 546. Asano, S., Inoie, M., and Takeguchi, N. (1987)
489. Jarolim, P., Shayakul, C., Prabakaran, D., 517. Jeyakumar, L. H., Copello, J. A., O’Malley, A. J. Biol. Chem.262, 13263–13268
Jiang, L., Stuart-Tilley, A., Rubin, H. L., M., Wu, G.-M., Grassucci, R., Wagenknecht, 547. Seto-Young, D., Hall, M. J., Na, S., Haber, J. E.,
Simova, S., Zavadil, J., Herrin, J. T., T., and Fleischer, S. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, and Perlin, D. S. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 581–
Brouillette, J., Somers, M. J. G., Seemanova, 16011–16020 587
E., Brugnara, C., Guay-Woodford, L. M., and 518. Kraus, R. L., Sinnegger, M. J., Glossmann, H., 548. Auer, M., Scarborough, G. A., and Kühlbrandt,
Alper, S. L. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 6380–6388 Hering, S., and Striessnig, J. (1998) J. Biol. W. (1998) Nature (London)392, 840–843
489a.Fujinaga, J., Tang, X.-B., and Casey, J. R. (1999) Chem.273, 5586–5590 549. Orlowski, J., and Grinstein, S. (1997) J.
J. Biol. Chem.274, 6626–6633 519. Kim, S., Lakhani, V., Costa, D. J., Sharara, A. Biol. Chem.272, 22373–22376
490. Welsh, M. J., and Smith, A. E. (1995) Sci. Am. I., Fitz, J. G., Huang, L.-W., Peters, K. G., and 549. Orlowski, J. and Grinstein, S. (1997) J. Biol.
273(Dec), 52–59 Kindman, L. A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, Chem.272, 22373–22376
491. Seibert, F. S., Linsdell, P., Loo, T. W., 5266–5269 549a.Wakabayashi, S., Pang, T., Su, X., and
Hanrahan, J. W., Riordan, 520. Mezna, M., and Michelangeli, F. (1996) J. Biol. Shigekawa, M. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 7942–
J. R., and Clarke, D. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. Chem.271, 31818–31823 7949
271, 27493–27499 521. Nicoll, D. A., Hryshko, L. V., Matsuoka, S., 549b.Williams, K. A. (2000) Nature (London)403,
492. Romero, M. F., Hediger, M. A., Boulpaep, E. Frank, J. S., and Philipson, K. D. (1996) J. Biol. 112–115
L., and Boron, W. F. (1997) Nature (London) Chem.271, 13385–13391 550. Kasho, V. N., Stengelin, M., Smirnova, I. N.,
387, 409–413 522. Crumpton, M. J., and Dedman, J. R. (1990) and Faller, L. D. (1997) Biochemistry36, 8045–
493. Burnham, C. E., Amlal, H., Wang, Z., Shull, G. Nature (London)345, 212 8052
E., and Soleimani, M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 523. Swairjo, M. A., and Seaton, B. A. (1994) Annu. 551. Campos, M., and Beaugé, L. (1997)
19111–19114 Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.23, 193–213 Biochemistry36, 14228–14237
494. Muchhal, U. S., Pardo, J. M., and 524. Benz, J., Bergner, A., Hofmann, A., Demange, 552. Vilsen, B. (1997) Biochemistry36, 13312–13324
Raghothama, K. G. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. P., Göttig, P., Liemann, S., Huber, R., and 552a.Boxenbaum, N., Daly, S. E., Javaid, Z. Z.,
U.S.A.93, 10519–10523 Voges, D. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.260, 638–643 Lane, L. K., and Blostein, R. (1998) J. Biol.
495. Smith, F. W., Ealing, P. M., Hawkesford, M. J., 525. Burger, A., Berendes, R., Liemann, S., Benz, J., Chem.273, 23086–23092
and Clarkson, D. T. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Hofmann, A., Göttig, P., Huber, R., Gerke, V., 553. Zhang, P., Toyoshima, C., Yonekura, K.,
U.S.A.92, 9373–9377 Thiel, C., Römisch, J., and Weber, K. (1996) J. Green, N. M., and Stokes, D. L. (1998) Nature
496. Zhou, J.-J., Theodoulou, F. L., Muldin, I., Mol. Biol.257, 839–847 (London)392, 835–839
Ingemarsson, B., and Miller, A. J. (1998) J. Biol. 526. Demange, P., Voges, D., Benz, J., Liemann, S., 553a.Toyoshima, C., Nakasako, M., Nomura, H.,
Chem.273, 12017–12023 Göttig, P., Berendes, R., Burger, A., and Huber, and Ogawa, H. (2000) Nature (London)405,
R. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 272–276 647–655

--- Page 453 ---

450 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
References
553b.MacLennan, D. H., and Green, N. M. (2000) 573. Ferro-Novick, S., and Jahn, R. (1994) Nature 603. Venisse, A., Rivière, M., Vercauteren, J., and
Nature (London)405, 633–634 (London)370, 191–193 Puzo, G. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 15012–15021
553c.Zhang, Z., Lewis, D., Strock, C., and Inesi, G. 574. Mayorga, L. S., Berón, W., Sarrouf, M. N., 604. Brennan, P. J., and Nikaido, H. (1995) Ann.
(2000)Biochemistry39, 8758–8767 Colombo, M. I., Creutz, C., and Stahl, P. D. Rev. Biochem.64, 29–63
554. Crider, B. P., Andersen, P., White, A. E., Zhou, (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 30927–30934 605. Liu, J., Barry, C. E., III, Besra, G. S., and
Z., Li, X., Mattsson, J. P., Lundberg, L., Keeling, 575. Burgoyne, R. D. (1988) Nature (London)331, 20 Nikaido, H. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 29545–
D. J., Xie, X.-S., Stone, D. K., and Peng, S.-B. 576. Wilson, D. W., Wilcox, C. A., Flynn, G. C., 29551
(1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 10721–10728 Chen, E., Kuang, W.-J., Henzel, W. J., Block, 606. Mikusová, K., Mikus, M., Besra, G. S.,
555. Nanda, A., Brumell, J. H., Nordström, T., M. R., Ullrich, A., and Rothman, J. E. (1989) Hancock, I., and Brennan, P. J. (1996) J. Biol.
Kjeldsen, L., Sengelov, H., Borregaard, N., Nature (London)339, 355–359 Chem.271, 7820–7828
Rotstein, O. D., and Grinstein, S. (1996) 577. Colombo, M. I., Taddese, M., Whiteheart, S. 607. Lopez-Marin, L. M., Quesada, D., Lakhdar-
J. Biol. Chem.271, 15963–15970 W., and Stahl, P. D. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, Ghazal, F., Tocanne, J.-F., and Lanéelle, G.
555a.Kelly, R. B. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24, 18810–18816 (1994)Biochemistry33, 7056–7061
M29–M33 578. Goda, Y. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 608. Sprott, G. D., Ekiel, I., and Dicaire, C. (1990) J.
556. Desjardins, M., Celis, J. E., van Meer, G., 769–772 Biol. Chem.265, 13735–13740
Dieplinger, H., Jahraus, A., Griffiths, G., and 579. Lugtenberg, B. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, 609. Peters, J., Nitsch, M., Kühlmorgen, B., Golbik,
Huber, L. A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 32194– 262–266 R., Lupas, A., Kellermann, J., Engelhardt, H.,
32200 580. Graham, L. L., Beveridge, T. J., and Nanninga, Pfander, J.-P., Müller, S., Goldie, K., Engel, A.,
557. Peng, S.-B., Crider, B. P., Tsai, S. J., Xie, X.-S., N. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 328–329 Stetter, K.-O., and Baumeister, W. (1995) J.
and Stone, D. K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 581. Oliver, D. B. (1987) in Escherichia coli and Mol. Biol.245, 385–401
3324–3327 Salmonella typhi-murium (Neidhardt, F. C., 610. Thomas, S. R., and Trust, T. J. (1995) J. Mol.
558. Pearse, B. M. F., and Crowther, R. A. (1987) ed), pp. 56–70, Am. Soc. for Micro-biology, Biol.245, 568–581
Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.16, 49–68 Washington, DC 611. Peters, J., Baumeister, W., and Lupas, A.
559. Schmid, S. L., and Damke, H. (1995) FASEB J. 582. Glauner, B., Höltje, J.-V., and Schwarz, U. (1996)J. Mol. Biol.257, 1031–1041
9, 1445–1453 (1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 10088–10095 612. Fischetti, V. A. (1991) Sci. Am.264(Jun), 58–65
559a.Marsh, M., and McMahon, H. T. (1999) Science 583. Park, J. T. (1987) in Escherichia coli and 613. Goward, C. R., Scawen, M. D., Murphy, J. P.,
285, 215–220 Salmonella typhimurium (Neidhardt, F. C., and Atkinson, T. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18,
559b.Heuser, J. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, 64–68 ed), pp. 23–32, Am. Soc. for Microbiology, 136–139
560. Pearse, B. M. F., and Bretscher, M. S. (1981) Washington, DC 614. Schneewind, O., Fowler, A., and Faull, K. F.
Ann. Rev. Biochem.50, 85–101 584. Scherrer, R. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 242– (1995)Science268, 103–106
561. Pishvaee, B., Munn, A., and Payne, G. (1997) 245 615. Knörle, R., and Hübner, W. (1995) Biochemistry
EMBO J.16, 2227–2239 585. Nikaido, H., and Vaara, M. (1987) in 34, 10970–10975
562. Rothman, J. E. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 185–194 Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium 616. Shaper, N. L., Hollis, G. F., Douglas, J. G.,
563. Brodsky, F. M., Hill, B. L., Acton, S. L., (Neidhardt, F. C., ed), pp. 7–22, Am. Soc. for Kirsch, I. R., and Shaper, J. H. (1988) J. Biol.
Näthke, I., Wong, D. H., Ponnambalam, S., Microbiology, Washington, DC Chem.263, 10420–10428
and Parham, P. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 586. Hancock, R. E. W., Karunaratne, D. N., and 617. Lin, C. Q., and Bissell, M. J. (1993) FASEB J.7,
208–213 Bernegger-Egli, C. (1994) in Bacterial Cell Wall 737–743
564. Lemmon, S. K., and Jones, E. W. (1987) Science (New Comprehensive Biochemistry), Vol. 27 618. Har-El, R., and Tanzer, M. L. (1993) FASEB J.
238, 504–509 (Ghuysen, J.-M., and Hakenbeck, R., eds), pp. 7, 1115–1123
564a.Anderson, R. G. W. (1998) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 263–279, Elsevier, Amsterdam 619. Mayne, R., and Burgeson, R. E., eds. (1987)
67, 199–225 587. Raetz, C. R. H., and Dowhan, W. (1990) J. Biol. Structure and Function of Collagen Types,
564b.Shin, J.-S., Gao, Z., and Abraham, S. N. (2000) Chem.265, 1235–1238 Academic Press, New York, Orlando, San
Science289, 785–788 588. Osborn, M. J. (1969) Ann. Rev. Biochem.38, Diego
564c.Mulvey, M. A., and Hultgren, S. J. (2000) 501–538 620. Nimni, M. E., ed. (1988) Collagen: Biochemistry,
Science289, 732–733 589. Choi, D.-S., Yamada, H., Mizuno, T., and Biomechanics, Biotechnology, CRC Press, Boca
565. Lowe, M., and Kreis, T. E. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. Mizushima, S. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 8953– Raton, Florida
270, 31364–31371 8957 621. Ramachandran, G. N. (1988) Intl. J. Peptide
566. Schekman, R., and Orci, L. (1996) Science271, 590. Diedrich, D. L., and Schnaitman, C. A. (1978) Prot. Res.31, 1–16
1526–1533 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.75, 3708–3712 622. Martin, G. R., Timpl, R., Müller, P. K., and Kühn,
566a.Eugster, A., Frigerio, G., Dale, M., and Duden, 591. Raetz, C. R. H., Ulevitch, R. J., Wright, S. D., K. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 285–287
R. (2000) EMBO J.19, 3905–3917 Sibley, C. H., Ding, A., and Nathan, C. F. 623. Prockop, D. J., and Kivirikko, K. I. (1995) Ann.
567. Bloomer, A. C., Champness, J. N., Bricogne, (1991)FASEB J.5, 2652–2660 Rev. Biochem.64, 403–434
G., Staden, R., and Klug, A. (1978) Nature 592. Hollingsworth, R. I., and Carlson, R. W. (1989) 624. van der Rest, M., and Garrone, R. (1991)
(London)276, 362–368 J. Biol. Chem.264, 9300–9303 FASEB J.5, 2814–2823
567a.Rapoport, I., Chen, Y. C., Cupers, P., Shoelson, 593. Ogawa, T. (1994) Eur. J. Biochem.219, 737–742 625. Byers, P. H. (1995) in The Metabolic and
S. E., and Kirchhausen, T. (1998) EMBO J.17, 594. Rietschel, E. T., Kirikae, T., Schade, F. U., Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed.,
2148–2155 Mamat, U., Schmidt, G., Loppnow, H., Ulmer, Vol. 3 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S.,
567b.Huang, K. M., D’Hondt, K., Riezman, H., and A. J., Zähringer, U., Seydel, U., Di Padova, F., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 4029–4077, McGraw-
Lemmon, S. K. (1999) EMBO J.18, 3897–3908 Schreier, M., and Brade, H. (1994) FASEB J.8, Hill, New York
567c.Owen, D. J., Vallis, Y., Pearse, B. M. F., 217–225 626. Brodsky, B., and Shah, N. K. (1995) FASEB J.9,
McMahon, H. T., and Evans, P. R. (2000) 595. Masoud, H., Moxon, E. R., Martin, A., 1537–1546
EMBO J.19, 4216–4227 Krajcarski, D., and Richards, J. C. (1997) 627. Koivu, J., and Myllylä, R. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.
567d.Wendland, B., Steece, K. E., and Emr, S. D. Biochemistry36, 2091–2103 262, 6159–6164
(1999)EMBO J.18, 4383–4393 596. Aspinall, G. O., and Monteiro, M. A. (1996) 628. Prockop, D. J. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 15349–
567e.Scales, S. J., and Scheller, R. H. (1999) Nature Biochemistry35, 2498–2504 15352
(London)401, 123–124 597. Rietschel, E. T., and Brade, H. (1992) Sci. Am. 629. Annunen, P., Autio-Harmainen, H., and
568. Ungewickell, E., Ungewickell, H., Holstein, S. 267(Aug), 54–61 Kivirikko, K. I. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 5989–
E. H., Lindner, R., Prasad, K., Barouch, W., 598. Costerton, J. W., Irwin, R. T., and Cheng, K. J. 5992
Martin, B., Greene, L. E., and Eisenberg, E. (1981)Crit. Rev. Microbiol8, 303–338 630. Reiser, K., McCormick, R. J., and Rucker, R. B.
(1995)Nature (London)378, 632–635 599. Fischer, W. (1994) in Bacterial Cell Wall (New (1992)FASEB J.6, 2439–2449
569. Mellman, I., Fuchs, R., and Helenius, A. Comprehensive Biochemistry), Vol. 27 (Ghuysen, 631. Li, S.-W., Sieron, A. L., Fertala, A., Hojima, Y.,
(1986)Ann. Rev. Biochem.55, 663–700 J.-M., and Hakenbeck, R., eds), pp. 199–215, Arnold, W. V., and Prockop, D. J. (1996) Proc.
570. Brown, M. S., and Goldstein, J. L. (1974) Sci. Elsevier, Amsterdam Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 5127–5130
Am.251(Nov), 58–66 600. Ganfield, M.-C. W., and Pieringer, R. A. (1980) 632. Meek, K. M., Chapman, J. A., and Hardcastle,
571. Brown, M. S., and Goldstein, J. L. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.255, 5164–5169 R. A. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 10710–10714
Science232, 34–47 601. Johnson, S. D., Lacher, K. P., and Anderson, J. 633. Chan, V. C., Ramshaw, J. A. M., Kirkpatrick,
572. Holstein, T. W., Benoit, M., Herder, G., S. (1981) Biochemistry20, 4781–4785 A., Beck, K., and Brodsky, B. (1997) J. Biol.
Wanner, G., David, C. N., and Gaub, H. E. 602. Ivatt, R. J., and Gilvarg, C. (1979) J. Biol. Chem. Chem.272, 31441–31446
(1994)Science265, 402–404 254, 2759–2765

--- Page 454 ---

451
References
634. Wess, T. J., Hammersley, A. P., Wess, L., and 665. Pöschl, E., Mayer, U., Stetefeld, J., 692. Komori, T., Yagi, H., Nomura, S., Yamaguchi,
Miller, A. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.275, 255–267 Baumgartner, R., Holak, T. A., Huber, R., and A., Sasaki, K., Deguchi, K., Shimizu, Y.,
634a.Kramer, R. Z., Venugopal, M. G., Bella, J., Timpl, R. (1996) EMBO J.15, 5154–5159 Bronson, R. T., Gao, Y.-H., Inada, M., Sato, M.,
Mayville, P., Brodsky, B., and Berman, H. M. 666. Durkin, M. E., Gautam, M., Loechel, F., Sanes, Okamoto, R., Kitamura, Y., Yoshiki, S., and
(2000)J. Mol. Biol.301, 1191–1205 J. R., Merlie, J. P., Albrechtsen, R., and Wewer, Kishimoto, T. (1997) Cell89, 755–764
635. Eyre, D. R., Paz, M. A., and Gallop, P. M. U. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 13407–13416 693. Ducy, P., Zhang, R., Geoffroy, V., Ridall, A. L.,
(1984)Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 717–748 667. Beckmann, G., Hanke, J., Bork, P., and Reich, and Karsenty, G. (1997) Cell89, 747–754
636. Miller, A. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 13–18 J. G. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.275, 725–730 694. Dickman, S. (1997) Science276, 1502
637. Eyre, D. R. (1980) Science207, 1315–1322 668. Colognato-Pyke, H., O’Rear, J. J., Yamada, Y., 695. Rodan, G. A., and Harada, S.-i. (1997) Cell89,
638. Wu, J.-J., and Eyre, D. R. (1984) Biochemistry Carbonetto, S., Cheng, Y.-S., and Yurchenco, P. 677–680
23, 1850–1857 D. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 9398–9406 696. Mundlos, S., Otto, F., Mundlos, C., Mulliken,
639. Hanson, D. A., and Eyre, D. R. (1996) J. Biol. 669. Kramer, J. M., Cox, G. N., and Hirsch, D. J. B., Aylsworth, A. S., Albright, S., Lindhout,
Chem.271, 26508–26516 (1985)J. Biol. Chem.260, 1945–1951 D., Cole, W. G., Henn, W., Knoll, J. H. M.,
640. Kiss, I., Deák, F., Holloway, R. G., Jr., Delius, 670. Beck, K., Hunter, I., and Engel, J. (1990) Owen, M. J., Mertelsmann, R., Zabel, B. U.,
H., Mebust, K. A., Frinberger, E., Argraves, W. FASEB J.4, 148–160 and Olsen, B. R. (1997) Cell89, 773–779
W., Tsonis, P. A., Winterbottom, N., and 671. Sasaki, T., Kostka, G., Göhring, W., 697. Price, P. A., and Williamson, M. K. (1985) J.
Goetink, P. F. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 8126– Wiedemann, H., Mann, K., Chu, M.-L., and Biol. Chem.260, 14971–14975
8134 Timpl, R. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.245, 241–250 698. Nishimoto, S. K., Araki, N., Robinson, F. D.,
641. Tanaka, S., Avigad, G., Eikenberry, E. F., and 672. Aeschlimann, D., and Paulsson, M. (1991) J. and Waite, J. H. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267,
Brodsky, B. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 17650– Biol. Chem.266, 15308–15317 11600–11605
17657 673. Reinhardt, D. P., Ono, R. N., and Sakai, L. Y. 699. Price, P. A., Rice, J. S., and Williamson, M. K.
642. Kleman, J.-P., Aeschlimann, D., Paulsson, M., (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 1231–1236 (1994)Protein Sci.3, 822–830
and van der Rest, M. (1995) Biochemistry34, 673a.Kettle, S., Yuan, X., Grundy, G., Knott, V., 700. Hohenester, E., Maurer, P., and Timpl, R.
13768–13775 Downing, A. K., and Handford, P. A. (1999) J. (1997)EMBO J.16, 3778–3786
643. Mazzorana, M., Gruffat, H., Sergeant, A., and Mol. Biol.285, 1277–1287 701. Kelm, R. J., Jr., Swords, N. A., Orfeo, T., and
van der Rest, M. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 673b.Ritty, T. M., Broekelmann, T., Tisdale, C., Mann, K. G. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 30147–
3029–3032 Milewicz, D. M., and Mecham, R. P. (1999) J. 30153
644. Martin, G. R., Timpl, R., Miller, P. K., and Biol. Chem.274, 8933–8940 702. Fisher, L. W., Robey, P. G., Tuross, N., Otsuka,
Kuhn, K. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 285–287 674. Reinhardt, D. P., Keene, D. R., Corson, G. M., A. S., Tepen, D. A., Esch, F. S., Shimasaki, S.,
645. Gunwar, S., Ballester, F., Noelken, M. E., Sado, Pöschl, E., Bächinger, H. P., Gambee, J. E., and and Termine, J. D. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262,
Y., Ninomiya, Y., and Hudson, B. G. (1998) Sakai, L. Y. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.258, 104–116 13457–13463
J. Biol. Chem.273, 8767–8775 675. McKusick, V. A. (1991) Nature (London)352, 703. Denhardt, D. T., and Guo, X. (1993) FASEB J.
646. van der Rest, M., and Mayne, R. (1988) J. Biol. 279–281 7, 1475–1482
Chem.263, 1615–1618 676. Francke, U., and Furthmayr, H. (1994) N. 704. Shanmugam, V., Chackalaparampil, I.,
647. de Crombrugghe, B., and Pastan, I. (1982) Engl. J. Med.330, 1384–1385 Kundu, G. C., Mukherjee, A. B., and
Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 11–13 677. Mann, K., Mechling, D. E., Bächinger, H. P., Mukherjee, B. B. (1997) Biochemistry36, 5729–
648. Myers, J. C., Yang, H., D’Ippolito, J. A., Eckerskorn, C., Gaill, F., and Timpl, R. (1996) 5738
Presente, A., Miller, M. K., and Dion, A. S. J. Mol. Biol.261, 255–266 704a.Rodan, G. A., and Martin, T. J. (2000) Science
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 18549–18557 678. Durkin, M. E., Carlin, B. E., Vergnes, J., Bartos, 289, 1508–1514
649. Lui, V. C. H., Ng, L. J., Sat, E. W. Y., Nicholls, B., and Merlie, J. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 704b.Service, R. F. (2000) Science289, 1498–1500
J., and Cheah, K. S. E. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, U.S.A.84, 1570–1574 705. Zipkin, I., ed. (1973) Biological Mineralization,
16945–16951 679. Richards, A. G. (1978) in Biochemistry of Insects Wiley, New York
650. de Wet, W., Bernard, M., Benson-Chanda, V., (Rockstein, M., ed), Academic Press, New 706. Schlesinger, P. H., Blair, H. C., Teitelbaum, S.
Chu, M.-L., Dickson, L., Weil, D., and York (p. 205) L., and Edwards, J. C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
Ramirez, F. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 16032– 680. Schaefer, J., Kramer, K. J., Garbow, J. R., Jacob, 18636–18643
16036 G. S., Stejskal, E. O., Hopkins, T. L., and 707. Alberts, B., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M.,
651. Chu, M.-L., de Wet, W., Bernhard, M., and Speirs, R. D. (1987) Science235, 1200–1204 Roberts, K., and Watson, J. D. (1994) Molecular
Ramirez, F. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 2315– 681. Simkiss, K., and Wilbur, K. M. (1989) Biology of the Cell, 3rd ed., Garland, New York
2370 Biomineralization, Academic Press, San Diego, (p. 1182–1186)
652. Kramer, J. M. (1994) FASEB J.8, 329–336 California 708. Riggs, B. L., and Melton, L. J. (1992) N. Engl. J.
653. Engel, J. (1997) Science277, 1785–1786 682. DeOliveira, D. B., and Laursen, R. A. (1997) J. Med.327, 620–627
654. Rosenbloom, J., Abrams, W. R., and Mecham, Am. Chem. Soc.119, 10627–10631 709. Sly, W. S., and Hu, P. Y. (1995) in The Metabolic
R. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1208–1218 683. Weiner, S., and Addadi, L. (1991) Trends and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed.,
655. Hukins, D. W. L. (1984) Connective Tissue Biochem. Sci.16, 252–256 Vol. 3 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S.,
Matrix, MacMillan, New York 684. Albeck, S., Aizenberg, J., Addadi, L., and and Valle, D., eds), pp. 4113–4124, McGraw-
656. Fransson, L.-Å. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, Weiner, S. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 11691– Hill, New York
406–411 11697 710. Roush, W. (1996) Science273, 1170
657. Burg, M. A., Tillet, E., Timpl, R., and Stallcup, 685. Bonucci, E., ed. (1992) Calcification in Biological 711. Delmas, P. D., and Meunier, P. J. (1997) N.
W. B. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 26110–26116 Systems, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida Engl. J. Med.336, 558–566
658. Caplan, A. I. (1984) Sci. Am.251(Oct), 84–94 686. Mann, S., Archibald, D. D., Didymus, J. M., 711a.Ho, A. M., Johnson, M. D., and Kingsley, D.
659. Heinegård, D., and Oldberg, Å. (1989) FASEB Douglas, T., Heywood, B. R., Meldrum, F. C., M. (2000) Science289, 265–270
J.3, 2042–2051 and Reeves, N. J. (1993) Science261, 1286–1292 711b.Hagmann, M. (2000) Science289, 225–226
660. Cheng, F., Heinegård, D., Fransson, L.-Å., 687. Aizenberg, J., Hanson, J., Ilan, M., 712. Hohling, H. J., Barckhaus, R. H., and Kreftin,
Bayliss, M., Bielicki, J., Hopwood, J., and Leiserowitz, L., Koetzle, T. F., Addadi, L., and E. R. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 8–11
Yoshida, K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 28572– Weiner, S. (1995) FASEB J.9, 262–268 713. Outka, D. E., and Williams, D. C. (1971)
28580 688. Otsubo, K., Katz, E. P., Mechanic, G. L., and Journal of Protozoology18, 285–297
661. Hauser, N., and Paulsson, M. (1994) J. Biol. Yamauchi, M. (1992) Biochemistry31, 396–402 714. Inoue, S., and Okazaki, K. (1977) Sci. Am.
Chem.269, 25747–25753 689. Fledelius, C., Johnsen, A. H., Cloos, P. A. C., 236(Apr), 83–92
662. Beck, K., Gambee, J. E., Bohan, C. A., and Bonde, M., and Qvist, P. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 715. Volcani, B. E. (1981) in Silicon and Silicious
Bächinger, H. P. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.256, 909–923 272, 9755–9763 Structures in Biological Systems (Simpson, T. L.,
663. Yurchenco, P. D., and Schittny, J. C. (1990) 689a.Ducy, P., Schinke, T., and Karsenty, G. (2000) and Volcani, B. E., eds), Springer-Verlag, New
FASEB J.4, 1577–1590 Science289, 1501–1504 York (p. 157)
663a.Yurchenco, P. D., Birk, D. E., and Mecham, R. 689b.Teitelbaum, S. L. (2000) Science289, 1504–1508 716. Mann, S. (1988) Nature (London)332, 119–124
P., eds. (1994) Extracellular Matrix Assembly 690. Weiner, S., and Traub, W. (1992) FASEB J.6, 717. Calvert, P. (1988) Nature (London)334, 651–652
and Structure, Academic Press, San Diego, 879–885 718. Watanabe, N., and Wilbur, K. M., eds. (1976)
California 691. McLean, F. M., Keller, P. J., Genge, B. R., The Mechanisms of Mineralization in
664. Utani, A., Nomizu, M., Timpl, R., Roller, P. P., Walters, S. A., and Wuthier, R. E. (1987) J. Biol. Invertebrates and Plants, Univ. N. Carolina
and Yamada, Y. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, Chem.262, 10481–10488 Press, Columbia, South Carolina
19167–19175

--- Page 455 ---

452 Chapter 8. Lipids, Membranes, and Cell Coats
References
719. Lemann, J., Jr. (1993) N. Engl. J. Med.328, 722. Bimmler, D., Graf, R., Scheele, G. A., and Frick, 726. Cabib, E., Roberts, R., and Bowers, B. (1982)
880–881 T. W. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 3073–3082 Ann. Rev. Biochem.51, 763–793
720. Nakagawa, Y., Abram, V., Kézdy, F. J., Kaiser, 723. De Reggi, M., Gharib, B., Patard, L., and 727. Ballou, C. E., and Raschke, W. C. (1974)
E. T., and Coe, F. L. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, Stoven, V. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 4967–4971 Science184, 127–134
12594–12600 724. Cheung, H. S., Kurup, I. V., Sallis, J. D., and Ryan, 728. Frevert, J., and Ballou, C. E. (1985) Biochemis-
721. Bertrand, J. A., Pignol, D., Bernard, J.-P., L. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 28082–28085 try24, 753–759
Verdier, J.-M., Dagorn, J.-C., and Fontecilla- 725. Rothschild, B. M., and Thillaud, P. L. (1991) 729. Celerin, M., Ray, J. M., Schisler, N. J., Day, A.
Camps, J. C. (1996) EMBO J.15, 2678–2684 Nature (London)349, 288 W., Stetler-Stevenson, W. G., and Laudenbach,
D. E. (1996) EMBO J.15, 4445–4453
Study Questions
1. Compare the chemical makeup of the extracellar 4. Stearic acid (1.16 g) was dissolved in 100 ml of
“coat” or “matrix” materials secreted by the follow- ethanol. A 10 µl portion of the resulting solution
ing cells: bacteria, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, plant was pipetted onto a clean surface of a dilute HCl
cells, fungi. solution (in a shallow tray) where it spread to form
a monolayer of stearic acid. The layer was com-
2. The iodine number of a compound is defined as the pressed (by moving a Teflon barrier across the tray)
number of grams of I absorbed (through addition until the surface pressure π started to rise sharply
2
to C = C bonds to give a diiodo derivative) per 100 g and reached ~ 20 dyn / cm. Note that π = γ - γ
o
of fat. NOTE: Iodine monochloride or iodine where γ is the measured surface tension with the
monobromide are the usual halogenating reagents film present and γ is the higher surface tension of
o
but the iodine number is expressed in terms of water alone. The compressed film occupied a 20 x
grams of I . The saponification number is the 24 cm area. Calculate the cross-sectional area of an
2
number of milligrams of KOH needed to complete- alkyl chain in stearic acid. [See J. B. Davenport, in
ly saponify (hydrolyze and neutralize the resulting Biochemistry and Methodology of Lipids (A. R.
fatty acids) 1 g of fat. A pure triglyceride has a Johnson and J. B. Davenport, eds.), pp. 47-83.
saponification number of 198 and an iodine num- Wiley-Intersience, New York, 1971; and M. C.
ber of 59.7. Phillips,inProgress in Surface and Membrane Science
(J. F. Danielli, D. M. Rosenberg, and D. A. Caden-
a) What is the relative molecular mass? head, eds.) Vol. 5, pp. 139-221. Academic Press,
b) What is the average chain length of the fatty New York, 1972.]
acids?
c) What is the number of double bonds in the 5. In 1925, E. Gorter and F. Grendel (J. Exp. Med.41,
molecule? 439) reported measurements in which they extract-
ed lipid from red blood cell membranes with ace-
3. Spermaceti (a wax from the head of the sperm tone, spread the lipids as a monolayer, and
whale) resembles high molecular mass hydrocar- measured the area of the compressed monolayer.
bons in physical properties and inertness toward They then estimated the surface area of an erythro-
Br / CHCl and KMNO ; on qualitative analysis, it cyte and calculated that the ratio of the lipids (as a
2 3 4
gives positive tests only for carbon and hydrogen. monolayer) to the surface area of the red blood cell
However, its IR spectrum shows the presence of an was 1.9 – 2.0. More modern experiments gave the
ester linkage, and quantitative analysis gives the following: each erythrocyte membrane contains 4.5
empirical formula C H O. A solution of the wax x 10–16 mol of phospholipid and 3.1 x 10–16 mol of
16 32
in alcoholic KOH is refluxed for a long time. Titra- cholesterol.
tion of an aliquot shows that one equivalent of base
is consumed for every 475 g of wax. Water and a) If the cross-sectional areas of phospholipid and
ether are added to the cooled reflux mixture, and cholesterol molecules in a membrane are taken
the aqueous and etheral layers are separated. Acid- as 0.70 and 0.38 nm2, respectively, what surface
ification of the aqueous layer yields a solid A with a area would be occupied in a monolayer?
neutralization equivalent of 260 + 5. Evaporation b) If the measured surface area of an erythrocyte is
of the ether layer gives solid B, which could not be 167µm2, what is the ratio of the area calculated
titrated. Reduction of either spermaceti or A by in (a) to the area of the cell surface?
lithium aluminum hydride gave B as the only c) How might you explain the difference between
product. this answer and that of Gorter and Grendel?
See E. D. Korn (1966) Science 153, 1491– 1498.
What is the likely structure of spermaceti?

--- Page 456 ---

453
Study Questions
6. The following experimental observations are relat- 10. Which would be the more effective detergent in the
ed to biological membrane structure and function. pH range 2 to 3, sodium lauryl sulfonate or sodium
Discuss the implications of each observation with laurate? Why?
respect to membrane structure.
11.Suppose that a cell contains 10 mM Na+ and 100
a) Many macrocyclic antibiotics (nonactin, valino- mM K+ and that it is bathed in extracellular fluid
mycin, and others) form 1: 1 complexes with containing 100 mM Na+ and 5 mM K+. How much
alkali metal cations in a highly selective manner. energy will be required to transport three equiva-
The complexes are readily soluble in nonpolar lents of Na+ out and two equivalents of K+ in?
organic solvents. These antibiotics increase the Compare this with ∆G’ for hydrolysis of ATP at
electrical conductance and permeability to alkali pH 7. Assume that the membrane is permeable to
−
metal cations of synthetic phospholipid mem- Cl .
branes. Valinomycin increases the electrical
conductance of thylakoid membranes of chloro- 12.An E. coli cell is said to contain about 105 molecules
plasts in the presence of K+ but not in the pres- of an envelope protein of MW = 36,500. If the
ence of Na+; it also uncouples oxidative phosho- latter is spherical and the spheres are closely packed
rylation in mitochondria. (See Chapter 18.) in a hexogonal lattice, how much of the surface area
b) Treatment of intact chloroplasts with a galacto- of the bacterium would be covered? What would
lipase releases glactose from galactosyl digly- the diameter of the protein be? What spacing
cerides. Treatment of red blood cell ghosts with would be required if 105 molecules covered the
phopholipase C releases about 75% of the lipid surface completely? Suggest a shape for the protein
P in water-soluble form. In neither case is the molecule that is consistent with the requirement.
structural integrity of the membrane destroyed.
c) Using sphingomyelin as a hapten, antibodies
specific for this lipid can be produced. When
red blood cell ghosts are exposed to these anti-
bodies, it can be shown that the antibodies react,
but only on one side of the membrane.
7. Describe the structure of biological membranes and
the characteristic functions of lipid-, protein-, and
carbohydrate-containing components. Describe the
differences between inner and outer membrane
surfaces.
8. Compare the distribution of triglycerides, phos-
phatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, sphin-
gomyelins, glycolipids, and cholesterol within cells.
Consider differences between the two sides of
membranes.
9. Consider the chemistry underlying the labeling of
cell surfaces with each of the following:
a) Lactoperoxidase,
b) galactose oxidase,
c) formylmethionylsulfone methyl phosphate,
d) the diazonium salt of diiodosulfanilic acid,
e) fluorescent antibodies,
f) antibodies conjugated with ferritin.
Write the equations for the chemical reactions
involved. State what surface groups will be labeled
by each reagent. List special advantages of each of
these reagents.

--- Page 457 ---

454 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
Bimolecular reactions of two molecules, A and B, to give two products, P and
B P [B] Q, are catalyzed by many enzymes. For some enzymes the substrates A and B
E A B k k 1 3 k k 2 4 E E A B k8 k6 k k 7 5 EAB k k 9 10 EPQ k k 1 1 1 3 k k 1 1 4 2 E E Q P k k 18 k 1 k 6 1 1 5 7 Q P E v 1 f V 1 V 6 0 f f b b c a l n i e a n d s i d n s s i i o f a n i m c r t a o a e t n i t f o h d i n r e o s m a i t n c o t t o r r i d r v o d e d e e r u s , r i . c d t e e e T d s i h n c b e r y a i s b n c C e h o l t e e r h m l d a e e n e r r d e e s v d . h e o E s r w e s ig q i n b h u l t h e e e n e e s r c y n e e s r i t w s a e t m d h e e i . l c s e o c D n f r o e i s b t r t e e a o r d n m t t h a s i e s , n r s r a s o a , t m i n b o d i n e n o d s o m e i f n c t B o g h n i e m d B se i a o i y r n d a er
A Random Bi Bi Mechanism Q V 1 f 1 k p i l n o e ts t i ( c L p in a e ra w m ea e v te e r r s - B is u o rk ft e p n lo a t c s c ), o s m u p ch li s a h s e t d h o u s s e i n a g t t a h s e e r r i i g e h s t o . f double reciprocal
[A]
Contents
455 A. Information from Kinetics 482 D. Mechanisms of Catalysis
455 1. Measuring the Speed of an Enzymatic Reaction 482 1. The “Transition State”
457 First-order reactions 483 Quantitative transition state theory
457 Turnover numbers and units of activity 484 Transition state inhibitors
458 Second-order reactions 484 Describing the transition state
458 Reversible chemical reactions 486 Getting to the transition state
458 2. Formation and Reaction of Enzyme–Substrate 486 2. Microscopic Reversibility
Complexes 486 3. Acid and Base Catalysis
460 Linear forms for rate equations 486 Acidic and basic groups in enzymes
460 Nonlinear equations and integrated rate equations 487 Acid–base catalysis of mutarotation
461 Kinetics with high enzyme concentrations 487 General base and general acid catalysis
461 3. Diffusion and the Rate of Encounter of an Enzyme 490 The Bronsted relationships
with Substrate 490 Concerted acid–base or tautomeric catalysis
462 The “cage effect” and rotation of molecules 491 4. Hydrogen Bonding and the Transfer of
463 The rate of substrate binding Protons within Active Sites
463 The displacement of bound ligands by substrate 491 Ultra–fast proton transfer
464 4. Reversible Enzymatic Reactions 492 Proton transfer rates
464 Reactions of two or more substrates 493 Marcus theory
465 “Ping-pong” mechanisms 493 Diffusion-controlled dissociation of protons
466 Isomechanisms 493 Coupled proton transfers
466 Dead-end complexes 493 Unusually strong hydrogen bonds
466 Handling rate equations for complex mechanisms 494 5. Covalent Catalysis
467 The rapid equilibrium assumption 494 6. Proximity and Orientation
467 Isotope exchange at equilibrium 495 7. The Microenvironment
468 5. Kinetics of Rapid Reactions 496 8. Strain and Distortion
468 Flowing substrates together 497 9. Why Oligomeric Enzymes?
468 Observing relaxation 497 10.Summary
468 Rapid photometric methods 497 E. Classification of Enzymes
468 Some results
469 6. Cryoenzymology 498 References
469 7. The Effect of pH on Enzymatic Action 501 Study Questions
471 B. Inhibition and Activation of Enzymes
471 1. Competitive Inhibitors Boxes
473 2. Noncompetitive Inhibition and Activation; 456 Box 9-A A Historical Note on Enzymes
Allosteric Sites 470 Box 9-B Growth Rates of Cells
475 3. Inhibitors in the Study of Mechanisms 473 Box 9-C The Sulfonamides as Antimetabolites
475 4. Allosteric Effectors in the Regulation of Enzyme 479 Box 9-D Receptors, Agonists, and Antagonists
Activity 485 Box 9-E Chorismate Mutase
477 5. Irreversible Inhibition of Enzymes 488 Box 9-F Immunophilins as Rotamases
478 C. The Specificity of Enzymatic Action
478 1. Complementarity of Substrate and Enzyme
Surfaces
478 2. Stereospecificity and Prochiral Centers
480 Stereochemical numbering
480 Trigonal prochiral centers
481 3. Induced Fit and Conformational Changes
481 4. Specificity and k
cat
482 5. Proofreading

--- Page 458 ---

455
9
Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
[B]
B P
10
A k EA EQ k Q
1 k 5 k 11 15 V f
k k k k k
2 6 9 12 16
E EAB EPQ E 1 6
k 4 k 8 k 10 k 14 k 18 v f V f
k
B k 3 EB k 7 13 EP k 17 P
A Q
1
Random Bi Bi Mechanism V f
1
[A]
Most of the machinery of living cells is made of
A. Information from Kinetics
enzymes. Thousands of them have been extracted from
cells and have been purified and crystallized. Many
The quantitative study of catalysis by enzymes, i.e.,
others are recognized only by their catalytic action and
the study of enzyme kinetics,is a highly developed
have not yet been isolated in pure form. Most enzymes
branch of biochemistry. It is one of our most important
are soluble globular proteins but an increasing number
means of learning about the mechanisms of catalysis
of RNA molecules are also being recognized as enzymes.
at the active sites of enzymes.1– 13a By determining
Many structural proteins of the cell also act as catalysts.
rate constants k under a variety of conditions we can
For example, the muscle proteins actin and myosin
learn just how fast an enzyme can act, how tightly it
together catalyze the hydrolysis of ATP and link the
binds its substrates to form the enzyme-substrate (ES)
hydrolysis to movement (Chapter 19). Catalysis is one
complexes essential to catalysis, how specific it is with
of the most fundamental characteristics of life.
respect to substrate structure, and how it is affected by
How do we recognize that a protein or RNA mole-
compounds that inhibit or activate the catalysis.
culeis an enzyme? The answer is that enzymes are
recognized primarily by their ability to catalyze a chemical
reaction. For this reason, an everyday operation for
1. Measuring the Speed of an Enzymatic
many biochemists is the measurement of the catalytic
Reaction
activity of enzymes. Only by measuring the rates of
the catalyzed reactions carefully and quantitatively
A major goal in kinetic studies is to establish a rate
has it been possible to isolate and purify these remark-
equation which describes the velocity of a reaction in
able molecules.
terms of kinetic constants and other experimentally
Since the beginning of biochemical investigation
measurable parameters. To measure the velocity of any
enzymes have held a special fascination for chemists
chemical reaction precisely we must start the reaction
and biologists. How can these easily destroyed sub-
at a definite time by rapidly mixing together the two
stances catalyze reactions with such speed and without
or more reactants. Then, while keeping the mixture at
formation of significant quantities of side products?
an accurately constant temperature and pH, we must
Some enzymes increase the velocity of a single chemical
measure the concentration of a reactant or product after
reaction of a specific compound by a factor of as much
a fixed time interval, or at various times. No end of
as 1010. How can a protein do this? In this chapter
ingenuity has gone into devising ways of doing this for
we’ll consider both ways of measuring enzymatic
particular enzymes. Whatever the procedure, the infor-
activity and basic mechanisms of catalysis.
mation we must obtain is the rate at which some con-
centration changes with time. We can then construct a
progress curve showing the decrease in concentration
[S] of the reactant (substrate) or the increase in the
concentration of product [P] with time (Fig. 9-1).

--- Page 459 ---

456 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
BOX 9-A A HISTORICAL NOTE ON ENZYMES
The velocity v of an enzymatic reaction is defined any time is given by the slope of the progress curve
as the rate at which a substrate disappears or at which (Fig. 9-1). We usually want to measure the velocity
a product is formed, the two being identical: immediately after the reaction is started to avoid the
decrease in rate that comes from the depletion of sub-
v = –d[S] / dt = d[P] / dt (9-1) strate or accumulation of products. In some cases, as
in the example given in Fig. 9-1, this is difficult to do
Under the steady-state conditions that usually apply with accuracy.
(see p. 449), the rate of increase of product will be the same In some chemical reactions, which involve first-
as the rate of decrease of substrate. The units of velocity order processes, a logarithmic plot of the progress curve
are moles per liter per second (M s–1) or more tradition- (log[S] vs t) gives a straight line so that the initial slope
ally in enzymology moles per liter per minute. We are need not be determined. However, most enzyme assays
interested in the instantaneousvelocity, which at give progress curves that remain nearly linear for only
short periods of time. In these cases we need
very sensitive methods for detecting products.
These may involve colorimetric or fluorimetric
measurements or the use of radioactive sub-
The initial rate is given
by the slope of this line. strates. One of the most sensitive approaches
is to arrange the assay so that a product of the At any later time, the slope
is less than at time = zero. reaction serves as a catalyst for another enzy-
matic process, thus amplifying the amount of
If half as much enzyme is present, final product to be measured.14,15 Another
it will take twice as long to reach
a given point on the progress curve. approach is to measure velocities of reactions
in a very small volume, e.g., 200 nanoliters,
and to continuously separate and measure
t 2t
products using capillary electrophoresis and
fluorescence detection.16
If the progress curve is not a straight line
at the beginning of the reaction (0 time) and if
the amount of compound that reacts in a fixed
ni
esaerced
ehT
noitartnecnoc S
,etartsbus
fo
Time
]S[∆
While the earliest physiologists postulated a an amylase that causes the hydrolysis of starch, had
“vital force” to explain the chemical reactions of already been isolated from germinating barley in
cells, the existence of biochemical substances pro- 1833 and that “in living plants and animals thou-
moting reactions outside of the body was recognized sands of catalytic processes take place.”c Some
at least by the early 1600s. However, the role of chemists and physiologists accepted Berzelius’
yeast in fermentation was still unknown and it was concept of biochemical catalysis immediately, but
thought that both alcoholic fermentation and animal many did not. The matter was complicated by
digestion were caused by unknown substances Pasteur’s discovery that yeast cells were the caus-
calledferments. In 1752, Reamur demonstrated the ative agent of alcoholic fermentation. Only after
solvent power of the gastric juice of birds and by 1783 Edward Buchner’s reports in 1897 that a juice
Spallanzani had extended the studies to humans formed by grinding yeast with sand and filtering
and other species.a In 1836 Schwann isolated the could still ferment sugar (see Chapters 15 and 17)
enzymepepsinb from gastric juice. was the reality of enzymes in metabolismd generally
In the same year Jacob Berzelius introduced the accepted. The word enzyme (from the Greek “in
concept of catalysis, which he developed as a result yeast”) was introduced earlier by F. W. Kuhne, pro-
of studies of the effects of acids and bases in pro- fessor of physiology in Heidelberg and a person
moting the hydrolysis of starch and of the effects of who had accepted Berzelius’ concept.c
metals on the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide.
Berzelius proposed the term catalyst from the Greek aRichmond, C. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 528 – 530
“katalysis,” meaning “dissolution.” Although he bSchwann, T. (1836) Arch. Anat. Physiol., 90 – 138
cHoffmann-Ostenhof, O. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 186 – 187
had been concerned primarily with inorganic cata-
dBuchner, E. (1897) Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges.30, 117 – 124
lysts, Berzelius recognized that a natural catalyst,
Figure 9-1 The progress curve for an enzymatic reaction in
which the substrate S is converted into products.

--- Page 460 ---

A. Information from Kinetics 457
interval of time is taken as the rate, an erroneous τ = 1/k = t 12 /ln 2 (9-5)
answer will be obtained. Sometimes an integrated
rate expression that describes the time course of Turnover numbers and units of activity. When
product formation can be used (see Eq. 9-22). Even an enzyme is catalyzing product formation at the maxi-
when the progress curve is nonlinear as shown in Fig. mum possible rate, V , we can usually assume that
max
9-1, it is possible to estimate relative rates by noting the active site of every molecule of enzyme contains a
that in most cases if one unit of enzyme yields a cer- substrate in the form of an intermediate enzyme–
tain amount of product in time t , the same amount of substrate complex ES and that this complex is being
1
product will be formed by n units of enzyme in time converted to products according to Eq. 9-6:
t /n.
1
d[P] / dt = V = k[ES] = k[E]
max t
First-order reactions. In many chemical reactions or V = k [E] (9-6)
max cat t
the rate of decrease of the concentration of a given
reactant [A] is found experimentally to be directly Here E is the total enzyme, namely, the free enzyme
t
proportional to the concentration of that reactant at E plus enzyme–substrate complex ES. The equation
any given time: holds only at substrate saturation, that is, when the
substrate concentration is high enough that essentially
v = –d[A] / dt = k[A] (9-2) all of the enzyme has been converted into the inter-
mediate ES. The process is first order in enzyme but
Such a reaction is described as first order and the pro- is zero order in substrate. The rate constant k is a
portionality constantk is known as the rate constant. measure of the speed at which the enzyme operates.
Such first-order kinetics is observed for unimolecular When the concentration [E] is given in moles per liter
t
processes in which a molecule of A is converted into ofactive sites(actual molar concentration multiplied by
product P in a given time interval with a probability the number of active sites per mole) the constant k is
that does not depend on interaction with another known as the turnover number, the molecular activity,
molecule. An example is radioactive decay. Enzyme– ork . The symbol k is also used in place of k in Eq.
cat cat
substrate complexes often react by unimolecular pro- 9-6 for complex rate expressions in which k cannot
cat
cesses. In other cases, a reaction is pseudo-first order; represent a single rate constant but is an algebraic
compound A actually reacts with a second molecule expression that contains a number of different constants.
such as water, which is present in such excess that its Turnover numbers can be measured only when
concentration does not change during the experiment. the concentration of the enzyme is known. Partly for
Consequently, the velocity is apparently proportional this reason the activity of an enzyme is usually given
only to [A]. asspecific activity, the units of activity per milligram
A first-order rate constant k has units of s–1. When of protein. One international unit is the amount of
[A] = 1, v = k. Thus, k is a measure of the speed in mol enzyme that produces 1 µmol of product per minute
l–1 s–1 of the reaction of a substance at unit activity. under standard (usually optimal) conditions. The
As a first-order reaction proceeds, [A] decreases and International Union of Biochemistry17 has recommended
at time t is given by any one of the following three a larger unit, the katal (kat), the amount of enzyme
equivalent expressions (Eq. 9-3). These are obtained that converts one mol s–1 of substrate to product.
by integration of Eq. 9-2 in which t is the time at
0
which the reaction was started. 1 kat = 6 x 107 international units
1 international unit = 16.67 nkat (nanokatals)
[A] = A e–kt
0
ln ( [A ] / [A] ) = kt If the enzyme is pure and is saturated with substrate
0
log [A ]– log [A] = kt/ 2.303 (9-3) under the standard assay conditions, the following
0
relationships hold.
Equation 9-3 is the equation of exponential decay. A
characteristic of exponential decay is that [A] is halved Turnover No. = katals/mol of active sites
in a time that is independent of concentration. The = [nkat/mg] x M x 10 – 6/n
r
half-life is t1
2
: = [international units/mg] x M
r
x 10 –3/60n
t 1 2 = ln 2 / k = 0.693 / k (9-4) Here M r is the relative molecular mass of the enzyme
andn is the number of active sites per molecule. Since
Therelaxation timeτ for A is defined by Eq. 9-5 and the activity of an enzyme is dependent on both tem-
represents the time required for the concentration [A] perature and pH, these variables must be specified.
to fall to 1/ e (or ~ 0.37) of its initial value. Turnover numbers of enzymes vary from <1 to
~ 106 s–1. Trypsin, chymotrypsin, and many intracellular

--- Page 461 ---

458 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
enzymes have turnover numbers of ~ 102 s–1. The for the forward reaction and k the unimolecular rate
2
fastest enzymes, which include catalase (Chapter 16), constant for the reverse reaction. The equilibrium
carbonicanhydrase (Chapter 13), and (cid:1)5-3-oxosteroid constantK can easily be shown, from Eq. 9-2 and 9-8,
isomerase (Chapter 13), have maximum turnover to equal k /k for the reaction of Eq. 9-9.
1 2
numbers of 2 x 105 s –1 or more. Compare these reaction The student should be aware that in kinetic equa-
rates with those of a typical organic synthesis in the tions rate constants are usually numbered consecutively
laboratory. A reaction mixture must often be heated via subscripts and that the subscripts do not imply any-
for hours (k < 10–3 s–1). Many enzymes accelerate rates thing about the molecularity. The system which is used
by factors of greater than 106 over those observed in here employs odd-numbered constants for steps in the
the absence of an enzyme at a comparable temperature forward direction and even-numbered constants for
and pH. Enzymes often bring two or more substrates steps in the reverse direction. However, many authors
together, binding them at a specific location in their number the steps in the forward direction consecutively and
active sites. Because of this, rapid reactions can be those in the reverse direction with corresponding negative
catalyzed even when the reactants are present in low subscripts.
concentrations. What relationships exist between experimentally
observable rates and k and k for a reversible reaction?
1 2
Second-order reactions. For a chemical reaction Consider first the simplest case (Eq. 9-10):
to occur between two molecules, A and B (Eq. 9-7),
they must meet and collide. k 1
A B
k k 2 (9-10)
2
A + B P (9-7)
If pure A is placed in a solution, its concentration will
The velocity of such a second-order process is charac- decrease until it reaches an equilibrium with the B
terized by a bimolecular rate constantk and is pro- which has been formed. It is easy to show that in this
2
portional to the product of the concentrations of A case [A] does not decay exponentially but [A] – [A]
equil
and B: does. If log([A] – [A] ) is plotted against time a
equil
first-order rate constant k, characteristic of the rate of
v = k [A] [B] approach to equilibrium, will be obtained. Its relationship
2 (9-8)
tok andk is given by Eq. 9-11.
1 2
The units of k are M–1 s–1. If [B] is present at unit
2
activity, the rate is k [A], a quantity with units of s–1. k = k +k (9-11)
2 1 2
We can see that the bimolecular, or second-order, rate
constant for reaction of A with B may be compared The relaxation time τ for approach to equilibrium can
with first-order constants when the second reactant be expressed as follows:
B is present at unit activity. In many real situations,
reactant B is present in large excess and in a virtually τ –1 = k = τ 1 –1 + τ 2 –1 = k 1 + k 2 (9-12)
constant concentration. The reaction is pseudo-first
order and the experimentally observed rate constant and for the more complex case of Eq. 9-9 as
k [B] is an apparent first-order rate constant. The bimole-
2
cular rate constant k can be obtained by dividing the k = τ –1 = k ( [A] + [B] ) + k (9-13)
2 1 e e 2
apparent constant by [B].
where [A] and [B] are the equilibrium concentrations
e e
Reversible chemical reactions. In any reversible of A and B.18
process, we must consider rate constants for both the
forward and the reverse reactions. At equilibrium a
reaction proceeds in the forward direction at exactly 2. Formation and Reaction of Enzyme–
the same velocity as in the reverse reaction so that no Substrate Complexes
change occurs. For this reason there is always a rela-
tionship between the equilibrium constant and the rate An abundance of evidence indicates that the first
constants. For Eq. 9-9, k is the bimolecular rate constant step in enzymatic catalysis is the combining of the
1
enzyme and substrate reversibly to form a complex,
k ES (Eq. 9-14). Formation of the complex is normally
1
A + B P reversible. ES can either break up to form enzyme
k
2 and substrate again or it can undergo conversion to a
k product or products, often by a unimolecular process.
[P] 1
Equilibrium constant = K = = Three rate constants are needed to describe this system
[A][B] k 2 (9-9) for a reaction that is irreversible overall. A complete

--- Page 462 ---

A. Information from Kinetics 459
description of the kinetic behavior is fairly involved. [ES] [S]
=
[E] K + [S] (9-18)
t m
The maximum velocity, V = k [E], is attained only max 3 t
when all of the enzyme is converted into ES. Under
For example, the kinetics may be different within cells, other conditions v = k [ES] and Eq. 9-19 holds.
3
where molar concentrations of enzymes often exceed
those of substrate, than in the laboratory. In most [ES] / [E] = v/V
t max (9-19)
laboratory experiments the enzyme is present at an
extremely low concentration (e.g., 10–8 M) while the Substituting from Eq. 9-19 into Eq. 9-18 gives the
substrate is present in large excess. Under these cir- Michaelis–Menten equation (Eq. 9-15).
cumstances the steady-state approximation can be In many cases, the rate at which ES is converted
used. For this approximation the rate of formation of ES back to free E and S is much greater than the rate of
from free enzyme and substrate is assumed to be exactly conversion of ES to products (k »k ). In such cases K
2 3 m
balanced by the rate of conversion of ES on to P. That is, equalsk /k , the dissociation constant for breakdown
2 1
for a relatively short time during the duration of the of ES to free enzyme and substrate (sometimes called
experimental measurement of velocity, the concentra- K). Thus, K sometimeshas a close inverse relationship
s m
tion of ES remains essentially constant. To be more to the strength of binding of substrate to enzyme. In such
precise, the steady-state criterion is met if the absolute cases, 1/K is a measure of the affinity of the substrate
m
rate of change of a concentration of a transient inter- for its binding site on the enzyme and for a series of
mediate is very small compared to that of the reactants different substrates acted on by the same enzyme.
and products.19 The more tightly bound substrates have the lower
TheMichaelis–Menten equation (Eq. 9-15) values of K . But beware! The condition that k is
m 3
describes the initial reaction rate of a single substrate negligible compared to k may be met with some
2
with an enzyme under steady-state conditions. (poorer) substrates but may not always be met by
others. From Eq. 9-15 we see that K is always greater
m
V V [S] than or equal to K, but it may be less than K for more
v = 1 + K max [S] = K ma + x [S] complex mechanis S ms. S
m m Figure 9-2 shows a plot of velocity against substrate
where K m = (k 2 + k 3 ) k 1 (9-15) concentration as given by Eq. 9-15. The position of
V on the ordinate is marked, but it should be clear
max
This can be rearranged as follows: that the experimental velocity (v) can never attain V
max
unless [S] is very high relative to K . The value of v
m
approaches V asymptotically. Since K is defined
max m
(9-16) as the value of [S] at which v = V / 2, its value can max
be estimated from Fig. 9-2. However, K cannot be
m
Equation 9-15 provides a relationship between the determined reliably because of the difficulty of estab-
velocity observed at a particular substrate concentration lishing the value of V from a plot of this type. Notice
max
and the maximum velocity that would be achieved at that the curve of Figure 9-2 is identical in form to the
infinite substrate concentration. The quantities V saturation curve for reversible binding shown in Fig. 7-1.
max
andK are often referred to as the kinetic parameters
m
of an enzyme and their determination is an important
part of the characterization of an enzyme. Equation
V
9-15 can be derived by setting the rate of formation of max
the ES complex (k1[E][S]) in the steady state equal to
its rate of breakdown, ([k + k ][ES]). Rearranging and
2 3
substitutingK , as defined in Eq. 9-15, we obtain Eq.
m V
9-17. max
(k + k )
[E][S] = 2 3 [ES] = K m [ES] (9-17)
k
1 K
m
[S]
Using this equation, together with a mass balance
relationship ([E] = [E] – [ES]), we can solve for [ES]/[E],
t t
the fraction of enzyme combined as enzyme–substrate
complex (Eq. 9-18).
v
k k
1 3
E + S ES E + P
k (9-14) 2
V
max = 1 + K /[S]
v m
1
2
Figure 9-2 Plot of observed velocity v vs substrate concen-
tration [S] for an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.

--- Page 463 ---

460 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
Linear forms for rate equations. To obtain K m V max
andV from experimental rate data, Eq. 9-15 can be
max K
transformed by algebraic rearrangement into one of m
several linear forms. The popular double-reciprocal
orLineweaver–Burkplot of 1/ v against 1/ [S] (Fig. 9-3) v
is described by Eq. 9-20. The values of K /V and [S]
m max
1/V can be evaluated from the slope and intercept,
max
respectively, of this straight line plot.
1 = 1 + K m 1 V max
v V V [S] (9-20) v
max max
Figure 9-4 The Eadie–Hofstee plot of v/ [S] against v. The
slope is –1/K ; the intercept on the vertical axis is V /K
m max m
and that on the horizontal axis is V .
max
1 K
v slope = m
V
max As pointed out at the beginning of Section A,
depletion of substrate with time lowers [S] from its
1
V initial value to some extent. This can have an especially
max
adverse effect on points obtained at low [S], e.g., points
on the right side of Fig. 9-3 or on the left side of Fig.
–1
9-4. Equations 9-20 and 9-21 will be more precise if the
K 1
m
[S] average substrate concentration over the time period
of the assay, rather than that at zero time,20 is used.
Figure 9-3 Double-reciprocal or Lineweaver–Burk plot of
Nonlinear equations and integrated rate
1/v vs 1/ [S]. The intercept on the vertical axis gives 1/V
max
and the slope gives K /V . The intercept on the horizontal equations. In discussions of the control of metabolism
m max
axis equals –1/K . through regulation of enzymatic activity, it is often
m
better to plot v against log [S] as in Fig. 9-5. This plot
also has the virture that the entire range of attainable
substrate concentrations can be plotted on one piece
Another linear plot, the Eadie–Hofstee plot, is that of paper if the point for [S] = 0 (at minus infinity) is
ofv/ [S] vs v (Fig. 9-4). It is related to the Scatchard omitted. The same scale can be used for all enzymes.
plot (Fig. 7-3) and is fitted by Eq. 9-21. The plot is S-shaped, both for simple cases that are
represented by Eq. 9-15 and for enzymes that bind
v = V max − v 1 s c u la b s s s t i r fi a c t a e t i c o o n o p o e r r “ a h ti y v p e e ly rb ( o S l e i c c t ” i o v n s B “s ,5 ig ). m T o h id u a s l , ” t h is e lost.
[S] K m K m (9-21) However, the degree of cooperativity can be directly
measured from the midpoint slope of the curve. A
While the point for [S] = 0 and v = 0 cannot be plotted, disadvantage is that it is awkward to measure V
max
the ratio v/ [S] approaches V max /K m as v approaches from a plot of this type, and it may be preferable to
zero. Notice the distribution of the points in Fig. 9-4. obtain it from a linear plot (Figs. 9-3 or 9-4). Alterna-
Substrate concentrations were chosen such that the tively, computer-assisted methods can be used to
increase in velocity from point to point is more or less obtain both K and V and to fit a curve to the exper-
m max
constant, a desirable experimental situation. The points imental points as in Fig. 9-5.
on the Eadie–Hofstee plot are also nearly evenly dis- An attractive alternative to the use of initial veloci-
tributed, but those of the Lineweaver–Burk plot are ties and linear plots is to measure the kinetic parame-
compressed at one end. (However, if the substrate tersV and K using points all along the progress
max m
concentrations for successive points are selected in curve (Fig. 9-1). Various procedures for doing this
the ratios 1, 1/ 3, 1/ 5, 1/ 7, and 1/ 9, the spacing will have been devised.21,22 For example, the integrated
be uniform on the Lineweaver–Burk plot.) A second form of Eq. 9-15 can be given as Eq. 9-22 or 9-23.
advantage of the Eadie–Hofstee plot is that the entire
range of possible substrate concentration from near
zero to infinity can be fitted onto a single plot.

--- Page 464 ---

461
V
max
Presence of a competitive
inhibitor will shift entire
curve according to Eq. 9-59
so that higher substrate
concentrations are required
to reach saturation.
logK –2 log K –1 log K logK +1
m m m m
log [S]
10
V t= [S] – [S] + K ln ( [S] / [S] ) max 0 m 0
Here [S] is the initial substrate concentration at t = 0
0
and [S] and [P] are the substrate and product concen-
trations at any later time. In one type of linear plot,21
based on Eq. 9-23, ([S] – [S]) / t is plotted against 1/ t
0
ln ([S] / [S]), the slope of the plot being –K and the
0 m
intercepts being V and V /K . Computer pro-
max max m
grams are available for analysis of enzymatic progress
curves, even for complex mechanisms.23,24
Kinetics with high enzyme concentrations.
Laboratory studies of the kinetics of purified enzymes
are usually conducted with enzyme concentrations of
10–7 to 10–10 M, but within cells enzyme concentrations
are probably often in the range 10–6 to 10–5 M,25 which
may be higher than the concentrations of the substrates
upon which the enzymes act. Be cautious in drawing
conclusions about kinetics under such circumstances!
Methods have been devised for handling kinetic data
when the concentration of enzyme is greater than K ,
m
a condition that can lead to intolerably high errors if
the usual equations are applied.26,27
3. Diffusion and the Rate of Encounter of an
Enzyme with Substrate
What determines the value of k in Eq. 9-14? This
1
rate constant represents the process by which the sub-
strate and enzyme find each other, become mutually
oriented, and bind to form ES. If orientation and bind-
ing are rapid enough, the rate will be determined by
the speed with which the molecules can come together
by diffusion. Large molecules in solution are free to
travel for only a tiny fraction of their diameter as a
result of their frequent collision with solvent molecules.
v
A. Information from Kinetics
The result is visible in the Brownian
movement of microscopic particles sus-
pended in a fluid. If an individual particle
is followed, it is seen to undergo a “random
1
2 V max walk,” moving in first one direction then
another. Albert Einstein showed that if the
distances transversed by such particles in
a given time ∆ t are measured, the mean
square of these ∆ x values ∆2 can be related
by Eq. 9-24 to the diffusion constant D
(which is usually given in units of cm2s–1).
Figure 9-5 Plot of v against log [S] for an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. ∆2 = 2 D∆ t (9-24)
For molecules, the Brownian move-
ment cannot be observed directly but the
[S] diffusion constant can be measured, for example, by
V t = [P] + K ln 0
max m [S] − [P] observing the rate of spreading of a boundary between
0 (9-22) two different concentrations of the substance.28 The
diffusion constant for 1H2HO (HDO) in H O at 25°C is
2
(9-23) 2.27 x 10–5 cm2 s–1, and the values for the ions K+ and
Cl– are about the same.29 For many small molecules D
is approximately 10–5 cm2 s–1, and the value decreases as
the size of the molecule increases. Thus, for the 13.7-kDa
ribonuclease,D = 1.1 x 10–6 cm2 s–1, and for the 500-kDa
myosin,D is ~ 1 x 10–7 cm2 s–1. For the spherical particle
theStokes–Einstein equation (Eq. 9-25) can be used
to relate the diffusion coefficient to the radius, the
coefficient of viscosity η, the Boltzmann constant k ,
B
and the temperature (Kelvin) T.
k T
D = B
6πηr
(9-25)
To estimate the rate constant for a reaction that
is controlled strictly by the frequency of collisions of
particles, we must ask how many times per second
one of a number n of particles will be hit by another of
the particles as a result of Brownian movement. The
problem was analyzed in 1917 by Smoluchowski,30,31
who considered the rate at which a particle B diffuses
toward a second particle A and disappears when the
two collide. Using Fick’s law of diffusion, he concluded
that the number of encounters per milliliter per second
was given by Eq. 9-26.
Number of encounters/ml s–1=
4π (D + D) (r + r )n n
A B A B A B (9-26)
Here D and D are the two diffusion coefficients, r and
A B A
r are the radii (in Å) of the two particles, and n and n
B A B
are the numbers of particles per milliliter. The number
of encounters per liter per second is (4π /1000) (D + D)
A B
(r + r )N2[A][B], where N is Avogadro’s number.
A B
Dividing this frequency by N gives the rate of collision
v in M s–1, a velocity that can be equated (Eq. 9-27)
withk [A] [B], where k is a second-order rate constant
D D

--- Page 465 ---

462 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
which determines the diffusion controlled limit, Division of Eq. 9-31 by Eq. 9-32 gives the volume swept
that is, the maximum possible rate of a reaction. out per second by one particle:
v =
4π
(D + D )(r + r )[A][B]N = k [A][B]
∆ V/∆ t = k
B
T/ 3 η cm3 s–1 (9-33)
A B A B D
1000
(9-27) Since the collision radius for two particles of equal size
is two times the particle radius, the effective volume
This equation can be rearranged to Eq. 9-28. swept out will be four times that given by Eq. 9-33.
Since both particles are diffusing, the effective diffusion
4πN constant will be twice that used in obtaining Eq. 9-28.
k = (D + D )(r + r )M−1s−1
D 1000 A B A B (9-28) Thus, the effective volume swept out by the particle
in a second will be eight times that given by Eq. 9-33.
While this equation is thought to overestimate the The volume swept out by one mole of particles is equal
diffusion-limited rate constant slightly, it is a good tok (recall that the second-order rate constant has
D
approximation. If the diffusing particles are approxi- dimensions of liter mol–1 s–1). Thus, when converted
mately spherical, diffusion constants D and D can to a moles per liter basis and multiplied by 8, Eq. 9-33
A B
be calculated from Eq. 9-25, and Eq. 9-28 becomes Eq. should (and does) become identical with the Smolu-
9-29. chowski equation (Eq. 9-30).
The volume given by Eq. 9-33 is about 1.4 x 10–11
 
k = 2RT 2 + r A + r B  cm3, which could be represented approximately by a
D 3000η  r B r A  (9-29) cube 2.4 µm on a side. If we compare this volume with
that of a cell (Table 1-2) or of an organelle, we see that
The value of k does not vary greatly as the ratio in one second an enzyme molecule will sweep out a
D
of radii r /r is changed, and in most cases it may be large fraction of the volume of a small cell, mitochon-
A B
assumed that r /r ≈ 1, in which case the equation drion, chloroplast, etc.
A B
simplifies (Eq. 9-30).
The “cage effect” and rotation of molecules. It
k ≈ 8RT M−1s−1 is of interest to compare the bimolecular rate constant
D 3000η (9-30) for encounters calculated by the Smoluchowski theory
(Eq. 9-29) with the corresponding bimolecular rate
For water at 25°C, the coefficient of viscosity η is ~ 0.01 constant for molecular collisions given by the kinetic
poise (1 poise = 10–5 newton cm–2) which leads, accord- theory of gases (Eq. 9-34).
ing to Eq. 9-30, to k ~ 0.7 x 1010 M–1 s–1. It was shown
D
by Debye32 that this rate constant must be multiplied
by a correction factor when charged particles rather N(r +r )2   1 1 12
than uncharged spheres diffuse together. This factor k(collision)= A B 8πk T  +  
may be of the order of 5–10 for a substrate and enzyme
1000  B m
A
m
B
 
carrying two or three charges and may act to either (9-34)
increase or decrease reaction rates. Since the viscosity
of cytoplasm is 0.02 – 0.03 poise,33k will be reduced Here m and m are the masses of the two particles.
D A B
correspondingly. This rate constant is also relatively independent of
A simple alternative derivation of Eq. 9-30 was molecular size and for spheres varies from (4 to 11) x
developed by Dexter French,34 who also provided the 1011 M–1 s–1, over an order of magnitude greater than
author with most of this discussion of encounter theory. the rate constant for encounters. In a solution, mole-
Consider a small element of volume ∆V swept out by a cules still collide at about the same rate as in a gas so
particle as it moves through the solution for a distance that100 to 200 collisions occur between two particles for
equal to its own radius. This element of volume will each encounter. However, during the time of the single
equalπr3: encounter, the particles are together in a solvent “cage.”
While in this solvent cage, both substrate and enzyme
∆ V = π r2 x r = π r3 (9-31) molecules undergo random rotational motions. Suc-
cessive collisions bring them together in different
It will be swept out in a time ∆ t which can be calculated orientations, one of which is likely to lead to a suffi-
from Eq. 9-24 as r2/ 2D. Substituting the value of D ciently close match of complementary surfaces (of
given by Eq. 9-25, we obtain for ∆ t: substrate and binding site) so that formation of a
“productive” ES complex takes place.
3πηr3 Molecular rotation in a solution is described quan-
∆t =
titatively by diffusion laws (analogous to Fick’s laws)
k T (9-32)
B

--- Page 466 ---

A. Information from Kinetics 463
for which a rotary diffusion constantθ is defined.35,36 values of k /K are always less than this limit, indi-
cat m
Consider a group of molecules all oriented the same cating that a certain time is required for a substrate
way initially, then undergoing rotary diffusion until molecule to become oriented and seated in the active
their orientations become random. If we measure the site.37 However, for several real enzymes values of
orientation of each molecule by an angle we see that k /K of 107 to 3 x 108 M–1 s–1 have been observed.
cat m
initially the value of cos α is 1 but that when the angles For triose phosphate isomerase Albery and Knowles
become random the mean value of cos α averaged over obtained a value of 4 x 108 M–1 s–1, so close to the diffu-
all molecules is zero. The rotary relaxation time τ is sion controlled limit that these authors regard this
the time required for the mean value of cos α to fall to enzyme as a nearly perfect catalyst, one that could not
have evolved further because it is already catalyzing
the reaction with substrate at almost the maximum
α velocity that is possible.37– 39
Initial Later
orientation orientation The displacement of bound ligands by sub-
strate. Jenkins pointed out that in many instances a
1/e (which occurs when α = 68.5°). For a sphere θ is substrate must displace another ligand from the active
given by Eq. 9-35. site to form the ES complex.40 For example, a binding
site for an ionic substrate often already contains an
ion, either of the product P or some other ion X which
k T
θ = 1τ = B
Jenkins calls a substrate surrogate. For this situation
2 8πηr3
(9-35)
Eq. 9-14 must be replaced by the following set of
equations:
Ellipsoidal or rod-shaped molecules have two different
rotary diffusion constants while, if the dimensions of P
k product release
the molecules are different along all three axes, three 5
constants must be specified.36 EX + S k 1 X + ES k 3 EP S
From Eq. 9-35 we can calculate (if η = 0.01 poise) k 2 k X
4
the following values for a small spherical molecule P (9-38)
(substrate) of ~ 1 nm length and for a spherical enzyme
of 5 nm diameter:
Here k and also k and k ,are second-order rate con-
2 4 5
r = 0.5 nm θ≈ 1.3 x 109 s–1 stants. The release of product, as determined by k
4
r = 2.5 nm θ≈ 1.0 x 107 s–1 andk , may be rate-limiting. At zero time the reverse
5
reactions may be ignored, and steady-state analysis
We see that smaller molecules rotate much faster than shows that the Michaelis–Menten equation (Eq. 9-16b)
large ones and that rotational relaxation times for small will be replaced by Eq. 9-39. Here, D is a constant and
proteins are of the same order of magnitude as k for A is also constant if X is present at a fixed concentration.
D
diffusion-limited encounter. However, for very large
molecules, especially long rods, the rotary relaxation
V k [X]+k k (1k −1k )
time about a short axis may be a large fraction of a second. max =1+ 2 3 + 3 5 1
v k [S] k [X] k +[S]
1 4 5
The rate of substrate binding. At very low sub- =1+K [S]+D (A+[S])
strate concentrations the Michaelis–Menten equation m (9-39)
(Eq. 9-15) simplifies as follows:
Whenk , the rate constant for displacement of product
5
v = ( V /K ) [S] by substrate, is very small, this equation simplifies to
max m (9-36)
Eq. 9-40.
SinceV = k [E] (Eq. 9-6) and at low [S] most of
max cat t
[E] is free E, we obtain the following equation:2 V
t max =1+k k [X]+(k [X]+k ) k [S]
v 3 4 2 3 1
v = ( k cat /K m ) [E] [S] (9-37) =1+k k [X]+K , [S] (9-40)
3 4 m
From this we see that k /K is the apparent second-
cat m
order rate constant for the reaction of free enzyme with At high concentrations of X the second term becomes
substrate. As such it cannot exceed the diffusion con- negligible and the equation becomes identical to the
trolled limit k of Eqs. 9-28 to 9-30 which falls in the Michaelis–Menten equation (Eq. 9-16) except that K ’,
D m
range of 109– 1011 M–1 s–1. Experimentally observed the apparent Michaelis constant, now increases as [X]

--- Page 467 ---

464 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
increases (Eq. 9-41). This is exactly what is observed only way that an enzymatic sequence can keep going
for competitive inhibitors where in the forward direction is for product P to be removed
rapidly by a subsequent reaction with a second enzyme.
K ,= k 2 [X]+k 3 The first enzyme may be thought of as possessing a
m k kind of “one-way valve” that turns off the flow in a
1 (9-41)
metabolic pathway when the concentration of its
Thus substrate surrogates at high concentrations are product rises.
often competitive inhibitors. However, at low [X] the
second term in Eq. 9-41 may be important and X then Reactions of two or more substrates. Enzymes
serves as an activator. Under many circumstances, Eq. frequently catalyze the reaction of two, three, or even
9-39 does not simplify further and a nonlinear relation- more different molecules to give one, two, three, or
ship between 1/ v and 1/ [S] is ob,served, with the shape more products. Sometimes all of the substrate mole-
of the curves being influenced by the values of constants cules must be bound to an active site at the same time
A and D (see also Section B,4).40 and are presumably lined up on the enzyme molecule
in such a way that they can react in proper sequence.
In other cases, the enzyme may transform molecule A
4. Reversible Enzymatic Reactions to a product, and then cause the product to react with
molecule B. The number of variations is enormous.1,10,12
For some enzyme-catalyzed reactions the equilib- The order in which two molecules A and B bind
rium lies far to one side. However, many other reac- to an enzyme to form a complex EAB may be com-
tions are freely reversible. Since a catalyst promotes pletelyrandomor it may be obligatorilyordered. Both
reactions in both directions, we must consider the situations occur with real enzymes. Cleland introduced
action of an enzyme on the reverse reaction. Let us a widely used method of depicting the possibilities.42
designate the maximum velocity in the forward direc- For example, Eq. 9-43 shows the reaction of A and B in
tion as V and that in the reverse direction as V. There anordered sequence to form the complex EAB which is
f r
will be a Michaelis constant for reaction of enzyme then isomerized to EPQ, the complex formed by bind-
with product K , while K will refer to the reaction ing the two products P and Q to the enzyme. The rate
mP mS
with substrate. constant to the left of each vertical arrow or above
As in any other chemical reaction, there is a rela- each horizontal arrow refers to the reaction in the
tionship between the rate constants for forward and
reverse enzyme-catalyzed reactions and the equilib- A B P Q
r B i r u i m tis h co k n i s n t e a t n ic t i . s t T J h . i B s . r S e . l a H ti a o l n d s a h n i e p , a f n ir d s t p d ro e p ri o v s e e d d b i y n t h h is e E k 1 k 2 EA k 3 k 4 EAB k 5 EPQ k 7 k 8 EQ k 9 k 10 E
bookEnzymes41 in 1930, is known as the Haldane k 6
(9-43)
relationship. It is obtained by setting v = v for the
f r
condition that product and substrate concentrations forward direction as indicated by the arrow while the
are those at equilibrium. For a single substrate–single other constants (to the right or below the arrows) refer
product system it is given by Eq. 9-42. to the reverse reactions. The velocity in the forward
direction for an enzyme with ordered binding is given
K = V K /V K by Eq. 9-44a,
eq f mP r ms (9-42)
Because the Haldane relationship imposes con-
V [A][B]
straints on the values of the velocity constants and v = f
Michaelis constants, it is of some value in understand- f K eqA K mB + K mB [A] + K mA [B] + [A][B]
ing regulation of metabolism. Consider the case that (9-44a)
the maximum forward velocity V is high and that K
f mS
has a moderately low value (fairly strong binding of which may also be written in the reciprocal form (Eq.
substrate). If the reaction is freely reversible (K ~ 1) 9-44b):
eq
and the velocity of the reverse reaction V is about the
r
s
b
a
e
m
tr
e
u
a
e
s
( s
th
ee
a t
E
o
q
f
.
t
9
h
-
e
4 2
fo
)
r
th
w
a
a
t
r
t
d
h e
re
p
a
r
c
o
ti
d
o
u
n
c
,
t
i t
P
w
w
il
i
l
l l
n
a
e
l
c
s
e
o
s
b
sa
e
rily
v
1 =
V
1 

1 + K
[A
mA
]
+ K
[B
m
]
B + K
[
e
A
qA
][
K
B
m
]
B 


fairly tightly bound. If V << V, the value of K will f f (9-44b)
r f mP
have to be much lower than that of K . In such a
mA
situation P will remain tightly bound to the enzyme An alternative form of this equation (Eq. 9-45),
and since V is low, it will tend to clog the enzyme. proposed by Dalziel,43 is sometimes used.
r
Suchproduct inhibition may sometimes slow down
a whole pathway of metabolism. In such a case, the

--- Page 468 ---

465
[E] φ φ φ the one that was held fixed.
t = φ + 1 + 2 + 12
0 From a set of these secondary plots,V and one
v [A] [B] [A][B] (9-45) f
f
of the Michaelis constants can be determined (Fig. 9-6B
and C). Using two sets of secondary plots, all of the
The kinetic parameters of Eq. 9-44 are V, the maximum constants of Eq. 9-44 may be established. Alternatively,
f
velocity in the forward direction, the two Michaelis a computer can be used to examine all of the data at
constants,K and K , and the equilibrium constant once and to obtain the best values of the parameters.
mB mA
K , for reversible dissociation of the complex EA and The latter approach is desirable because estimates of
eqA
which is equal to k k . The relationship between the the standard deviations of the parameters can be
2 / 1
parameters of Eq. 9-44 (K ’s,V‘s, and K ’s) and the obtained. However, the user must take care to ensure
m eqA
rate constants k –k is not obvious. However, remem- that the experimental errors are correctly estimated and
1 10
ber that the parameters are experimental quantities are not simply estimates of how well the computer has
determined by measurements on the enzyme. Some- fitted the points on the assumption that they contain
times, but not always, it is possible to deduce some of no error.23
the values of individual rate constants from the experi- The meaning of the kinetic parameters may be
mental parameters. slightly difficult to grasp. V is the velocity that would
f
An equation similar to 9-44a can be written for the be obtained if both [A] and [B] were high enough to
velocityv of the reaction of P and Q. Also an equation saturate the enzyme. Each K corresponds to that for
r m
can be written in similar form for v –v, i.e., the instan- a simple system in which the concentration of the
f r
taneous velocity of the reaction in any mixture of all second substrate is at a high, saturating value.
four components A, B, P, and Q. For the bimolecular reaction that we have consid-
The kinetic parameters of Eq. 9-44b are often ered, there are two Haldane relationships:
obtained from experimental data through the use of
reciprocal plots (Fig. 9-6). However, Eq. 9-44b is linear
only if the concentration of one or the other of the sub-
strates A and B is kept constant. For this reason a
series of experiments is usually performed in which
[A] is varied while [B] is held constant. Then [A] is Of these, only the first is ordinarily used.
held constant and [B] is varied. Each of these experi-
ments leads to a family of lines (Fig. 9-6A) whose “Ping-pong” mechanisms. A common type of
slopes and intercepts are measured. The slopes and mechanism that is especially prevalent for enzymes
intercepts of this family of curves are then plotted with tightly bound cofactors has been dubbed
against the reciprocal of the second concentration, i.e., ping-pong because the enzyme alternates between
[B] = 0.5 K
mA
[B] = K mA
[B] = 2K
mA
[B] = 3K
mA
[B] = 4K
mA
Figure 9-6 Reciprocal plots used to analyze kinetics of two-substrate enzymes. (A) Plot of 1/ v against 1/ [A] for a series
f
of different concentrations of the second substrate B. (B) A secondary plot in which the intercepts from graph A are plotted
against 1/ [B]. (C) Secondary plot in which the slopes from graph A have been plotted against 1/ [B]. The figures have been
drawn for the case that K = 10–3 M, K = 2 K , and K = K K (Eq. 9-46) = K / 200 and [A] and [B] are in units of moles
mA mB mA AB eqA mB mA
per liter. Eadie–Hofstee plots of v/ [A] vs v at constant [B] can also be used as the primary plots. The student can easily
f f
convert Eq. 9-44 to the proper form analogous to Eq. 9-21.
stpecretni
sepols
A. Information from Kinetics
 2
VK K V K K
K = f mP dQ =  f  dP mQ
eq V r K dA K mB V r  K mA K dB (9-46)
A B C
K
10 5 slope = K mB 10K mA slope = V AB
V f V f V f V f f
1 6
v V
f f
1
K
1 V mA
V f f V f
–1 –K
a
1 K b 1 K ia K b 1
[A] [B] [B]

--- Page 469 ---

466 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
two forms E and E’ (Eq. 9-47). Substrate A reacts via the enzyme will be protonated during part of the
complex EA to form E’, a modified enzyme that often catalytic cycle. This proton must dissociate before
another catalytic cycle begins, and in some instances
A P B Q this dissociation may be a rate-limiting step. Northrup
E k 1 k 2 EA k 3 E’P k 5 k 6 E’ k 7 k 8 E’B k 9 EQ k 11 k 12 E a to n d id c e o n w ti o fy r k s e u r c s h d i e s v o e m lo e p c e h d a n th is e m u s s . e 44 of product inhibition
k k
4 10
Ping-pong mechanism for reaction Dead-end complexes. In the steady state of
of A and B to form P and Q (9-47)
action of an enzyme with ping-pong kinetics, part of
the enzyme is in form E and part in form E’. Ideally, E
contains an altered coenzyme. At the same time A is would have affinity only for A and Q, while E’ would
changed to product P still bound to the enzyme. P have affinity only for B and P. However, in many real
dissociates leaving E’ which is then able to react with situations E also binds B and P weakly; similarly, E’
the second substrate B and to go through the second binds A and Q. This is because the products and
half of the cycle during which E’ is converted back to reactants usually have structural features in common.
E. An example is provided by the aminotransferases The propensity of enzymes with ping-pong kinetics
(Eq. 14-25) in which the coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate to form dead-end complexes (also called abortive
is interconverted with pyridoxamine phosphate. complexes) may sometimes have a regulatory func-
The rate equations of the ping-pong mechanism tion. In Eq. 9-49 the reactions of Eq. 9-47 have been
resemble that for the ordered bimolecular reaction (Eq. rearranged to depict a situation in which product P
9-44), but each has one less term (Eq. 9-48): normally undergoes a sequence of further reactions.
However, if P accumulates to a high enough concen-
V [A][B] tration it can react reversibly to form a dead-end com-
v = f
f K mB [A] + K mA [B] + [A][B] (9-48a) plex EP. This is an effective form of product inhibition
which can be relieved only by a lowering of the con-
or centration of P through its further metabolism.
1 = 1  1 + K mA + K mB  
v V  [A] [B]  (9-48b)
f f
A P
further reactions
A diagnostic feature of the ping-pong mechanism
is that the families of lines (in double reciprocal plots)
obtained when one substrate is held constant while
EP E E’
the other is varied no longer intersect as they do in Fig. (nonproductive)
9-6A but are parallel. They must be truly parallel and
the experimentalist must be aware that nearly parallel
Q B (9-49)
lines may sometimes be observed for sequential reac-
tions. Thus, if K of Eq. 9-44b is small enough the
eqA
last term of that equation will be small compared to Handling rate equations for complex mecha-
the other terms and the equation will be approximated nisms. While steady-state rate equations can be
by Eq. 9-48b. The reaction will appear to be ping-pong derived easily for the simple cases discussed in the
even though it is sequential and the reaction proceeds preceding sections, enzymes are often considerably
through the ternary complex EAB. more complex and the derivation of the correct rate
One less kinetic parameter can be obtained from equations can be extremely tedious. The topological
an analysis of the data for a ping-pong mechanism than theory of graphs, widely used in analysis of electrical
can be obtained for ordered reactions. Nevertheless, networks, has been applied to both steady-state and
in Eq. 9-47, twelve rate constants are indicated. At nonsteady-state enzyme kinetics.45–50 The method em-
least this many steps must be considered to describe ploys diagrams of the type shown in Eq. 9-50. Here
the behavior of the enzyme. Not all of these constants
can be determined from a study of steady-state kinetics,
1 A k [A] 2
but they may be obtained in other ways. 1
E EA
k
2
Isomechanisms. A catalyst functions over and B P B
over again without being altered. However, during k [B] k k k k [B]
7 6 5 4 3
a single turnover it is likely to undergo a temporary
k
change. For example, if an enzyme assists in removing 8
EB EAB
a proton from a substrate, some functional group of k [A]
4 A 9 3 (9-50)

--- Page 470 ---

467
the reaction of an enzyme with two substrates A and maintained. As can be seen from the graph, this ex-
B with a random order of binding is depicted. (In change rate increases monotonically as substrate
contrast, Eq. 9-43 shows the case of ordered binding concentrations are increased. This is also true for the
of two substrates.) When complex EAB is formed, it rate of ATP–ADP exchange. The fact that both ex-
can decompose to free enzyme and to the single prod- change rates increase continuously indicates random
uct P. Each one of the nodes, which are numbered 1– 4 binding of substrates.55 The inequality of the two
in the diagram, corresponds to a single form of the maximal exchange rates suggests that release of glucose
enzyme. The appropriate first-order rate constant or 6-phosphate may be slower than that of ADP.
apparent first-order constant is placed by each arrow. Figure 9-7B shows similar plots for lactate dehydro-
The methods provide easy rules for deriving from genase.53 In this case, after an initial rise (that is not
such a scheme the steady-state rate equation. regarded as significant), the pyruvate*–lactate exchange
The importance of the simplified schematic methods reaches a high constant value as the amount of pyruvate
is apparent when one considers that the steady-state is increased (with a constant [pyruvate] / [lactate] ratio
rate equation for Eq. 9-50 would have 6 terms in the of 1/35). However, the NAD*–NADH exchange in-
numerator and 12 terms in the denominator.51 In the creases rapidly at first but then drops abruptly as the
more complex case in which EAB breaks down to two pyruvate and lactate concentrations continue to in-
products P and Q with a random order of release, the crease. This suggests an ordered mechanism (Eq. 9-43)
rate equation contains 672 terms in the denominator. in which NAD+ and NADH represent A and Q, respec-
In such cases it is worthwhile to enlist the help of a tively, and pyruvate and lactate represent B and P. As
computer in deriving the equation.24,52– 54 the concentrations of B and P become very high, the
The rapid equilibrium assumption. Rate equa-
tions for enzymes are often simplified if a single step,
e.g., that of reaction of complex EAB to product in Eq.
9-50, is rate limiting.54a If it is assumed that all reaction
steps preceding or following the rate-limiting step are
at equilibrium, the equation for random binding with
a two-substrate and two-product reaction simplifies to
one whose form is similar to that obtained for ordered
binding (Eq. 9-44). In the absence of products P and Q
Eq. 9-44 will correctly represent the steady-state rate
equation corresponding to Eq. 9-50. However, this
simplification may not be valid for a very rapidly
acting enzyme.
Isotope exchange at equilibrium. Consider the
reaction of substrates A and B to form P and Q (Eq.
10
9-51). If both reactants and both products are present
with the enzyme and in the ratio found at equilibrium
no net reaction will take place. However, the reactants
and products will be continually interconverted under pyruvate lactate
the action of the enzyme. Now if a small amount of
4
A + B P + Q (9-51)
NAD NADH
highly labeled reactant (A* or B*) is added, the rate at
which isotope is transferred from the labeled reactant 0 0.5
into one or the other of the products can be measured. Lactate concentration, mol l–1
(pyruvate/lactate = 1/35)
In general, a label in one of the substrates will appear
in only one of the products.
Figure 9-7A shows the rate of exchange of isotopi- Figure 9-7 (A) Effect of glucose and glucose 6-phosphate
cally labeled glucose (glucose*) with glucose 6-phosphate concentrations on reaction rate of yeast hexokinase at equi-
as catalyzed by the enzyme hexokinase (Chapter 12). librium. Reaction mixtures contain 1– 2.2 mM ATP, and 25.6
mM ADP at pH 6.5. From Fromm et al.51 (B) Effect of lactate
The exchange rate is plotted against the concentra-
and pyruvate concentrations on equilibrium reaction rates
tion of glucose 6-phosphate with the ratio [glucose] /
of rabbit muscle lactate dehydrogenase. Reaction mixtures
[glucose 6-phosphate] constant at 1/19, such that an contained 1.7 mM NAD+, and 30 – 46 µM NADH in Tris-
equilibrium ratio for reactants and products is always nitrate buffer, pH 7.9, 25°C. From Silverstein and Boyer.53
,etar
noitcaer
muirbiliuqE
301
×1-nim
1-l
lom
ATP ADP
10
glucose glucose 6-P
5
0 2 4
G 6-P molarity × 102, G/G 6-P = 1/19
8
6
2
1.0
,etar
noitcaer
muirbiliuqE
401
×1-nim
1-l
lom
A. Information from Kinetics
A
B

--- Page 471 ---

468 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
enzyme shuttles back and forth between EA and EQ, through the solution (without any sparking) raising
but these two complexes rarely dissociate to give free the temperature 2 – 10 degrees. All the chemical equi-
enzyme and A or Q. Hence, the A*–Q exchange rate libria for which ∆H≠ 0 are perturbed. If some property,
drops. such as the absorbance at a particular wavelength or
In other cases a label may be transferred from A the conductivity of the solution, is measured, very
into P or from B into Q. Information on such exchang- small relaxation times can be determined.
es has provided a valuable criterion of mechanism While it may not be intuitively obvious, if the
which is considered in Chapter 12, Section B,4. displacement from equilibrium is small, the rate of
return to equilibrium can always be expressed as a
first-order process (e.g., see Eq. 9-13). In the event that
5. Kinetics of Rapid Reactions there is more than one chemical reaction required to
reequilibrate the system, each reaction has its own
The fastest steps in an enzymatic process cannot be characteristic relaxation time. If these relaxation times
observed by conventional steady-state kinetic methods are close together, it is difficult to distinguish them;
because the latter cannot be applied to reactions with however, they often differ by an order of magnitude
half-times of less than about 10 s. Consequently, a or more. Therefore, two or more relaxation times can
variety of methods have been developed18,56– 59a to often be evaluated for a given solution. In favorable
measure rates in the range of 1 to 1013s–1. circumstances these relaxation times can be related
directly to rate constants for particular steps. For
Flowing substrates together. One of the first example, Eigen measured the conductivity of water
rapid kinetic methods to be devised consists of rapidly following a temperature jump18 and observed the rate
mixing two flowing solutions together in a special of combination of H+ and OH– for which τ at 23ºC
mixing device and allowing the resulting reaction equals 37 x 10–6 s. From this, the rate constant for
mixture to move at a rate of several meters per second combination of OH– and H+ (Eq. 9-52) was calculated
down a straight tube. At a flow velocity of 10 m s–1 a as follows (Eq. 9-53):
solution will move 1 cm in 10–3 s. Observations of the
mixture are made at a suitable distance, e.g., 1 cm, and H+ + OH – H O
2 (9-52)
with various flow rates. Using spectrophotometry or
other observation techniques, the formation or disap- k = 1/ {τ ( [ OH–] + [ H+] )} = 1.3 x 1011 M–1 s–1 (9-53)
pearance of a product or reactant can be followed. The
special advantage of this technique is that observation Pressure jump and electric field jump methods
can be made slowly. However, it may require large have also been used, as have methods depending upon
amounts of precious reactant solutions, e.g., those of periodic changes in some property. For example, absorp-
purified enzymes. tion of ultrasonic sound causes a periodic change in
In the stopped flow technique two solutions are the pressure of the system.
mixed rapidly by the flow technique during a period
of only 1– 2 (or a few) milliseconds. A ram drives the Rapid photometric methods. Another useful
solutions from syringes through a mixing chamber method has been to discharge a condenser through
into an observation chamber. After the flow stops a flash tube over a period of 10–12 to 10–4 s, causing a
light absorption, fluorescence, conductivity, or other rapid light absorption in a sample in an adjacent parallel
property, is measured. A means of rapid observation tube. Following the flash, changes in absorption spec-
of changes during the reaction is essential. For example, trum or fluorescence of the sample can be followed.
light absorption may be measured by a photomultiplier The availability of intense lasers as light sources has
with data being collected by a computer. Relaxation made it possible to follow the results of light flashes of
times as short as a few milliseconds or less can be 5– 10 picosecond duration and to measure extremely
observed in this way.59a,b short relaxation times (Chapter 23).58,59
Observing relaxation. Kinetic measurements Some results. Rapid kinetic methods have revealed
over periods of tens of microseconds or less can be made that enzymes often combine with substrates extremely
by rapidly inducing a small displacement from the quickly,60 with values of k in Eq. 9-14 falling in the
1
equilibrium position of a reaction (or series of reactions) range of 106 to 108 M–1 s–1. Helix–coil transitions of
and observing the rate of return (relaxation) of the polypeptides have relaxation times of about 10–8 s,
system to equilibrium. Best known is the temperature but renaturation of a denatured protein may be much
jump method devised by Eigen and associates. Over a slower. The first detectable structural change in the
period of about 10–6 s a potential difference of ~ 100 kV vitamin A-based chromophore of the light-operated
is applied across the experimental solution. A rapid proton pump bacteriorhodopsin occurs in ~ 5 x 10–8 s,
electrical discharge from a bank of condensers passes while a proton is pumped through the membrane in

--- Page 472 ---

A. Information from Kinetics 469
~10–4 s.61 Interconversion between chair and boat forms EH EHS Both ionizable
of cyclohexane derivatives may have τ ~ 10–5 s at room 2 2 groups protonated
K K
1E 1ES
t a e m m id p e e r l a in tu k r a e g , e w m hi a l y e r b o e t a v t e i r o y n s a l b o o w u w t a i t C h – τ N ~ 0 b . o 1 n s d . i T n h a e n S + EH k 1 EHS k 3 EH + products
nonenzymatic hydration of the aldehyde pyridoxal k 2
phosphate via Eq. 13-1 occurs with τ = 0.01 – 0.1 s, K K
2E 2ES
depending upon the pH.59
E ES No protons on either
ionizable group (9-54)
6. Cryoenzymology
Let us designate the acid dissociation constants (K ) for
a
An alternative to studying rapid reactions is to cool the two groups in the enzyme as K and K and those
1E 2E
enzymes to a subzero temperature (down to – 100ºC) of the ES complex K and K . However, as discussed
1ES 2ES
where reactions proceed more slowly.60,62 The enzyme in Chapter 6, Section E,2 these consecutive K values
a
must be dissolved in a suitable “cryosolvent,” often cannot necessarily be assigned to single groups. They
containing 50 – 80% by volume of an organic solvent or may belong to a system of interacting groups. Each
solvents such as methanol, ethanol, dimethyl sulfoxide, may be the sum of more than one microscopic K and
a
dimethyl formamide, or ethylene glycol. Those con- there may be extensive tautomerism within the active
taining methanol are especially desirable because of site. The rate constants k ,k , and k define the rates of
1 2 3
their low viscosities. Kinetics can be studied by various formation and breakdown of the ES complex.
spectroscopic methods and stopped-flow, temperature- If it is assumed that only form EHS reacts to give
jump, and other rapid-reaction techniques can be products, the bell-shaped curves of Fig. 9-8 are obtained.
applied. One goal of cryoenzymology is to stabilize The frequent observation of such curves supports the
otherwise unstable intermediates. X-ray crystallo- model of Eq. 9-54. It also suggests that the two ioniz-
graphic measurements can also be made at these low able groups may be intimately involved in catalysis,
temperatures and it should be possible to observe one as an acid and the other as a conjugate base (see
structures of intermediate ES complexes. A problem Section E,5).
is that the forms of the complexes stabilized may be For the simple case illustrated in Eq. 9-54, the pH
side-products rather than true intermediates. How- dependence of the initial maximum velocity, the appar-
ever, as discussed in Chapter 3, a combination of low- ent Michaelis constant, and V /K are given by Eqs.
max m
temperature Laue X-ray diffraction and a laser-induced 9-55 to 9-57.
temperature jump may be feasible.
7. The Effect of pH on Enzymatic Action 1.0
0.8
Because proteins contain many acidic and basic
groups it is not surprising that the activity of enzymes
0.6
often varies strongly with pH. However, it is usually
found that the state of protonation of only a few groups 0.4
has a strong effect on activity. This is understandable
because most ionized groups are on the outer surface 0.2
of protein molecules and most are not close to an active
0.0
site. Protonation or deprotonation of those groups will 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
hardly ever have a major influence on events in the pH
active site. Often only one or two ionizable groups
have highly significant effects.
Figure 9-8 Expected dependence of V on the pH accord-
max
For many enzymes a plot of V against pH is
a bell-shaped curve (Fig. 9-8). The m o a p x timum rate is i t n h g e g to r a E p q h . . 9 - A 5 f 4 t e w r i A th lb k e 3 r [E ty t . ] 6 3 = C 1, o p m K p 1E u S t = e r 6 - , d a r n aw d n p K g 2 r E a S p a h s g co iv u e r n te o s n y
observed at some intermediate pH, which is often, of Carol M. Metzler.
but not always, in the range of pH 6 – 9. This type of
curve can be interpreted most simply by assuming the
presence in the active site of two ionizable groups and
three forms of the enzyme with different degrees of
protonation: E, EH, and EH .
2
V
xam
6 7 8 10

--- Page 473 ---

470 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
k [E] k [E] The denominators (which are the Michaelis pH
V = 3 t = 3 t
max (1 + [H+] K + K [H+]) F functions given by the first three terms of Eq.
1ES 2ES 2ES (9-55)
3-6) represent the fraction of enzyme or of ES
complex in the monoprotonated state. The
(k + k ) (1 + [H+] K + K [H+]) pH dependence of enzymatic action is often
K = 2 3 ⋅ 1E 2E = K F F
m k (1 + [H+] K + K [H+]) m 2E 2ES more complex than that shown in Fig. 9-8 and
1 1ES 2ES
(9-56) given by the foregoing equations. However,
it is easy to write Michaelis pH functions (see
V max = k 1 k 3 ⋅ 1 = k 3 [E] t Chapter 3) for enzymes with any number of
K (k + k ) (1 + [H+] K + K [H+]) K F dissociable groups in both E and ES and to
m 2 3 1E 2E m 2E
(9-57) write appropriate equations of the type of
BOX 9-B GROWTH RATES OF CELLS
How do we correctly describe the rate at which liter in the medium. From the two preceding equa-
a cell grows? Consider bacteria in their rapidly tions the following can be derived.a
growing “log phase.”a Each cell divides after a fixed
length of time, the doubling time. For E. coli this µ = k ln 2 = 0.69k
may be as short as 17 min in the early stages of
growth but becomes somewhat longer as time goes When bacteria are transferred to new medium
on. A mean value of about 26 min. for E. coli at 37°C there is usually a lag before exponential growth
is typical. In contrast, the doubling time for mam- begins. Exponential growth eventually stops and the
malian cells in tissue culture is often about one day. culture enters stationary phase, which is usually
If a given volume of culture contains N cells followed by relatively rapid death of cells in the
0
initially, the number N after n cell divisions will be: culture. It is often desirable to study cell growth
n
under conditions of continuous cultivation in
N = 2nN which a constant generation time is maintained but
n 0
the density of cells in the medium does not increase.
From this equation we can calculate that a single This can be done with a simple device known as the
bacterium with a generation time of 20 min can chemostat.a,b A culture vessel containing bacteria
produce 2144 cells in 48 h of exponential growth. is stirred to ensure homogeneity. Fresh culture
Theexponential growth rate constant k is equal medium continuously enters the vessel from a
tothe number of doublings per unit time. Thus, k is the reservoir and part of the content of the vessel, sus-
reciprocal of the doubling time. It is easy to show pended bacteria included, is continuously removed
that the number of bacteria present at time t will be through another tube. The bacterial population in
given by the following equation. the vessel builds up to a constant level and can be
maintained at the same level for relatively long
N = 2ktN periods of time.
t 0
Here are some other statistics on cell growth.
This can be rewritten in a form that can be used to Bacteria growing exponentially expand their linear
determinek by counting the number of bacteria at dimensions by 1.5 nm and synthesize 1.6 x 107 Da of
zero time and at time t. new cell material in one second. This is equivalent
to ~1000 small proteins and includes 23 ribosomes
kt = log (N /N ) = log (N /N ) / 0.301 and 3000 base pairs of DNA at each growing point.
2 t 0 10 t 0
The much larger HeLa human tumor cell grows by
Another way of expressing the growth is to 0.13 nm / s but makes 4.6 x 108 Da/ s of material.c
equate the rate of increase of the number of bacteria
with a growth rate constant µ multiplied by the aStanier, R. Y., Douderoff, M., and Adelberg, E. A. (1970) The
number of bacteria present at that time. Microbial World, 3rd ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey (pp. 298 – 324)
bSmith, H. L., and Waltman, P., eds. (1995) The Theory of the
dN/dt = µN Chemostat; Dynamics of Microbial Competition, Cambridge
University Press, London and New York
This is a general equation for an autocatalytic reac- cPollard, E. C. (1973) in Cell Biology in Medicine (Bittar, E. E., ed),
pp. 357– 377, Wiley, New York
tion and N could be replaced with a concentration,
for example, the total content of cellular matter per

--- Page 474 ---

471
Eqs. 9-55 to 9-57. Bear in mind that if the free sub-
4
strate contains groups dissociating in the pH range of
interest, a Michaelis pH function for the free substrates
will also appear in the numerator of Eq. 9-56. If the pH
3
dependence of the enyzme is regulated by a conforma-
tional change in the protein, there may be a coopera-
tive gain or loss of more than one proton and the 2
Michaelis pH function must reflect this fact. This can
sometimes be accomplished by addition of a term
related to Eq. 7-45. For more information see Dixon 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
and Webb,64 Cleland,65,66 or Kyte.67
Plots of log V (or log-specific activity) and –log
max
K or log (V /K ) versus pH yield graphs of the
m max m
type shown in Fig. 9-9. The curved segments of the
graphs that extend for about 1.5 pH units on either
side of each pK are asymptotic to straight lines of
a
slope 1 when a single proton is involved or of a higher
slope for multiple cooperative proton dissociation.
The straight lines can be extrapolated and intersect at
the pK values. (However, it is better to fit a complete
a
curve of theoretically correct shape to the points.)
Note that the curved line always passes below or
above the intersection point at the value of log 2 = 0.30
except in the case of cooperative proton dissociation
when it is closer.
Upward turns in the curve of log K vs pH corre- m
spond to pK values in the free enzyme or substrate a
and downward turns to pK values in ES. This approach
a
to analysis of pH dependence has been adopted widely
but often incorrectly. For example, many published
curves have very sharp bends in which the curved
portion covers less than 3 pH units and the curve is for both forward and reverse reactions was observed
much closer than 0.30 to the extrapolated point. This by Alberty and coworkers63 and, using Eqs. 9-54 and
suggests cooperative proton binding and an apparent 9-55, the two apparent pK values were measured.
a
pK that is related to K of Eq. 7-21. Cooperativity is
a
always a possibility if a conformational change in the
protein is involved.67 B. Inhibition and Activation of Enzymes
The simple treatment given above is based on the
assumption that all proton dissociations are rapid The action of most enzymes is inhibited by many
compared to k , that enzyme in only one state of substances. Inhibition is often specific, and studies of
cat
protonation binds substrate, and that ES in only one the relationship between inhibitor structure and activity
state of protonation yields products. These assump- have been important to the development of our concepts
tions are not always valid. It also assumes that both of active sites and of complementarity of surfaces of
binding and dissociation of substrate are rapid, that is, biomolecules. Inhibition of enzymes is also the basis
to use Cleland’s terminology the substrate is not “sticky.” of the action of a very large fraction of important drugs.
For a sticky substrate that dissociates more slowly than Inhibition may be reversible orirreversible, the latter
it reacts to form products (k > k ; Eq. 9-54), the values leading to permanent inactivation of the enzyme. Often,
3 2
of pK will be lowered and pK of Eq. 9-53 will be but not always, irreversible inhibition is preceded by
1E 1E
raised by log (1 + k /k ).65,66 In addition to the articles reversible binding of the inhibitor at a complementary
3 2
by Cleland, other detailed treatments of pH effects site on the enzyme surface.
have been prepared by Brocklehurst and Dixon69 and
Tipton and Dixon.70
Fumarate hydratase (fumarase), which is dis- 1. Competitive Inhibitors
cussed in Chapter 13, catalyzes the reversible hydra-
tion of fumaric acid to malic acid (Eq. 13-11). It was Inhibitors with close structural similarities to a
one of the first enzymes whose pH dependence was substrate tend to bind to the substrate site. In truly
studied intensively. A bell-shaped pH dependence competitive inhibition, substrate and inhibitor not only
V
gol
xam
01
pK , 4.2 pK , 7.6
1ES 2ES
pK pK
1ES 2ES
0
0.8
pK
1.6 1E
2.4
3.2
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
pH
K
gol–
m
01
B. Inhibition and Activation of Enzymes
A
pH
B
pK
2E
Figure 9-9 (A) Plot of log V vs pH for a crystalline bacterial
max α-amylase. From Ono, et al.68 (B) Theoretical curve of log
K vs pH for Eq. 9-56 with pK = 5, pK = 10, pK = 6, and m 1E 2E 1ES
pK = 7. Courtesy of C. Metzler.
2ES

--- Page 475 ---

472 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
compete for the same site but also their binding is stances carry negative charges, anions such as Cl–, HCO–,
3
reversible and mutually exclusive. The affinity of the HPO 2–, and acetate– frequently act as competitive
4
inhibitor for the enzyme is expressed quantitatively inhibitors.
through the inhibition constantK which is the disso- Two special classes of competitive inhibitors are
i
ciation constant of the enzyme inhibitor complex EI : characterized by slow binding and slow,tight binding
to active sites.73– 77 Among the very tight-binding
K i = [E] [I] / [EI] (9-58) inhibitors, which may also be slow to dissociate from
active sites, are transition state inhibitors discussed in
Using the steady state assumption for the mechanism Section D,1.
shown in Eq. 9-14, and writing a mass balance equation
that includes not only free enzyme and ES but also EI
we obtain an equation relating rate to substrate con-
V /K
max m
centration. It is entirely analogous to Eq. 9-15 but K
m
is replaced by an apparent Michaelis constant, K’ :
m
(9-59)
The relationships between vand [S] and between 1/ v
and 1/ [S] are as follows: V
max
v
(9-60)
(9-61)
A commonly used test for competitive inhibition
is to plot 1/ v vs 1/ [S] (Eq. 9-61), both in the absence
of inhibitor and in the presence of one or more fixed
concentrations of I. The result, in each case, is a family
of lines of varying slope (Fig. 9-10) that converge on
one of the axes at the value 1/V . We see that the max
maximum velocity is unchanged by the presence of
inhibitor. If sufficient substrate is added, the enzyme
will be saturated with substrate and the inhibitor
cannot bind. The value of K can be calculated using
i
Eq. 9-61 from the change in slope caused by addition
of inhibitor.
The effect of a fixed concentration of a competitive
inhibitor on a plot of v against log [S] (Fig. 9-11) is to
shift the curve to the right, i.e., toward higher values
of [S], but without any change in shape (or in the value
ofV ). max
Another plot, introduced by Dixon,71 is that of 1/ v
versus [ I ] at two or more fixed substrate concentrations.
The student should be able to demonstrate that this
plot contains a family of straight lines that intersect
at a point to the left of the origin with coordinates
[I] = –K and 1/v = 1/V . This plot may fail to distin-
i max
guish certain types of inhibition discussed in the next
section.72
Competitive inhibition is extremely common and
has great significance for metabolic control and for the
effects of drugs and of poisons. Simple ions are often
competitive inhibitors. Since many biochemical sub-
]S[/v
without inhibitor
V /2K [I] = K max m i
[I] = 2K
i
[I] = 2K
i
[I] = K
i
without inhibitor
1/V
max
–1/K
m
1/[S]
v/1
Figure 9-10 Effect of a competitive inhibitor on the Eadie–
Hofstee plot (top) and on a double reciprocal plot (bottom).
The apparent K (Eq. 9-59) is increased by increasing [ I ], but
m
V is unchanged.
max
V
max
Figure 9-11 Plots of v vs. log [S] for competitive and non-
competitive inhibition.
v
  K , =K 1+ [I] 
m m K 
i
v = V max − v
, ,
[S] K K
m m
1 1 K  [I] 
= + m 1+

v V V [S] K  max max i
[I]/K = 1
i Uninhibited
K Competitive
m K ’ inhibition
m
1
V 2 max
[I]/K =[I]/K = 1
2 1 Noncompetitive inhibition
log [S]
10

--- Page 476 ---

B. Inhibition and Activation of Enzymes 473
transmitted to the active site even though the inhibitor
2. Noncompetitive Inhibition and Activation;
binds far from that site. In some cases two distinctly
Allosteric Sites
different conformers of the protein may exist, one
binding substrate well and the other binding inhibitor
If an inhibitor binds not only to free enzyme but
well (Fig. 9-12). In other instances the bound inhibitor
also to the enzyme substrate complex ES, inhibition is
may interfere with the catalytic action by partially
noncompetitive. In this case, S and I do not mutually
overlapping the active site. In either case the ES com-
exclude each other and both can be bound to the en-
plex reacts to give product in a normal way, but the
zyme at the same time. Why does such an inhibitor
ESI complex reacts more slowly or not at all.
slow an enzymatic reaction? In most instances, the
Binding of a substance to an allosteric site some-
structure of the inhibitor does not show a close simi-
times has the effect of increasing the activity of an
larity to that of substrate, which suggests that the
enzyme rather than inhibiting it. This may occur
binding of inhibitors is at an allosteric site, that is,
because the activator stabilizes the conformation
at a site other than that of the substrate. The inhibition
that binds substrate best (Fig. 9-12). The quantitative
of the enzyme may result from a distortion of the three-
treatment of such activation is similar to that of inhibi-
dimensional structure of the enzyme which is caused
tion; allosteric inhibitors and activators are often con-
by the binding of the inhibitor. This distortion may be
sidered together and are referred to as modifiers or
BOX 9-C THE SULFONAMIDES AS ANTIMETABOLITES
The development of the “sulfa drugs,”a– c deriv- antimetabolite theory.d,e It was proposed that
atives of sulfanilamide, originated with studies of p-aminobenzoate was needed by bacteria and that
the staining of protozoal parasites by Paul Erhlich. sulfanilamide competed for a site on an enzyme
In 1932 it was shown that the red dye 2,4-diamino- designed to act on p-aminobenzoate. We now know
azobenzene-4'-sulfonamide (Prontosil) dramatically that the idea was correct and that the enzyme on
cured systemic infections by gram-positive bacteria. which the competition occurs catalyzes the synthesis
Subsequent studies revealed that bacteria converted of dihydropteroic acid (Fig. 25-19), a precursor to
folic acid.
NH2
H H H H
N N
H2N N
N SO2NH2
Prontosil
the azo dye to sulfanilamide, a compound with
O S O C
strong bacteriostatic activity; that is, it inhibited
–
O O
bacterial growth without killing the bacteria. Al- N
p-Aminobenzoate
though sulfanilamide had been used in large quan- H R
tities since 1908 as an intermediate in synthesis of Sulfonamides
dyes, its potential as an antibacterial agent had not R=H in sulfanilamide
been recognized.
In 1935, D. D. Woods found that the growth While sulfanilamide itself is somewhat toxic, a
inhibition of sulfanilamide was reversed by yeast variety of related drugs of outstanding value have
extract.d From this source, in 1940 he isolated been developed. Over 10,000 sulfonamides and
p-aminobenzoic acid and demonstrated that the related compounds have been tested for antibacterial
inhibitory effect of 3 x 10–4 M sulfanilamide was action.
overcome by 6 x 10–8Mp-aminobenzoate. The
relationship between the two compounds was a Bardos, T. J. (1974) Top. Curr. Chem.52, 63 – 98
b Gale, E. F., Cundliffe, E., Reynolds, P. E., Richmond, M. H., and
shown to be strictly competitive. If the sulfanil-
Waring, M. J. (1972) The Molecular Basis of Antibiotic Action,
amide concentration was doubled, twice as much Wiley, New York
p-aminobenzoate was required to reverse the c Shepherd, R. G. (1970) in Medicinal Chemistry, 3rd ed.
inhibition as before. These facts led to the formula- (Burger, A., ed), pp. 255 –304, Wiley (Interscience), New York
d Woods, D. D. (1940) Brit. J. Exp. Pathol.21, 74 – 90
tion by Woods and by P. Fildes (in 1940) of the
e Fildes, P. (1940) Lancet1, 955 – 957

--- Page 477 ---

474 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
inhibition cannot be reversed completely.
Figure 9-12 shows a plot of 1/ v against 1/ [S] at a
series of fixed values of [ I ]. For the case that K = K
1 2
(classical noncompetitive inhibition), a family of
22//VV
mmmaaaxxx reciprocal plots that intersect on the horizontal axis at
a value of – 1/K is obtained. On the other hand, if K m 1
andK differ (the general case of noncompetitive
2
inhibition), the family of curves intersect at some other
–1/K point to the left of the vertical axis and, depending
m
1/[S] upon the relative values of K 1 and K 2 , either above or
below the horizontal axis. The example illustrated is
forK = 0.5K ; that is, for the binding of M to ES being
2 1
twice as strong as that to E.
Figure 9-11 shows inhibition data for both the
noncompetitive and the competitive cases plotted vs
log [S]. The shift of the midpoint to the right in each
case reflects the tendency of the inhibitor to exclude
the substrate from binding, while the lowered value of
effectors. A general scheme78,79 is given by Eq. 9-62.
the maximum velocity in the case of noncompetitive
inhibition results from the failure of the substrate to
K ds k 3 completely displace the inhibitor from the enzyme
E + S ES product
+ +
M (modifier) M
K K
1 2
K’ ds k 4
EM + S ESM product (9-62)
Here K and K are equilibrium constants for dissocia-
1 2
tion of M from EM and ESM, respectively, while K
dS
andK‘ are the dissociation constant of ES and of ESM
dS
(to S and EM), respectively. Notice that, K‘ is not
dS
independent of the others (Eq. 9-63):
K‘ dS = K dS K 2 /K 1 (9-63)
We have already considered competitive inhibition
which is obtained when K = 0 (and therefore K‘ = 0).
2 dS
For this case, M is always an inhibitor and no activation
is possible. Notice that the inhibition will appear
competitive even if M binds at an allosteric site as in
Fig. 9-13 or if the inhibited form does not react at all
with substrate. Noncompetitive inhibition will be
observed if ESM is formed but does not react, i.e., if
k = 0. Then the rate equation in reciprocal form will
4
be given by Eq. 9-64.
   
1 = 1 1 + [I]  + K m 1 + [I] 
v V  K  V [S]  K 
max 2 max 1 (9-64)
We see that 1/ V is multiplied by a term containing max
[ I ] and K . It is a characteristic of noncompetitive
2
inhibition that the maximum velocity is decreased
from that observed in the absence of the inhibitor.
Also, no matter how high the substrate concentration,
v/1
[I]/K =[I]/K = 1
2 1
[I]/K =0.5, [I]/K = 1 2 1 uninhibited 1/V
max
0 1/K
m
Figure 9-12 Double reciprocal plots for two cases of non-
competitive inhibition.
A Activator
J J
K
I t I
S S
Conformer A (or T) Conformer B (or R)
B
Inhibited dimer
S
Activated dimer in proper
conformation to bind
substrate at both sides
Figure 9-13 (A) An enzyme with binding sites for allosteric
inhibitor I and activator J. Conformer A binds inhibitor I
strongly but has little affinity for activator J or for substrate
S. Conformer B binds S and catalyzes its reaction. It also
binds activator J whose presence tends to lock the enzyme
in the “on” conformation B. Conformers A and B are desig-
nated T and R in the MWC model of Monod, Wyman, and
Changeux.80 (B) Inhibited and activated dimeric enzymes.

--- Page 478 ---

B. Inhibition and Activation of Enzymes 475
even as [S] becomes very high. If an inhibitor binds two substrates required by the enzymes, which one
only to ES and not to E, i.e., K = 0, a family of parallel binds to the enzyme first? If the concentration of one
1
double-reciprocal plots of 1/v vs 1/[S] will be obtained. substrate is kept constant while varying concentrations
This case is referred to as uncompetitive inhibition. of an inhibitory analog of that substrate are added and
Multisubstrate enzymes with either ordered sequential 1/v is plotted against the reciprocal of the concentration
or ping-pong mechanisms also often give parallel line of the other substrate, parallel lines are obtained if,
plots with inhibitors. and only if, the substrate of fixed concentration is B,
Uncompetitive inhibitors of liver alcohol dehydro- the substrate is adding second in the binding sequence,
genase (Chapter 15) could be used to treat cases of andif I is its analog. The substrate binding first (A) is
poisoning by methanol or ethylene glycol.81– 83 The the one whose concentration was varied in the experi-
aim is to prevent rapid oxidation to the toxic acids ment.
HCOOH and HOCH COOH, which lower blood pH, Product inhibition (Section A,12) can also provide
2
while the alcohols are excreted. Uncompetitive inhibi- information about mechanisms. For example, if 1/ v is
tors have an advantage over competitive inhibitors as plotted against 1/ [A] in the presence and absence of
therapeutic agents in that the inhibition is not over- the product Q, the product will be found to compete
come when the substrate concentration is saturating.84 with A and to give a typical family of lines for compet-
If rate constant k of Eq. 9-62 is not zero we may itive inhibition. On the other hand, a plot of 1/ v vs
4
observe either inhibition or activation. If k = k the 1/ [B] in the presence and absence of Q will indicate
3 4
effect of a modifier will be to alter the apparent K by noncompetitive inhibition if the binding of substrates
m
either increasing it (inhibition) or decreasing it (activa- is ordered (Eq. 9-43). In other words, only the A–Q
tion). The maximum velocity will be unchanged. pair of substrates are competitive. Product inhibition
Monodet al.80 referred to enzymes showing such is also observed with enzymes having ping-pong
behavior as K systems. On the other hand, if K = K kinetics (Eq. 9-47) as a result of formation of nonpro-
1 2
andk differs from k we have a purely V system. In ductive complexes.
3 4
the general case a modifier affects both the apparent
K and V . Although in the foregoing discussion it
m max
has been assumed that activators bind at allosteric sites, 4. Allosteric Effectors in the Regulation of
as was pointed out in Section A,11, ions and other Enzyme Activity
small molecules (substrate surrogates) that act as
competitive inhibitors at high concentrations may be The binding of a substance at an allosteric site
activators at low concentrations.40 with the induction of a conformational change forms
Activation of enzymes by specific metallic ions is the basis for many aspects of regulation. The term
often observed. In many instances the metallic ion is allostery (allosterism) usually refers to the effects of
properly regarded as a second substrate which must allosteric modifiers, which may be either inhibitors or
bind along with the first substrate before reaction can activators, on oligomeric enzymes. However, as we
occur. Alternatively, the complex of the organic sub- have already seen (Eq. 9-62), monomeric enzymes may
strate with the metal ion can be considered the “true also be subject to allosteric regulation by modifiers.
substrate.” Thus, many enzymes act upon the magne- Consider a monomer that contains binding sites for
sium complex of ATP (Chapter 12). The enzymes can substrate, inhibitor, and activator and which exists in
either be regarded as three-substrate enzymes requiring conformations A and B as in Fig. 9-13. Let us assume
Mg2+ + ATP4– and another substrate or as two-substrate (see Eq. 7-31) that conformer B binds both substrate
enzymes acting upon ATPMg2– and a second substrate. and activator well but that it binds inhibitor poorly or
not at all. On the other hand, A binds inhibitor well
but binds substrate and activator poorly. This simple
3. Inhibitors in the Study of Mechanisms combination of two conformers with different binding
properties provides a means by which enzymes can be
A substrate analog will frequently inhibit only one turned“on” or “off” in response to changing conditions.
of the two forms of a multisubstrate enzyme with a If an inhibitory substance builds up to a high
ping-pong mechanism.1,72 Reciprocal plots made for concentration within a cell, it binds to conformer A; if
various inhibitor concentrations consist of a family of the inhibitor concentration is high enough, virtually
parallel lines reminiscent of uncompetitive inhibition. all of the enzyme will be locked in the inactive confor-
Observation of such parallel line plots can support a mation A. The enzyme will be turned off or at least
ping-pong mechanism for an enzyme but cannot prove reduced to a low activity. On the other hand, in the
it because in some cases parallel lines are observed for presence of a high concentration of activator the en-
inhibition of enzymes acting by an ordered sequential zyme will be turned on because it is locked in the B
mechanism. The following question arises naturally conformation. The relative concentrations of inhibitor,
for any ordered bimolecular reaction (Eq. 9-43): Of the activator, and substrate within a cell at any given time

--- Page 479 ---

476 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
will determine what fraction of the enzyme is in active According to the MWC model, in the presence of
conformation B. It is this interplay of inhibitory and inhibitor and activator at normalized concentrations
activating effects that provides the basis for much of β and γ an enzyme will still follow Eq. 9-65, but the
the regulation of cell chemistry.80,85 allosteric constant L will be replaced by an apparent
The effects of inhibitors or activators on the kinetics allosteric constant L’ (Eq. 9-70).86 Figure 9-14 shows
of the monomeric enzyme of Fig. 9-13 can be described plots of Y vs. log α for two different values of L’ for a
by Eq. 9-62 to 9-64. Separate terms for both inhibition tetramer with a specific value assumed for c. In both
and activation can be included. The equilibrium between
the two conformers can also be indicated explicitly  (1 + βd)(1 + γe) n
according to Eq. 7-30. However, for monomeric en- L′ = L  
zymes it is usually not profitable to try to separate the  (1 + β)(1 + γ)  (9-70)
two constants K and K which describe the conforma-
t BX
tional change and binding of substrate or activator, cases, Y approaches 1 as log α increases, but since we
respectively, in Eq. 7-30. are dealing with noncompetitive inhibition at high
Most intracellular enzymes are oligomeric, and values of L’, much of the enzyme will be in the T(A)
the binding of allosteric effectors leads to additional conformation at saturation.
interesting effects. Binding constants or dissociation Noncompetitive inhibition cannot be completely
constants must be defined for both inhibitor and acti- reversed by very high substrate concentrations. Monod
vator to both conformers A and B. Since all species et al. defined for an allosteric enzyme a function of
must be taken into account in the mass balance, the state R (Eq. 9-71) which is the fraction of total enzyme
equations are complex. However, the Monod–Wyman– in the R(B) conformation:
Changeux (MWC) model (Chapter 7) gives a relatively
simple picture. The saturation curve for an oligomeric (1 + α)n
enzyme following this model may be derived from Eq. R = L(1 + cα)n + (1 + α)n
7-39 and is given by the following expression:
= function of state (9-71)
Lcα(1 + cα)n−1 + α(1 + α)n−1
Y = In a K system (Section B,2) it is the value of R that
L(1 + cα)n + (1 + α)n (9-65) determines the velocity with which an enzyme reacts.
Figure 9-14 also shows R as a function of log [α]. Note
Here, L is the allosteric constant which is given (for that when L’ is low R does not approach zero even
a dimer) by Eq. 7-36. The constant c is the ratio of when [S] → 0. In other words, the enzyme is never
dissociation constants K and K for the two conformers: completely turned off, just as when L’ is high the
BS AS
enzyme is never completely turned on.
c = K /K (9-66) Figure 9-14 may be compared with Fig. 9-11 which
BS AS
shows similar curves for noncompetitive inhibition
Notice that in this chapter dissociationconstants (K ) of of a monomeric enzyme. The significant difference
d
ES complexes are being used, whereas the equations of between the two figures is that saturation of the oligo-
Chapter 7 are all written in terms of association constant meric enzyme occurs over a narrower concentration
(K). The parameter α is defined as follows, where K range than does that of the monomer, i.e., saturation
f BS
equals 1/ K of Chapter 7. of the oligomeric enzyme, especially in the presence of
BX
inhibitor, is cooperative. Note that cooperative binding
α = [S] / K ) (9-67) of substrate requires that the free enzyme be largely
BS
in conformation T (A), as it is in the presence of an
To take account of effects of inhibitor and activator the inhibitor. Allosteric interactions between two iden-
ratiosof dissociation constants of I from BI and AI and tical molecules, whether of substrate or of effector, are
of activator J from BJ and AJ are defined as in Eq. 9-68. described by Monod et al.80 as homotropic interactions.
Likewise,“normalized concentrations” of I and J are Such interactions lead to cooperativity or anticooperat-
defined (Eq. 9-69) as β and γ, respectively. ivity in binding. Allosteric interactions between two
different molecules, e.g., a substrate and an activator
K K are designated heterotropic.
d = BI > 1 e = BJ < 1
For many enzymes the MWC model is unrealisti-
K K
AI AJ (9-68)
cally simple. The more general treatment of binding
β = [I] K γ = [J]K equilibria given in Chapter 7 may be applicable. How-
AI BJ (9-69)
ever, in addition to K systems there are V systems in
which a conformational change alters the maximum
velocity (see Eq. 9-62)87 and sometimes both substrate

--- Page 480 ---

477
1.2
L’= 4 R
0.8 c=0.1
n=4
Y
0.4
0.0
1.2
L’= 104
0.8
0.4 R
0.0
–2 –1 0 1 2 3 4
log α = log [S]– log K
10 10 10 BS
Figure 9-14 Fractional saturation Y and “function of state”
for hypothetical tetrameric enzymes following the MWC
model. Curves are calculated for two different values of the
apparent allosteric constant L’ (Eq. 9-70) and for c = 0.1 (Eq.
9-66). After Rubin and Changeux.86
affinity and maximum velocity.
The fact that data can be fitted to an equation is not
proof that a mathematical model is correct; other models
may predict the results just as well. For example, Jenkins
has shown that the presence of ions that act as substrate
surrogates (Section A,11) can produce cooperative or
anticooperative binding curves for substrates.40,88
Rabin89 suggested the following explanation of coop-
erativity for a monomomeric enzyme with a single
substrate-binding site. In its active conformation E the
enzyme reacts with substrate rapidly and the ES com-
plex yields product rapidly as in the upper loop of Eq.
9-72. However, a slow conformational change inter-
converts E and E’, a less active form with much lower
affinity for substrate.
At the same time, the complex ES’, if formed, can
equilibriate with ES and thereby alter the conforma-
tional state of the protein. At low substrate concentra-
tions E’ will predominate and the enzymatic activity
will be low. At high substrate concentrations most E
will exist as ES and after release of product will tend
to remain in the active conformation long enough to
bind and act on another substrate molecule. This and
other kinetic models of cooperativity are discussed by
Newsholme and Start.90
R
ro
Y
R
ro
Y
B. Inhibition and Activation of Enzymes
The physiological significance of cooperative
binding of substrates to enzymes is analogous to that
of cooperative binding of oxygen by hemoglobin which
provides for more efficient release of oxygen to tissues.
However, in the presence of excess activator an enzyme
is locked in the R (B) conformation and no cooperativity
is seen in the binding of substrate. In this case, each
binding site behaves independently. On the other
Y hand,there will be strong cooperativity in the binding of
the activator. The result is that control of the enzyme is
sensitive to a higher power than the first of the activator
concentration. Likewise, the turning off of the enzyme
is more sensitive to inhibitor concentration as a result
of cooperative binding of the latter. It seems likely
that the evolution of oligomeric enzymes is at least
partly a result of the greater efficiency of control mech-
R anisms based on cooperative binding of effectors.
5. Irreversible Inhibition of Enzymes
Some of our most effective drugs, such as penicillin
(Box 20-G) are irreversible inhibitors of specific enzymes.
Such inhibitors are also of practical importance to bio-
chemists who wish to inhibit specific enzymes such as
proteases that might otherwise destroy proteins they
are studying. Transition state analogs (Section E,1)
and slow-binding inhibitors (Section B,1) may appear
to inactivate an enzyme irreversibly because they
bind tightly and dissociate slowly. However, true
irreversible inhibitors, such as oxidizing agents or
alkylating agents, cause a more permanent chemical
modification, usually at or near the active site. Two
groups of irreversible inhibitors are of special interest:
affinity labeling agents and enzyme-activated inhibitors.
Affinity labeling agents (active-site directed
inactivating reagents) have two essential properties:
a high affinity for the active site of the specific enzyme to
be inhibited and the presence of a chemically highly reactive
group which can attack a functional group in a protein.
A good example is provided by derivatives of chloro-
S ES E + P
methylketones, which are reactive alkylating agents.
One of these, N-tosylphenylalanine chloromethyl
slow
S ES’ ketone (TPCK), is a potent inhibitor of chymotrypsin.
In addition to the chloromethyl ketone group it contains
E’ (inactive) (9-72)
CH2
H O
O C C CH2 Cl
H3C S NH Y Enzyme
O
l-N-tosylphenylalanine chloromethylketone (TPCK)

--- Page 481 ---

478 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
the phenylalanine side chain, which helps direct it Although side reactions may occur to a small extent,
into the substrate binding site of chymotrypsin, and the most impressive thing in comparing an enzyme-
a sulfonamide linkage that mimics the normal amide catalyzed reaction with an uncatalyzed organic reaction
linkages of the substrate. The group Y, which becomes is that the latter often produces large amounts of side
alkylated in an S 2-like displacement of a chloride ion reaction products, but the enzymatic reaction does not.
N
(see Eq. 9-76) is thought to be His 57 of the active site
(see Fig. 12-10). For additional discussion see Walsh,91
Kyte,67 and Plapp.91a 1. Complementarity of Substrate and Enzyme
Enzyme-activated inhibitors (also called suicide Surfaces
substrates,k inhibitors, or mechanism-based inhibi-
cat
tors) are chemically inert until they enter the active Impressed by the specificity of enzymatic action,
site of their target enzymes. Then, by passing through biochemists early adopted a “lock-and-key” theory
at least some of the normal stages of the catalytic action which stated that for a reaction to occur the substrate
of the enzyme, they are converted to reactive inter- must fit into an active site precisely. Modern experi-
mediates that can become irreversibly bound to an ments have amply verified the idea. A vast amount
enzyme.92,93 For example, a halogen atom (F, Cl, Br) of kinetic data on families of substrates and related
together with a proton may be eliminated from an competitive inhibitors support the idea and numerous
intermediate to give an unsaturated compound to X-ray structures of enzymes with bound inhibitors or
which a nucleophilic side chain of the protein adds. with very slow substrates have given visual evidence
Several of these inhibitors are discussed in later chap- of the reality of the lock-and-key concept. Directed
ters. Because of their high specificity many enzyme- mutation of genes of many enzymes of known three-
activated inhibitors are potential drugs. One of them, dimensional structure has provided additional proof.
α-difluoromethylornithine (Box 14-C), is said to bind As anticipated, hydrophobic groups of substrates
covalently to only one protein in the body of a rat, namely, or inhibitors usually contact hydrophobic regions of
ornithine decarboxylase, the target enzyme for the drug. the protein and the fit is tight. For example, the active
site of chymotrypsin contains a “hydrophobic pocket”
designed to hold a large hydrophobic side chain, thus
C. The Specificity of Enzymatic Action providing the specificity observed with this enzyme
(Table 3-2). Likewise, polar groups of substrates con-
Enzymes are usually impressively specific in their tact polar groups of the enzyme. The interactions are
action. The specificity toward substrate is sometimes complementary, positive charges fitting against nega-
almost absolute. For many years urea was believed to tive and with correctly formed hydrogen bonds. Trypsin,
be the onlysubstrate for the enzyme urease and succi- whose structure is similar to that of chymotrypsin,
nate the only substrate for succinate dehydrogenase. exerts its specificity for a positively charged side chain
Even after much searching for other substrates, only next to the bond cleaved (Table 3-2) by virtue of the
presence of a negatively charged carboxylate at the
bottom of the hydrophobic pocket. Several C = O and
H2N COO– N– H groups of the peptide linkages in the substrate
Urea C O Succinate CH2 H2C form hydrogen bonds to the edge of a β sheet in the
H2N COO– protein, in effect making the substrate an added β strand
in the sheet (Fig. 12-10). Aspartate aminotransferase
One H can be replaced by Cl
acts on the dicarboxylic amino acids glutamate and
One H can be replaced with retention of substrate activity
aspartate. A pair of arginine side chains bind the two
by—OH and some and by —CH3 with partial
substrate activity remains retention of activity carboxylates of the substrate while the – NH 3 + of the
substrate is attracted to a negatively charged group
in the coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate, which is also
one or two closely related compounds could be found present in the active site (Eq. 14-39, Fig. 14-10).
that were acted on at all. In other cases enzymes can
use a class of compounds as substrates. For example,
theD-amino acid oxidase of kidney oxidizes a variety 2. Stereospecificity and Prochiral Centers
ofD-amino acids but does not touch L-amino acids.
Almost as impressive as the substrate specificity of Most enzymes possess an infallible ability to
enzymes is the specificity for a given type of reaction. recognize the difference between the right side and the
Many substrates are capable of undergoing a variety left side of an organic substrate even when the latter
of different chemical reactions, either unimolecular or has perfect bilateral symmetry. In fact, this ability is
with water or some other compound present in the limited to prochiral centers of molecules and is a
cell. The enzyme catalyzes only one of these reactions. natural consequence of their reaction with the chiral

--- Page 482 ---

C. The Specificity of Enzymatic Action 479
enzyme.94– 98 Consider carbon atom number 1 of ethanol. The two hydrogen atoms on C-1 of ethanol are
The two attached hydrogen atoms are chemically calledenantiotopic because replacement of one or
identical and would react identically with a nonchiral the other by a fourth different kind of atom or group
reagent. Nevertheless, these atoms are no more equi- would produce a pair of enantiomers (page 41). This
valent stereochemically than are your right and your fact suggests a way of naming the positions occupied
left arms. We say that the molecule has a prochiral by two enantiotopic atoms or groups. We first assign
center at C-1. A prochiral center on a tetrahedrally priorities to all of the atoms or groups attached to the
bonded carbon atom always contains two identical central carbon atom according to the RS system. Now,
atoms or groups but a total of three different kinds of we ask whether the configuration will be R or S when
atoms or groups. If the priority of this H is elevated, the priority of one of the two identical groups is raised,
e.g., by substitution of 2Hfor 1H the configuration e.g., by substitution of one of the hydrogen atoms by
would be R (the priority of this 2H would become c). deuterium. If the configuration becomes R, that group
occupies a pro-R position; if the configuration becomes
S, it occupies a pro-S position. Referring to the preced-
b
ing diagram, it is easy to see (by viewing down the
CH
3
a bond to the group of lowest priority and applying the
H O C usual rule for determining configuration) that if the
pro-R hydrogen (H ) is replaced by deuterium (2H), the
H pro–S R
H S configuration will be R. Conversely, replacement of
R
pro–R H by deuterium will lead to the S configuration.
S
When ethanol is oxidized by the action of alcohol
dehydrogenase (Eq. 9-73), only the pro-R hydrogen
atom is removed. If the reaction is reversed in such a
way that deuterium is introduced into ethanol from the
BOX 9-D RECEPTORS, AGONISTS, AND
reduced coenzyme the optically active R-2-deuterio-
ANTAGONISTS
ethanol is formed. The ability of an enzyme to
Inhibition of enzymes provides the basis for
many of the effects of antibiotics and other chemo-
CH3 CH3
therapeutic substances (e.g., see Box 9-B). How- H O C O C + 2[H] (removed to a coenzyme)
ever, some drugs act on cell surface receptors
HR
HS
H
which have ordinarily not been regarded as (9-73)
enzymes. According to receptor theory, developed
around 1937, structurally similar drugs often elicit recognize a single hydrogen of a pair of hydrogens
similar responses because they bind to the same on a CH group was at first a surprise to many bio-
2
receptor. A receptor may normally bind a hormone, chemists.99 However, it is a natural result of the com-
neurotransmitter, or other metabolite whose plementarity of enzyme and substrate surfaces, just as
geometry is partially shared by a drug. Binding the fit of a shoe is determined by the complementarity
of drugs of one class, termed agonists in the of surfaces of foot and shoe. Only a chiral catalyst can
pharmacological literature, to an appropriate have this ability.
receptor triggers a response in a cell, similar to Another example is provided by malic acid, a
that of a hormone. On the other hand, compounds chiral molecule which also contains a prochiral center
of related structure often act as antagonists, (see Eq. 9-74). In this case replacement of the pro-R or
binding to receptor but failing to elicit a response. pro-S hydrogen atom by another atom or group would
Agonist and antagonist often act in a strictly yield a pair of diastereoisomers rather than enantiomers.
competitive fashion as in competitive inhibition Therefore, these hydrogen atoms are diastereotopic.
of enzyme action. WhenL-malic acid is dehydrated by fumarate hydratase
We know now that many receptors are en- (Chapter 13) the hydrogen in the pro-R position is
zymes, some of which may act quite slowly. removed but that in the pro-S position is not touched.
The active site may sometimes be far from the This can be demonstrated by allowing the dehydration
receptor binding site and sometimes in a separate product, fumarate, to be hydrated to malate in 2H O
2
subunit. The receptor can be viewed as an allos- (Eq. 9-74). The malate formed contains deuterium in
teric effector which binds at a distant site or as thepro-R position. If this malate is now isolated and
a ligand for a regulatory subunit of the enzyme placed with another portion of enzyme in H O, the
2
complex. Alternatively, the active site may be deuterium is removed cleanly. The fumarate pro-
viewed as the site for relaying a signal received duced contains no deuterium.
from the hormone or other agonist.

--- Page 483 ---

480 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
H
H
O
C C
COO–
–OOC
HS
2
H
C
R
C 1 OO– pro–S arm
–OOC
HS
HR
C
C
ac
i
c
tr
o
a
r
t
d
e
i n
io
g
n
t
n
o
u
th
m
e
b ered
L-Malate
HO C
4
C
5
OO– pro–R arm
stereochemical system
H COO–
HS HR
H2O + C C from HSof
–OOC H L-Malate 1COO–
Fumarate
(9-74) HS 2 C HR
HO 3 C COO– Drawn using the
Stereochemical numbering. In some prochiral Fisher convention
4
molecules, such as glycerol, the two ends of the main HR C HS
carbon chain form identical groups. Since the two 5
COO–
ends are distinguishable to an enzyme, it is important
Citrate
to decide which should be labeled C-1 and which C-3.
Hirschmann proposed a stereochemical numbering
system100 in which the carbons are numbered beginning Trigonal prochiral centers. Planar trigonal atoms,
with the end of the chain that occupies the pro-S position. such as those of aldehydes, ketones, and alkenes, are
also prochiral if they are attached to three different
kinds of atoms or groups. The two faces are enantio-
H
topic or diastereotopic, if another chiral center is present.
pro-S HO C H Stereochemical numbering for a Hanson94,94a proposed that the faces be named as indi-
1 OH symmetric prochiral molecule.
2 C Carbons are numbered begin- cated in Eq. 9-75. The trigonal atom is viewed from one
pro-R HO 3 C H ning with the end of the chain side and the three groups surrounding the carbon atom
H that occupies the pro-S position. are given priorities, a,b, and c, as in the RSsystem
H
(Chapter 2). If the sequence a,b,andc of priorites is
clockwise, the face toward the reader is re (rectus); if
In this numbering system derivatives of the parent counterclockwise, it is si(sinister). Priorities can often be
prochiral compound are given the prefix sn-. Thus, assigned on the basis of the atomic numbers of the first
glycerol phosphate, used by cells to construct phos- atoms in the three groups (as in the example shown)
pholipids, usually bears a phosphate group on the
– CH OH in the pro-R position of glycerol and is
2
b
therefore sn-3-glycerol phosphate.
CH3
CH3
Thecitrate ion, a very important prochiral meta- a
bolic intermediate, has three prochiral centers at C-2, O C + 2[H] HO C H
C-3, and C-4, respectively. That at C-3 distinguishes
c
H HR
thepro-R andpro-S arms and determines the stereo-
re (or Re) face is toward the reader
chemical numbering. Citrate containing 14C in the sn-1 si (or Si) face is behind the page (9-75)
position is called sn-citrate[1-14C] and is the form of
labeled citrate that is synthesized in living cells from
oxaloacetate and [1-14C]acetyl coenzyme A (see Fig. but, if necessary, replica atoms must be added as
10-6). The first step in the further metabolism of citrate described in Chapter 2. Replica atoms attached to
is the elimination of the – OH group from C-3 together an originally trigonal carbon are ignored completely,
with the H proton from C-4 through the action of the but those attached to O or N of C = O or C = N may be
enzymeac R onitate hydratase (aconitase). In this case required to establish the priorities of the groups around
the proton at C-4 (in the pro-R arm) is selected rather the carbon atom. For C = O and C = N the faces of the
than that at C-2. O and N atoms are taken to be the same as that of the
attached trigonal carbon atom. In C = C the two carbons
may have theirre faces either on the same side or on
opposite sides of the group.
Notice that addition of an atom of 2H to the re face
of acetaldehyde would give R-deuteroethanol (Eq. 9-75;
reverse of Eq. 9-73). This is the reaction catalyzed by
alcohol dehydrogenase. Addition of 1H to the re face
places the entering hydrogen in the pro-R position.
Addition to the siface would place it in the pro-S

--- Page 484 ---

C. The Specificity of Enzymatic Action 481
position. Fumarate has two trigonal carbon atoms. at active sites than in other parts of the molecules, and
Thesifaces of both are toward the viewer in the fol- that active sites often lie between domains and usually
lowing structure (also shown in Eq. 9-74). Referring are formed by several loops of the peptide chain
to Eq. 9-74, we see that an HO– ion from water adds (Chapter 2).102
to the si face of one carbon atom of fumarate to give Although conformational changes allow proteins
s-malate (L-malate). At the same time, a proton com- to maintain good complementarity with substrates, it
bines with the re face of the adjacent unsaturated does not follow that substrates are therefore bound very
carbon atom to enter the pro-R position. tightly. This is easiest to understand for reversible
reactions in which a substrate is the product of the
c a reverse reaction. Not only binding but also the rate
H b COO– of release of product must be rapid. Very tight binding
C C Thesi faces of both trigonal would retard release and cause product inhibition.
carbon atoms are toward
–OOC b H the viewer. Furthermore, as we can see from Eq. 9-37, the velocity
a c
of catalysis is the product of [S][E] x k /K , where [E]
cat m
Fumarate
is,free enzyme. Catalysis can be made more efficient in
two ways: by increasing k or by decreasing K , that
cat m
is, by tighter binding. However, tighter binding will be
3. Induced Fit and Conformational Changes advantageous only if K is not so low that the enzyme
m
is approaching saturation with substrate. Otherwise,
Results of many X-ray studies indicate that the [E] will fall as K is lowered and little increase in rate
m
lock-and-key picture of enzyme action must be modi- will be observed.2
fied. If an enzyme is a “lock” and the substrate the In fact, it appears that enzymes have evolved to
“key,”the entrance of the key into the lock often induces a have high values of k and highvalues of K , that is,
cat m
conformational change in the protein. Binding of substrates weak binding of substrates.2 Frequently, in one confor-
may be imperfect in the initially formed ES complex mational state of a protein the active site is open, with
but may be more nearly perfect a few nanoseconds or solvent molecules or substrate surrogates present,
microseconds later as the protein readjusts its structure while in a second state of nearly equal energy it is
to accommodate the substrate. The substrate has in- closed around the substrate. The functional groups
duced a fit. For example, when an amino acid substrate of the enzyme’s active site can be bound either to
binds to aspartate aminotransferase one whole domain external ions or to ionic groups of substrates and either
of the enzyme moves inward, packing hydrophobic to water or to hydrogen-bonding groups of substrates.
side chains of the protein against the substrate (Chap- In some cases two ionic groups in the protein may pair
ter 14). This strengthens the electrostatic interactions with each other in the open conformation and with
between the ion pairs that orient the substrate and ionic groups of the substrate in the closed conformation.
align it for reaction. Similar conformational changes Thus, the energy changes accompanying the confor-
have been observed for citrate synthase, glycogen mational changes can be small but very good comple-
phosphorylase, various kinases (Chapter 12), alcohol mentarity can exist in the ES complex, an important
dehydrogenase (Chapter 15), and a growing list of factor in establishing specificity.
other enzymes. Accompanying changes in circular
dichroism, ultraviolet spectra, and sedimentation
constants are often observed. 4. Specificity and k
cat
For many other enzymes the observed conforma-
tional changes are subtle. A single loop of polypeptide Enzyme specificity is often observed not only in
chain or even of a side chain moves to cover the bound binding but also in the rate at which ES is converted to
substrate. With trypsin and other serine proteases a products. Thus, it is the values of k /K that determine
cat m
flexible segment of the peptide chain becomes immo- specificity. Good examples are provided by chymo-
bilized and forms more hydrogen bonds after substrate trypsin and related serine proteases (Chapter 12),2 for
binds than before. It is probably quite unusual for a which substrates with the shortest chains are often
major unfolding and refolding of parts of a protein to bound as well as those with longer chains but react
take place. The term induced fit usually refers to more slowly. For example, N-acetylphenylalanine amide
substrate binding, but as substrates are interconverted binds to chymotrypsin about as well as does the longer
within active sites successive changes in geometry and N-acetylphenylalanylalanine amide but reacts only 1/47
in charge distribution occur. Small conformational as fast.2 One might anticipate that increasing the length
changes may be required at several stages of an enzy- of the substrate would make it bind more tightly
matic reaction to ensure that complementarity of because of the greater number of contacts between
substrate and enzyme is preserved.101 In line with this substrate and enzyme. It has often been suggested
idea are the facts that proteins are less tightly packed that the reason that this does nothappen is that the

--- Page 485 ---

482 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
binding of the longer, more specific substrates distorts The reaction can be thought of as an “attack” by the
the enzyme and that the binding energy is now stored in OH– ion on the “back side” of the carbon atom of the
the enzyme. It is as if the enzyme contained an internal methyl groups with a simultaneous displacement of
spring which would be compressed when the substrate binds. the I–.
This would keep the binding weak but the energy in
the spring might then be used to increase the velocity.
1. The “Transition State”
5. Proofreading A reaction such as that of Eq. 9-76 is not instantan-
eous, and at some time between that at which the reac-
Although enzymes may be very specific they do tants exist and that at which products have been formed
make mistakes. This is of particular concern for pro- the C – I bond will be stretched and partially broken
cesses such as protein synthesis in which the correct and the new C – O bond will be partially formed. The
amino acid is placed at each position in the sequence structure at this point is not that of an ordinary com-
with an error rate that has been estimated for E. coli as pound and is energetically unstable with respect to both
only 1 in 104. It would be impossible for an enzyme the reactant and the products. The intermediate struc-
designed to attach valine to its specific transfer RNA ture of the least stability is known as the transition
to avoid attaching the smaller alanine if discrimination state. Although no one has actually seen a transition
between the two were based solely on the Gibbs energy state structure, we might represent that for Eq. 9-76 as
differences of binding.103 However, it would be easier follows:
for an enzyme to exclude larger amino acids. This prob-
lem may be resolved by use of multistep screening.104,105
For example, isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase (Chapter 29)
H –
does occasionally attach the smaller valine to the
specific tRNA,Ile but when it does the enzyme in a
HO C I
“proofreading and editing” step hydrolyzes off the H
H
incorrect amino acid. The active site for this hydro-
lyzing activity, whether at a different place on the
enzyme surface or created by a conformational
Transition state structure
change, may be able to exclude sterically the larger
isoleucyl residue while acting on the valyl-tRNA.
This editing mechanism for isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase The negative charge is distributed between the attack-
was demonstrated directly in 1998 by X-ray crystallo- ing HO– group and the departing iodide. The bonds
graphy on complexes of the enzyme with L-isoleucine to the central carbon atom are no longer tetrahedrally
andL-valine. Both substrates fit into the ATP-requir- arranged but the C – H bonds lie in a single plane and
ing synthetic site but neither isoleucine nor isoleucyl- the partial bonds to the OH and iodine atom lie at
tRNA will fit into the editing site which is located in right angles to that plane.
an adjacent β-barrel domain.104,105 Proofreading steps It is useful in discussing a reaction mechanism to
based on differing chemical properties as well as size construct a transition state diagram in which Gibbs
can also be visualized.103,106 energy G is plotted against reaction coordinate (Fig.
9-15A). Energy E or enthalpy H may be plotted in the
same way and authors frequently do not state whether
D. Mechanisms of Catalysis G,E, or H is meant. The reaction coordinate is usually
not assigned an exact physical meaning but represents
Kinetic studies tell how fast enzymes act but by the progress from reactants toward products. It is
themselves say nothing about howenzymes catalyze directly related to the extent to which an existing bond
reactions. They do not give the chemical mechanism has been stretched and broken or a new one formed.
of catalysis, the step-by-step process by which a The high energy point is the transition state. A some-
reaction takes place. Most of the individual steps what more detailed idea of a transition state is obtained
involve the simultaneous breaking of a chemical bond from a contour diagram such as that of Fig. 9-15B. Here,
and formation of a new bond. Consider a simple energy is plotted as a function of two distances, e.g.,
displacement reaction, that of a hydroxyl ion reacting the lengthening C – I bond distance and the shortening
with methyl iodide to give the products methanol and C– O distance for Eq. 9-76. The path of minimum
iodide ions. energy across the “saddle point” representing the
transition state is indicated by the dashed line.
H
HO – In a reaction coordinate diagram the difference
–
C I HO CH3 + I in value of G between reactants and products is the
H H (9-76)

--- Page 486 ---

483
overall Gibbs energy change ∆G for the reaction, while k = Ae–Ea/RT
the difference in G between the transition state and
reactants is ∆G‡, the Gibbs energy of activation. The T he Arrhenius equation, together with studies of
magnitude of ∆G‡ represents the “energy barrier” to a the effects of salts on reaction rates and observation of
reaction and largely determines the rate constant. quantitative correlations between rates and equilibrium
The diagrams in Fig. 9-15 are too simple because constants, suggested that a rate constant for a reaction
enzymatic reactions usually occur in several interme- might be a product of a constant term which is nearly
diate steps. There will be transition states for each independent of temperature and a constant K‡ which
step with valleys in between. The valleys correspond has the properties of an equilibrium constant for for-
to intermediate species, which are sometimes very mation of the transition state. Eyring made this quan-
unstable. The passing from reactants to products in titative in 1935 with his “absolute rate theory”112
an enzymatic reaction can be likened to wandering according to which all transition states break down
through a series of mountain ranges of various heights with a rate constant κkT/h. Eyring reached this
B
and finally reaching the other side. conclusion by assuming that the rate of a chemical
reaction is determined by the frequency of stretching of
Quantitative transition state theory.107– 113 In the bond that is being broken in the transition state. To be
the 1880s Arrhenius observed that the rate of chemical more precise, it is the “normal-mode” oscillation of the
reactions varies with temperature according to Eq. 9-77 transition state complex along the reaction coordi-
in a manner similar to the variation of an equilibrium nate.109 This frequency ν was deduced by describing
constant with temperature (integrate Eq. 6-37 and the vibrational energy as hν (from quantum mechanics)
compare). Here, kis a first-order rate constant, the and as k /T (from classical mechanics) and setting
B
quantityE is known as the Arrheniusactivation them equal.
a
energy, and the constant A is referred to as the “pre-
exponential factor” or the “frequency factor”. hν = k T and
B
ν =kT/h
B
k is the Boltzmann constant
B
h is Planck’s constant.
Transition state
The right side of Eq. 9-78 is usually multiplied by a
transmission coefficient (cid:2), which may vary from
1 to 0.1 or even much less. However, for lack of any
better value, κ is usually assumed to be 1. From Eq.
Reactants
9-78, at 25°Cν = 6.2 x 1012 s–1. This is the maximum
rate for a chemical reaction of molecules in the transi-
Products tion state. This is the rate for a single molecule and
must be multiplied by the concentration of the reacting
substance X in the transition state. This concentration
[X]‡ is determined by the equilibrium constant
K‡= [X]‡/ [X]. The velocity of the reaction becomes
The first-order rate constant is
Since∆G‡ = –RT lnK‡, Eq. 9-80 can be rewritten as Eq.
9-81, in which ∆G‡ is the Gibbs energy of activation.
)E
ro(
G
∆G‡
∆G
Reaction coordinate
High energy region of
dissociated molecules,
e.g., X+ or X*
Length, X A of bond breaking
gnimrof
dnob
fo
B
X
,htgneL
D. Mechanisms of Catalysis
(9-77)
(9-78)
A
B
−d[X] k T
=v= B ⋅K‡[X]
dt h (9-79)
−d[X] dt k T
k = =K B ⋅K‡ s–1
1 [X] h (9-80)
Figure 9-15 (A) Transition state diagram illustrating Gibbs
energy vs reaction coordinate for conversion of reactants to
products in a chemical reaction. (B) Contour map of Gibbs k ≈ k B T ⋅e−∆G‡ RT s–1
energy vs interatomic bond distances for reaction B + X – A → 1 h (9-81)
B– X + A.

--- Page 487 ---

484 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
At 25°C,∆G‡ in kJ/ mol, the following “practical” form molecule for the activated complex would thus lead to a
of Eq. 9-81 can be written. decrease in its energy, and hence to a decrease in energy
of activation of the reaction and to an increase in the
k = 6.2 x 1012e–∆G‡/2.48 s–1 rate of the reaction.
1
logk = 12.79 –∆G‡/5.71
1
and∆G‡ = 73.0 – 5.71 log k Transition state inhibitors. Suppose that a
1
chemical reaction of a compound S takes place with
Equation 9-81 is approximate and a more correct rate constant k through transition state T. Let the
N
statistical mechanical treatment is available.113,114 See equilibrium constant for formation of T be K ‡. Assume
N
also comment on p. 288 about log k (and log k ) being that an enzyme E can combine either with S with disso-
1
unitless. Employing Eq. 6-14, we may expand Eq. 9-81 ciation constant K or with the compound in its transi-
dS
as follows: tion state structure T with dissociation constant K
dT
(Eq. 9-83).
k T 
k≈ B e∆S Re−∆H‡RT s–1
 h  (9-82) K N ‡
S T product
+ +
From this it appears that ∆ H‡ E a , the Arrhenius E E
activation energy. A more correct treatment gives
∆ H‡ = E a –RT for reactions in solution. However, K dS K dT
sinceRT at 25°C is only 2.5 kJ mol–1, the approximation K ‡
E
that∆ H‡ = E is often used. The preexponential term, ES ET product (9-83)
a
in parentheses in Eq. 9-82, depends principally on ∆ S‡,
the entropy change accompanying formation of the If equilibrium is assumed for all four sets of double
transition state. The quantities ∆G‡,∆ H‡, and ∆ S‡ are arrows it is easy to show that Eq. 9-84 holds.
sometimes measured for enzymatic reactions but useful
interpretations are difficult. K‡/K ‡ = K /K (9-84)
E N dS dT
Equations 9-81 and 9-82 also show that a small
decrease in transition state energy will give a large According to transition state theory, if the transmission
increase in rate; stabilization of the transition state by coefficient κ = 1, T and ET will be transformed to prod-
5.7 kJ / mol (1.4 kcal / mol) will increase the rate 10-fold. ucts at the same rate. Thus, if the mechanisms of the
If∆G‡ = 400 kJ/mol, as for a strong covalent single nonenzymatic and enzymatic reactions are assumed
bond,k = 5 x 10–58 s–1 and the half-life t = .693 / k = the same, the ratio of maximum velocities for first-
1 12 1
1.3 x 1057 s (4 x 1049 years, greater than the ~ 1010 years order transformation of ES and S will be given by Eq.
estimated age of the universe). If ∆G‡ = 100 kJ / mol, 9-85. For some enzymes the ratio
logk ≈– 4.7 s–1,k = 1.9 x 10–5, and t ≈ 10 h. This is
1 1 12
about the rate of a typical nonenzymatic “model” k /k = K ‡/K ‡ = K /K (9-85)
E N E N dS dT
reaction at 25°C. If ∆G‡ = 50 kJ / mol, log k ≈ 4, as for
1
afast enzyme. k/k may be 108 or more. Thus, if K ≈ 10–3 the constant
E N dS
We can conclude that enzymes make use of relatively K would be ≈ 10–11. The enzyme would be expected
dT
small energy differences in catalyzing reactions. The ener- to bind the transition state structure (T) 108 times more
gies of numerous van der Waals interactions of hydro- tightly than it binds S.
gen bonds and electrostatic attraction or repulsion of The foregoing reasoning suggests that if structural
charges are sufficient. Nevertheless, we can see that analogs of T could be found for a particular reaction,
anything that stabilizes the transition state (decreases they too might be very tightly bound — more so than
∆G‡) will increase the rate of reaction. The role of a ordinary substrate analogs.116 Wolfenden117 listed a
catalyst is to permit the formation of a transition state series of compounds which may be transition state
of lower energy (higher stability) than that for the inhibitors of this type and many others have been
uncatalyzed reaction. Stabilization of the transition described.117a Nevertheless, very tight, reversible
state of a reaction by an enzyme suggests that the binding is no proof that an inhibitor is actually binding
enzyme has a higher affinity for the transition state to the transition state structure of the enzyme. For
than it does for substrate or products, an idea that example, an inhibitor may bind to a conformational
appears to have been expressed first by Haldane41 form of the enzyme that lies off to a side rather than
and popularized by Pauling.115 directly on the reaction pathway for catalysis.
I think that enzymes are molecules that are comple- Describing the transition state. How can we
mentary in structure to the activated complexes of the describe the structure of the transition state when we
reactions that they catalyze. The attraction of the enzyme have no direct knowledge of its structure? We can try

--- Page 488 ---

D. Mechanisms of Catalysis 485
BOX 9-E CHORISMATE MUTASE
Bacteria, fungi, and plants convert products of structure is also depicted, is a powerful inhibitor.
glucose metabolism into the aromatic amino acids X-ray structural studies show that this inhibitor
phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan by a com- binds in the conformation shown with a number of
plex sequence of reactions that is described in Chap- interactions with polar side chain groups.d,g Some
ter 25. One of these reactions, the conversion of of these interactions are shown for the E. coli enzyme
chorismate into prephenate,is unique among in the figure;g they are different in enzymes from
enzyme-catalyzed reactions. It is a Claisen rear- B. subtilisd and yeast.h However, in no case are there
rangement that occurs readily withoutcatalysis in an groups in obvious positions to serve as acid–base
aqueous solution. However, the rate is increased catalysts and the maximum velocity V is inde-
max
over one million-fold by the enzyme chorismate pendent of pH.b NMR studies show that the bound
mutase. The enzyme from Bacillus subtilis is a trimer product prephenate displays large shifts in some
of identical, small 127-residue subunits. Many 13C resonances, indicating strong interaction with
studies, both of the nonenzymatic and enzymatic the polar side chains of the protein.c Theoretical
reactions, have suggested a “pericyclic” mechanism calculations also suggested that these interactions,
involving a polar chairlike transition state whose especially those with Arg 90 and Glu 78 of the B.
presumed structure is shown in the accompanying subtilisenzymes,f– l help to stabilize the partial charge
equation.a– f The transition state analog, whose separation in the polar transition state. Studies of
mutant enzymes have confirmed that
the charged Arg 90 (Lys 39 for E. coli)
O side chain is essential.k
–
– O C
O O
a Gray, J. V., Eren, D., and Knowles, J. R. (1990)
C CH2
Biochemistry29, 8872 – 8878
O – b Turnbull, J., Cleland, W. W., and Morrison, J. F.
COO
CH2 (1991)Biochemistry30, 7777– 7782
c Rajagopalan, J. S., Taylor, K. M., and Jaffe, E. K.
C (1993)Biochemistry32, 3965 – 3972
O COO – H d Chook, Y. M., Gray, J. V., Ke, H., and Lipscomb,
W. N. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.240, 476 – 500
OH HO Bound e Gray, J. V., and Knowles, J. R. (1994) Biochemistry
Chorismate O conformation 33, 9953 – 9959
– f Lyne, P. D., Mulholland, A. J., and Richards, W.
O C
G. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 11345 – 11350
CH2 g Lee, A. Y., Karplus, P. A., Ganem, B., and Clardy,
δ– J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 3627– 3628
O COO – COO – h Xue, Y., Lipscomb, W. N., Graf, R., Schnappauf,
G., and Braus, G. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
–
δ+ OOC CH2 C U.S.A.91, 10814 – 10818
i Wiest, O., and Houk, K. N. (1995) J. Am. Chem.
O
Soc.117, 11628 – 11639
Transition
j Kast, P., Hartgerink, J. D., Asif-Ullah, M., and
state
HO Hilvert, D. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 3069 –
3070
k Lin, S. L., Xu, D., Li, A., Rosen, M., Wolfson, H.
Arg 12 HO H J., and Nussinov, R. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.271, 838 –
845
Prephenate
N l Ma, J., Zheng, X., Schnappauf, G., Braus, G.,
H
H2N O H Karplus, M., and Lipscomb, W. N. (1998) Proc.
+ Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 14640 – 14645
– H
N HN H
H O CH2 O N
H +
H + H O – Arg 28
N N
H
O
H H
Lys 39
(Arg 90 inB Subtilis)
Transition
OH state analog
H
N

--- Page 489 ---

486 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
to predict the atomic coordinates of all of the atoms of reaction. Effects of pressure125a and of temperature125b
the reacting substrates and of the protein. The transi- also raise doubts about the simple picture of Eq. 9-83.
tion state structure of the substrate must be between It also follows that tight binding of substrates in the
that of the last ES complex and the first EP complex ground state does not necessarily interfere with transi-
formed. It should be similar to that of a transition tion state stabilization.126– 129a
state inhibitor. We can hope to obtain suitable X-ray
or NMR structures and deduce an appropriate enzyme
structure by molecular modeling. Theoretical calcula- 2. Microscopic Reversibility
tions using quantum chemical methods are of value in
this effort.118,119 The important statistical mechanical principle of
Lengths of the breaking and forming bonds in microscopic reversibility asserts that the mechanism of
a transition state are often estimated using kinetic any chemical reaction considered in the reverse direction
isotope effects (KIEs) on the velocity of the reac- must be exactly the inverse of the mechanism of the forward
tion.118 – 122 This is somewhat indirect. Nevertheless, reaction. A consequence of this principle is that if the
by measuring these effects for a large number of sub- mechanism of a reaction is known, that of the reverse
strates and several isotopes a picture of the transition reaction is also known. Furthermore, it follows that
state structure that is good enough to use as a model for theforward and reverse reactions catalyzed by an enzyme
design of an enzyme inhibitor may be obtained.117a,121 –124 must occur at the same active site on the enzyme and the
Other physical measurements such as Raman difference transition state must be the same in both directions.
spectroscopy of isotopically labeled inhibitors can also The principle of microscopic reversibility is often useful
be of value.125 when the likelihood of a given mechanism is being
considered. If a mechanism is proposed for a reversible
Getting to the transition state. Since some reaction in one direction the principle of microscopic
bonds must lengthen and some shorten and bond reversibility will give an unambiguous mechanism for
angles must also change, it may not be simple for an the reverse reaction. Sometimes this reverse mechanism
enzyme to catalyze necessary steps prior to the rate- will be chemically untenable and, recognizing this, the
limiting breakdown of the transition state. Hydrogen enzymologist can search for a better one.
bonds within the protein may need to be broken and
reformed with new bonding partners. Nonpolar side
chains may need to shift to give a packing arrange- 3. Acid and Base Catalysis
ment that will allow the movement of nuclei that must
occur in forming the transition state structure. The Many reactions that are promoted by enzymes
enzyme must not only stabilize the transition state but can also be catalyzed by acids or bases or by both. An
also hold the substrate and escort it into the transition example is mutarotation, the reversible interconversion
state configuration. of the α- and β-anomeric forms of sugars (Eqs. 4-1
The attacking hydroxyl ion in Eq. 9-76 carries a and 9-86). This reaction is catalyzed by a specific
negative charge which becomes distributed more or mutarotase and also by inorganic acids and bases.
less equally between the hydroxyl and the iodine atom The frequently observed bell-shaped curve for the
in the transition state. In this state the CH group dependence of rate of catalysis on pH (e.g., Eqs. 9-55
3
carries a partial positive charge as well. To provide to 9-57 and Fig. 9-8) also suggests participation of both
good complementarity between an enzyme and this protonated and unprotonated acid–base groups
transition state, a change in the initial charge distribu- present in enzymes.
tion within the enzyme will also be required. If a
positively charged group initially binds the OH– ion Acidic and basic groups in enzymes. In this
it may have to lose part of its charge and a group next discussion the symbols HB or H+B will be used for acids
to the iodide atom may have to gain positive charge. and B– or B for their conjugate bases. Remember that
In the nonenzymatic reaction of Eq. 9-76 the ionic strong acids havelow pK values and that the conjugate
a
atmosphere provided by positive counterions in solution bases formed from them are weak bases. Likewise, very weak
can continuously readjust to keep the negative charge acids have high pK values and their conjugate bases are strong.
a
effectively balanced at every step along the reaction The following are among the pK values that may be
a
coordinate and through the transition state. Within important in considering an enzyme mechanism. How-
enzymes this adjustment may occur via redistribution ever, depending upon the environment of the side chain
of electrical charges within the polarizable network of in a protein, these pK values may fall substantially out-
a
internal hydrogen bonds. The enzyme structure must side of the indicated ranges.
allow this. Because of the complexity of an enzymatic
transition state it may be hard to compare it with the
transition state of the corresponding nonenzymatic

--- Page 490 ---

D. Mechanisms of Catalysis 487
–1.74 H 3 O+ in 55.5 M water OH
~3.6 –COOH, terminal in peptide
O
4.3–4.7 –COOH in a glutamic or aspartic acid side chain HO B
6.4–7.0 Imidazole (histidine) and phosphate (–OPOH–)
3 HO O H
7.5–8.0 –NH 3 +, terminal in peptide OH β
8.5–10 –SH of cysteine side chains H a OH
9.5–11 Phenolic –OH of tyrosine
O
~10.5 –NH 3 + of lysine side chain OH HO
~13.6 –CH OH of serine side chain b HO O– + BH+
2
15.7 free HO– in 55.5 M H 2 O, 25°C HO O– OH H
HO O
Acid–base catalysis of mutarotation. The C
mutarotation of glucose proceeds through the free OH H H + OH
c
aldehyde form as an intermediate (Eq. 9-86). A hydro-
OH
gen atom is removed as H+ from the oxygen at carbon HO
1 in step a and a proton (probably a different one) is HO C O
OH
transferred to the oxygen of the ring with cleavage of H
the O – C bond to the anomeric carbon atom. A similar (9-87)
process in reverse is required for step b. Transfers of
hydrogen ions between atoms of oxygen, nitrogen, and
sulfur atoms are a common feature of biochemical stepa). The anion is isomerized to a second anion
reactions. The bonds between hydrogen and O, N, and with the ring opened (step b). Addition of a proton
S atoms tend to be polarized strongly, leaving a partial (transfer of a proton from H O+) produces the free
3
positive charge on the hydrogen atoms. Consequently, aldehyde form of the sugar (step c).
the groups are weakly acidic and protons can be trans- The catalytic base B: might be HO– or a weaker
ferred from them relatively easily. It is reasonable to base such as ammonia or even water. For reactions the
suppose that acid and base catalysis is related to these rate is proportional only to the concentration of OH–
proton transfers. and the presence of other weaker bases has no effect.129b
Such catalysis is referred to as specific hydroxyl ion
catalysis.19 More commonly, the rate is found to depend
OH both on [OH–] and on the concentration of other weaker
bases. In such cases the apparent first-order rate constant
(k ) for the process is represented by a sum of terms
O obs
HO (Eq. 9-88). The term k is the rate in
H2O
HO H
α
OH
OH k = k + K – [OH–] + k [B]
a obs H 2 O OH B (9-88)
O H pure water and represents catalysis occurring by the
HO
action of water alone as either an acid or a base. The
HO C O last two terms represent the contributions to the catal-
OH ysis by OH– and by the other base, respectively. The
b H termk[B] represents general base catalysis.
Free aldehyde form B
OH Catalysis of mutarotation by acids occurs if an acid
donates a proton to the oxygen in the sugar ring as
O
HO
HO O H OH B + H
β
OH O
HO
H (9-86)
HO O H B
OH OH
H
General base and general acid catalysis. Base-
catalyzed mutarotation might be formulated as follows: HO O
A hydroxyl ion or some other base attacks the proton
HO O + H+
on the anomeric –OH group of the sugar, removing it C
OH
to form an anion and the conjugate acid BH+ (Eq. 9-87, H (9-89)

--- Page 491 ---

488 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
BOX 9-F IMMUNOPHILINS AS ROTAMASES
Since its introduction into clinical use in about other organisms and has a highly conserved sequence.f
1979 the immunosuppresant cyclosporin has been Another immunosuppresant, a synthetic molecule
responsible for a revolution in human organ trans- known only as FK506, has an action similar to that
plantation.a– c The exact mechanism of action in of cyclosporin but binds to distinctly different pro-
suppressing T-lymphocyte-mediated autoimmune teins, the FK506-binding proteins (FKBPs), of which
responses is still not completely clear, but cyclosporin, the 107-residue FKBP-12 is the best known.g– j These
a cyclic lipophilic peptide from a fungus, was proteins also bind another immunosuppresant,
found to bind to specific proteins that were named rapamycin, which, however, has different biological
cyclophilins.d Human cyclophilin A is a 165-residue properties than does FK506. Both FK506 and rapa-
protein which associates, in the crystal form, as a mycin are macrocyclic compounds but with structures
decamer with five-fold rotational and dihedral very different from that of cyclosporin.
symmetry.e This protein is also found in almost all It was a surprise to discover that all of the cyclo-
philins and FK506-binding proteins are peptidyl
prolyl cis–trans isomerases or rotamases. They
all catalyze the following simple and reversible
MeLeu
reaction of a prolyl peptide linkage:
H
H3C O
N
9
D-Ala O 8 H 1 N 0 CH M 3 eLeu H O H C O O –
CH3 N C C
H N O
C N C N+
O H N
H X H X
Val
H
Ala 7 11 trans Contributing
H3C H resonance form
N H O
O N CH3
H
O
MeLeu 6 H3C H 1 4-Butenyl-4,N-dimethyl-Thr
H
H3C N O C
HO H C N
H3C O H N
H CH2 CH3 H X
5 2
H Aminobutyrate cis H C O
Val
N H O
O O N CH3
MeLeu 4 3 The transition state energy for the reaction is
Sarcosine
N lowered by 33 kJ mol–1 by cyclophilin Ak and by
(N-CH3-Gly)
27 kJ mol–1 by FKBP-12g with corresponding rate
CH3
increases of ~ – 6 x 105- and 5 x 104-fold, respectively.
Cyclosporin A
Cyclosporin (black) bound
to human cyclophilin. From
Pflüglet al.e Courtesy of J. N.
Jansonius.

--- Page 492 ---

D. Mechanisms of Catalysis 489
BOX 9-F (continued)
For both enzymes the maximum velocity is indepen- a third family of bacterial rotamases (parvulins) that
dent of pH over a wide region. For cyclophilin the lack sequence similarity to the other two families.t,u
rate is nearly independent of the nature of residue X Yeast contains at least five cyclophilinsv and even
in the foregoing structure but FKBP prefers a hydro- more eukaryotic FKBPs are known.j There is abun-
phobic residue. dant evidence that these proteins play an important
How do these enzymes work? One possibility role in protein folding in vivo (Chapter 29).
would be for the protein to transfer a proton to the
nitrogen atom of the proline ring. This would destroy a Kahan, B. D. (1989) N. Engl. J. Med.321, 1725 – 1738
the partial double-bond character of the amide linkage b Schreiber, S. L. (1991) Science251, 283 – 287
c High, K. P., Joiner, K. A., and Handschumacher, R. E. (1994)
and allow free rotation about a single bond. The
J. Biol. Chem.269, 9105 – 9112
same thing could be accomplished if a nucleophilic d Fruman, D. A., Burakoff, S. J., and Bierer, B. E. (1994) FASEB J.
group from the enzyme formed a covalent adduct 8, 391– 400
with the C=O of the substrate. However, this seems e Pflügl, G. M., Kallen, J., Jansonius, J. N., and Walkinshaw, M. D.
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.244, 385 – 409
unlikely because there is no suitably placed nucleo-
f Lippuner, V., Chou, I. T., Scott, S. V., Ettinger, W. F., Theg, S. M.,
phile. A third possibility is that the enzyme distorts and Gasser, C. S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 7863 – 7868
the substrate and stabilizes the transition state using g Fischer, S., Michnick, S., and Karplus, M. (1993) Biochemistry32,
only noncovalent interactions.g,h,l This would account 13830– 13837
h Orozco, M., Tirado-Rives, J., and Jorgensen, W. L. (1993)
for the lack of pH dependence and observable sol-
Biochemistry32, 12864 – 12874
vent isotope effects. However, in human cyclophilin i Van Duyne, G. D., Standaert, R. F., Karplus, P. A., Schreiber, S.
the guanidinium group of arginine 55 hydrogen L., and Clardy, J. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.229, 105 – 124
bonds to the peptide C = O of the substrate’s proline j Lam, E., Martin, M. M., Timerman, A. P., Sabers, C., Fleischer,
S., Lukas, T., Abraham, R. T., O’Keefe, S. J., O’Neill, E. A., and
residue and could easily shift to place a guanidinium
Wiederrecht, G. J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 26511– 26522
proton against the proline ring nitrogen effectively k Eberhardt, E. S., Loh, S. N., Hinck, A. P., and Raines, R. T. (1992)
protonating it and permitting rotation about the J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 5437 – 5439
peptide linkage.m l Kakalis, L. T., and Armitage, I. M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 1495 –
1501
Do cyclosporin and FK506 act as transition state
mZhao, Y., and Ke, H. (1996) Biochemistry35, 7362 – 7368
inhibitors? If so, we might learn something about n Thériault, Y., Logan, T. M., Meadows, R., Yu, L., Olejniczak, E.
the mechanism from the three-dimensional structures T., Holzman, T. F., Simmer, R. L., and Fesik, S. W. (1993) Nature
of the inhibited rotamases.i,l,n,o From these structures (London)361, 88 – 91
o Konno, M., Ito, M., Hayano, T., and Takahashi, N. (1996) J. Mol.
as well as those with simpler substrate analogs, it is
Biol.256, 897– 908
seen that the substrate is desolvated and that many p Kern, D., Kern, G., Scherer, G., Fischer, G., and Drakenberg, T.
nonbonded (van der Waals) interactions stabilize (1995)Biochemistry34, 13594 – 13602
the binding. Hydrogen bonding is also important.p,q q Göthel, S. F., Herrler, M., and Marahiel, M. A. (1996) Biochemistry
35, 3636 – 3640
The presence of distinct hydrogen bonds to the pep-
r Clubb, R. T., Ferguson, S. B., Walsh, C. T., and Wagner, G. (1994)
tide NH and C=O groups on the N-terminal side Biochemistry33, 2761– 2772
of the substrate X-Pro linkage and less well-defined s Edwards, K. J., Ollis, D. L., and Dixon, N. E. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.
bonding on the terminal side suggests that the 271, 258 – 265
t Rudd, K. E., Sofia, H. J., Koonin, E. V., Plunkett, G., III, Lazar,
C-terminal part may be rotated while the enzyme
S., and Rouviere, P. E. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 12 – 14
holds the N-terminal part.p It can also be concluded u Rahfeld, J.-U., Rücknagel, K. P., Stoller, G., Horne, S. M.,
that mechanisms are probably not identical for all Schierhorn, A., Young, K. D., and Fischer, G. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.
rotamases. 271, 22130 – 22138
v Matouschek, A., Rospert, S., Schmid, K., Glick, B. S., and
Cyclophilins and FKBPs are large families of
Schatz, G. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 6319 – 6323
proteins. In E. coli there are two cyclophilin genes,r,s
three encoding FK506-binding proteins, and one of
shown in Eq. 9-89. Again, either specific acid catalysis protonation at the pH of the cell. Thus, if one of the
(by H O+) or general acid catalysis is possible. enzymes must be dissociated to its conjugate base
3
Enzymes are not able to concentrate protons or and a second must be protonated for reaction to take
hydroxyl ions to the point that specificbase or acid place (as in Eq. 9-54), it is reasonable to suppose that
catalysis would be effective. However, either general these two groups participate in acid–base catalysis.
acid or general base catalysis can be accomplished by Of the acidic and basic groups present in proteins, the
groups present in an enzyme in their normal states of imidazole group of histidine would appear to be the

--- Page 493 ---

490 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
most ideal both for general base catalysis and, because rate-determining step of a reaction.
both forms may exist in nearly equal amounts at pH 7, Concerted acid–base or tautomeric catalysis.
for general acid catalysis. However, carboxyl, thiol, A third possible type of catalysis requires that a base
lysyl, tyrosyl, and N-terminal amino groups are all and an acid act synchronously to effect the breaking and
thought to function in various enzymes. formation of bonds in a single step. Thus, tetramethyl-
The mutarotase of E. coli has a turnover number glucose mutarotates very slowly in benzene containing
of 104 s–1. The plot of – log K vs pH indicates two pK either pyridine (a base) or phenol (an acid). However,
m a
values in the free enzyme at 5.5 and 7.6, while the plot when both pyridine and phenol are present, mutarota-
of log V yields a single pK of 4.75 for the ES com- tion is rapid. This suggested to Swain and Brown132
max a
plex.130 The latter might represent a carboxyl group aconcertedmechanism (Eq. 9-92) in which both an
on an imidazole group in its conjugate base form. acid and a base participate.
Why doesn’t the group having pK 7.6 in the free During the reaction shown, the acid BH+ is con-
a
enzyme also show a pK in the ES complex? Either verted to its conjugate base B and the base B’ to its
a
the group has no catalytic function so that EH S of Eq. conjugate acid H+B’. It might seem that these agents,
2
9-54 reacts to form products just as fast as does HES having been altered by the reaction, are not serving as
or the pK is so strongly shifted by substrate binding true catalysts. However, a simple proton exchange will
a
that it is not detected in the log V plot. restore the original forms and complete the catalytic
max
cycle. In aqueous solutions, water itself might act as
The Brönsted relationships. The effectiveness of the acid or the base or even both in concerted catalysis.
a specific base as a general base catalyst can usually be The original experimental evidence for concerted
related to its basicity (pK ) via the Brönsted equation acid–base catalysis of the mutarotation in benzene is
a
(Eq. 9-90). Here, k is defined by Eq. 9-88 and G is a now considered unsound133,134 and concerted acid–
B B
(9-90) base catalysis has been difficult to prove for nonenzy-
logk = log G + β (pK ) matic reactions in aqueous solution. However, mea-
B B a
surements of kinetic isotope effects seem to support
constant for a particular reaction. A similar equation Swain and Brown’s interpretation.135 Concerted acid–
(9-91) relates the constant k for general acid catalysis base catalysis by acetic acid and acetate ions may have
A
(9-91) been observed for the enolization of acetone136 and it
logk = log G –α (pK ) may be employed by enzymes.136a
HB A a
Swain and Brown showed that a more effective
to pK . These equations are linear Gibbs energy relation- catalyst for the mutarotation of sugars than a mixture
a
ships similar to the ones discussed in Box 6-C. For the of an acid and a base can be designed by incorporating
Brönsted equations to hold, the Gibbs energy of activa- the acidic and basic groups into the same molecule.132,135
tion for the reaction must be directly related to the Thus, with 0.1 M tetramethylglucose in benzene solution,
basicity or acidity of the catalyst. 0.001 M α-hydroxypyridine is 7000 times as effective
The exponents β and α of Eqs. 9-90 and 9-91 mea- a catalyst as a mixture of 0.001 M pyridine + 0.001 M
sure the sensitivityof a reaction toward the basicity or phenol. Swain and Brown suggested the following
acidity of the catalyst. It is easy to show that as β and completely concerted reaction mechanism for the
α approach 1.0 general base or general acid catalysis is polyfunctional catalyst (cid:3)-hydroxypyridine in which
lost and that the rate becomes exactly that of specific the hydrogen-bonded complex formed (Eq. 9-93) is
hydroxyl ion or specific hydrogen ion catalysis.131 analogous to an enzyme–substrate complex. The
Asβ or α approach zero basic or acidic catalysis is product of the catalyst is 2-pyridone, a tautomer of
indetectable. Thus, general base or general acid catal-
ysis is most significant when β or α is in the neighbor-
hood of 0.5. Under these circumstances it is easy to OH B + H(an acid)
see how a moderately weak basic group, such as the
O
HO
imidazole group of histidine, can be an unusually
effective catalyst at pH 7. HO O H B’ (a base)
To determine α or β experimentally a plot of log k OH
B H
or log k vs pK (a Brönsted plot) is made and the
HB a
slope is measured. Statistical corrections (Chapter 7)
should be applied for dicarboxylic acids and for am- B (a base)
monium ions from which one of three protons may be OH
lost from the nitrogen atom. General base or general
OH
acid catalysis implies an important feature of any mech- HO
anism for which it is observed, namely, that removal HO O H +B’ (an acid)
C
of a proton or addition of a proton is involved in the OH
H (9-92)

--- Page 494 ---

D. Mechanisms of Catalysis 491
H3CO suggested that rapid transfer of protons along rigidly
and accurately held hydrogen bonds in the ES complex
may be an essential feature of enzymatic catalysis.137
O
H3CO This conclusion is supported by many more recent
H3CO O H observations. A remaining question is whether this
O proton transfer can take place in such a way that the
HO N
H transition state barrier is lowered.
H3C 2-Hydroxypyridine
Ultrafast proton transfer. The diffusion-
controlled limit for second-order rate constants
(Section A3) is ~ 1010 M–1 s–1. In 1956, Eigen, who had
H3CO O
developed new methods for studying very fast reactions,
H N discovered that protons and hydroxide ions react much
O H more rapidly when present in a lattice of ice than when
H3CO
in solution.138 He observed second-order rate constants
O
H3CO
of 1013 to 1014 M–1 s–1. These represent rates almost as
O great as those of molecular vibration. For example,
H
H3C the frequency of vibration of the OH bond in water is
Complex about 1014 s–1. The latter can be deduced directly from
the frequency of infrared light absorbed in exciting
this vibration: Frequency ν equals wave number (3710
H3CO
H cm–1 for – OH stretching) times c, the velocity of light
(3 x 1010 cm s–1).
O
H3CO O N This ultrafast transfer of protons can be explained
H3CO
C
O
H
as follows: The OH– ion and the proton, which is
combined with a water molecule to form H O+, are
O 2-Pyridone 3
H both hydrogen-bonded to adjacent water molecules.
H3C (9-93) In ice a chain of hydrogen-bonded water molecules
links the hydroxide and the hydrogen ions (Eq. 9-94).
By synchronous movement of electron pairs from the
2-hydroxypyridine, with which it is in a rapid revers- OH– ion and from each of the water molecules in the
ible equilibrium.
Rony called catalysis of the type illustrated in Eq.
9-93 tautomeric catalysis and suggested that its effi- H H H
ciency lies not simply in the close proximity of acidic H O– H O O H + O
and basic groups in the same molecule but also in the
H H H
ability of the catalyst to repeatedly cycle between the
O H O
two tautomeric states.133 For an enzyme the tautomer-
H H
ization of the free catalyst could sometimes be rate
determining (see Section A,4 on isomechanisms). Protons and
a electrons move
H H H
4. Hydrogen Bonding and the Transfer of
O H O O H O
Protons within Active Sites
H H H H
An extensive network of hydrogen bonds runs O H O
throughout most proteins and may be especially H H
complex within active sites. The network often runs
Water molecules
b
through bound substrate molecules and immobilized H2O reorient
water molecules in the active site cavity. This network
arises in part because of the frequent occurrence of H H H
acidic and basic catalytic groups in active sites and H O O H O
by the fact that many substrates contain polar groups.
H H
The structure of an enzyme often seems to be more
O H O
rigid in a complex with substrates or inhibitors than in
H H
the free state. Does this network of linked hydrogen
bonds play a role in catalysis? If so, what? Wang A second pair of HO– and H+
can now use the same pathway (9-94)

--- Page 495 ---

492 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
chain (as indicated by the little arrows) the neutraliza- process similar to that of Eq. 9-94 but involving side
tion can take place during the time of one molecular chains of serine residues.140
vibration (step a, Eq. 9-94). The positions of the oxygen
atoms remain unchanged at the end of the reaction but Proton transfer rates.Consider the reversible
the protons that were engaged in hydrogen bond for- reaction of a proton acceptor B with acid H-A (Eq. 9-97).
mation have moved toward the left and are now at- Eigen pointed out that the reaction will be fastest if the
tached to different oxygen atoms. The central chain of two reactants form a hydrogen-bonded complex (Eq.
water molecules can be restored to its original state if 9-97, step a).138 The hydrogen bonding shortens the
each molecule rotates around one of its single bonds, distance from the proton to B and allows for very
swinging a hydrogen from right back to left (Eq. 9-94, rapid transfer of the proton from A to B within the
stepb). This must be a slower process which may
occur one molecule at a time. The rotation of the a b c
leftmost water molecule would leave an empty space k1 k2 k3
A H A H B A H B H B
between two O-atoms, a “fault” in the H-bonded chain
B A
of the ice structure. This fault can be corrected by (9-97)
hydrogen-bonded complex (step b). The activation
H energy is close to zero. The complex dissociates in step
fault fault
H O c to form the products. The reactions are reversible, even
O H H H H though they have been indicated by unidirectional
arrows.
H O H O O O
The hydrogen-bonded complexes A– H —- B and A
H H H H
—- H– B can be formed readily if A and B are oxygen or
(9-95) nitrogen bases such as – COO –,– OH, – NH , or imida-
2
zole. In such cases, as in ice, the interconversion of
rotation of the second molecule (Eq. 9-95); however,
the two complexes (step b in Eq. 9-97) is very fast. The
this would create a fault at the right of the second water
overall rate of the proton transfer will then be limited
molecule. This would induce rotation of the third
by diffusion of B and H – A together or by diffusion of
molecule, etc., causing the fault to migrate from left
A and H – B apart. It might seem that these two pro-
to right across the entire chain of water molecules (Eq.
cesses should also both be very fast. However, the
9-94, step b) and leaving the chain ready to function
rates will be determined by the concentration ratio
again in transferring another proton.
[A–H—- B]/[A—- H–B]. If [A–H—- B] equals
Because of the disorder present in ice, an array
[A—- H – B] the rate of dissociation of A – H – B will be
of water molecules such as that in Eq. 9-94 wouldn’t
half what it is if nearly all of the complex is A—- H – B.
revert to its exact original form in step b. However,
If A – H—- B predominates by 1000 to 1, the rate will be
active sites of enzymes are highly structured and proton
slowed much more.
transfers may occur with precision. For example, a
The equilibrium constant for the reaction of Eq.
synchronous shift of protons in an array of carboxylic
9-97 will be:
acid, imidazolium, and phosphate groups can be
envisioned readily (Eq. 9-96). The net effect of the
K AB = K HA/K HB = k /k
process is to transfer a proton from one end of the eq a a f r
or log K = pK HA – pK HB = log k – log k
chain to the other (as in Eq. 9-94) with facile tauto- eq a a f r (9-98)
Here k and k refer to the rates in the forward and
f r
H O O H N N H O O H+ reverse directions. If the pK ’s of HA and HB are equal
a
C P k and k will be the same, but if they are very far from
f r
O O equal the reaction will be slowed in one direction. If
proton transfer is a step in an enzymatic reaction it
(9-96)
may be slowed enough to become rate limiting.
The difference in pK values between the proton
merization reactions providing the pathway. Such a a
donor and the proton acceptor in Eq. 9-97 can be
pathway might be constructed by protein side chains
expressed as the Gibbs energy change which at 25°C
to join the two sides of an active center promoting a is equal to ± 5.71 x ∆pK . This is often referred to as
concerted acid–base catalyzed reaction such as that of thethermodynamic ba a rrier∆G° to a reaction and ∆G‡
Eq. 9-92. Other tautomerization processes are possible
can be expressed as the sum of the thermodynamic
within proteins if the existence of less stable minor barrier∆G°plus an intrinsic barrier∆G‡ . For the
tautomers of selected amide groups in the peptide back- int
proton transfer of Eq. 9-97 the intrinsic barrier (for step
bone is allowed.139 Nagle and Morowitz suggested a b) is thought to be near zero so that ∆G‡≈ 5.71 ∆pK .
a

--- Page 496 ---

D. Mechanisms of Catalysis 493
From this we can conclude that two pK values can be The argument is as follows.146 The rate of donation
a
as much as eight units apart and ∆G‡ will still be less of a proton from H O+ to imidazole (reverse of Eq. 9-102)
3
than 50 kJ / mol, low enough to permit rapid enzymatic is known to be diffusion controlled with a rate constant
reactions. However, for transfer of a proton from a of 1.5 x 1010 M–1 s–1.
C– H bond to a catalytic group, for example, to form
an enolate ion for an aldol condensation (Chapter 13), ImH++ HO [ImH+ OH] Im+ OH+
2 2 3
the intrinsic barrier is known to be about 50 kJ / mol.141
In this case, to allow rapid enzymatic reaction either Very fast diffusion controlled
the thermodynamic barrier must be very low, as a k ~ 1.5 × 1010 M–1 s–1 (9-102)
result of closely matching pK values, or the enzyme
a
must lower the intrinsic barrier. It may do both. The equilibrium constant for Eq. 9-102, calculated
from the pK of 7.0 for imidazole, is 10–7 M. Since K
a eq
Marcus theory. Discussion of intrinsic barriers is is also the ratioof the overall rate constants for the forward
often approached using a quantitative theory proposed and reverse reactions, we see that for the forward reac-
by Marcus.142– 145 It was first applied to electron transfer tionk = 10–7 x 1.5 x 1010 = 1.5 x 103 s–1. This slow rate
f
(Chapter 16) but has been used for a great variety of results from the fact that in the intermediate complex
nonenzymatic and enzymatic reactions. As used by (in brackets in Eq. 9-102) the proton is on the imidazole
Gerlt and Gassman,141 the Marcus formalism describes group most of the time. For a small fraction of the
the reaction coordinate (Fig. 9-15A) as an inverted time it is on the coordinated molecule H O but reverts
2
parabola whose shape is determined by the overall to being on the imidazole many times before the imida-
Gibbs energy change ∆G° and the intrinsic barrier zole and OH + separate (see also Eqs. 9-97 and 9-98).
3
∆G‡ . The value of the Gibbs energy at any point on Because of this unfavorable equilibrium within the
int
the curve is designated G and the reaction coordinate complex, the diffusion-controlled rate of proton trans-
x is taken as 0 for the reactants and 1 for the products. fer from a protonated imidazole to water is far less
than for proton transfer in the reverse direction.
G = – 4 ∆G‡ (x– 0.5)2 + ∆G° (x– 0.5)
int
Limits: ∆G°/ 4 ≤ ∆G‡ ≤ 4 ∆G° (9-99) Coupled proton transfers. Enzymatic reactions
int
often require the transfer of two or more protons.
Differentiation of Eq. 9-99 yields the position of the They may move individually, one proton at a time,
transition state coordinate x‡ as follows: or as in Eq. 9-93 they may move synchronously in a
coupled or concerted process. Such coupled move-
x‡= 0.5 + ∆G°/ 8 ∆G‡ (9-100) ment is generally not possible for heavier nuclei.147
int
However, studies of solvent isotope effects using a
and it follows that proton inventory technique111,148,149 have provided
evidence favoring coupled proton transfers for a variety
∆G‡=∆G‡ (1 + ∆G°/ 4 ∆G‡ )2 (9-101) of enzymes. Movement of protons along hydrogen-
int int
bonded paths, as well as electron transfer, may take
place with some participation of quantum mechanical
Diffusion-controlled dissociation of protons. tunneling.150–152 Coupling to vibrational modes of the
The direct proton transfer between C-1 and C-2 during hydrogen-bonded protons may provide vibration-
the action of sugar isomerases may seem puzzling. assisted tunneling.153–154d These reactions are associ-
How can a highly mobile proton remain attached to a ated with unusually large kinetic isotope effects.
group in the enzyme for a millisecond or more instead
of being transferred out to a solvent molecule? This Unusually strong hydrogen bonds. The strength
can mean that the enzyme promotes the transfer of a of a hydrogen bond is thought to be directly related
hydride ion or of a hydrogen atom rather than a proton to the length, which is ordinarily taken to be the distance
(see Chapter 13). If so, the observed proton exchange between the two surrounding heavier atoms (see Chap-
with solvent would be an unimportant side reaction. ter 2, Section B,3). Hydrogen bonds are sometimes
On the other hand, could the group in the enzyme that classified on the basis of N–H---O distances155,156 as:
removes the proton be out of contact with the aqueous
medium and thus able to hold onto the proton more <0.25 nm very strong
tightly? In recent years, it has been recognized that 0.25–0.265 nm strong
neither of these explanations may be necessary. An >0.28 nm weak
imidazole group is a likely proton-carrying group at >0.37 nm no van der Waals contact but
many active sites and it is thought that a proton can- electrostatic interaction still occurs
not be expected to transfer out from an imidazolium
group with a rate constant greater than ~ 103 s–1. N–H---O distances may be a little longer than these.

--- Page 497 ---

494 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
The 0.276-nm hydrogen bonds in ice are regarded The pK for dissociation of its proton is 12.3 and the
a
as moderately strong. However, if one of the oxygen hydrogen-bonded proton is probably located in the
atoms in an O–H---O hydrogen bond carries a nega- center of the bond with both amino groups sharing
tive charge, as in the maleate monoanion, it will be the charge.160 Enols can also form unusually strong
“resonance-assisted” hydrogen bonds:
H H
O H O H H
H O O O O
0.276 nm
in ice
C C C C
H3C C CH3 H3C C CH3
shorter.156– 158 Although the proton will be closer to one
H H
oxygen atom than to the other, it will be able to move
between them by passing a very low transition state
barrier. For this to occur the microscopic pK values The structure can be thought of as a resonance-stabi-
a
for the two groups (when they are protonated) must lized enolate anion with a proton bound between the
be similar; for the maleate anion they are identical. two oxygen atoms and equidistant from them.156,157
Do these short “low-barrier hydrogen bonds”
have a special significance in enzymology? Proposals
– –
O H O O H O
that they contribute to stabilization of transition
C C C C states161– 166 have received some support154,167 and
O O O O
aroused controversy.158b,168 – 173 In later chapters we
will examine specific enzymes in which low-barrier
Monohydrogen maleate
hydrogen bonds have been observed.
Thestrength of a hydrogen bond can be measured
for hydrogen-bonded complexes in the gas phase and 5. Covalent Catalysis
range from 10 – 100 kJ/ mol and even higher155 for such
complexes as (FHF)–. It is more difficult to establish In addition to participating in acid–base catalysis,
the strength in the liquid state or within the active site some amino acid side chains may enter into covalent
of an enzyme, but shorter hydrogen bonds are usually bond formation with substrate molecules, a phenome-
stronger than longer ones. Hydrogen bond distances non that is often referred to as covalent catalysis.174
in crystals of small molecules can be measured precise- When basic groups participate this may be called
ly by X-ray or neutron diffraction but greater uncer- nucleophilic catalysis. Covalent catalysis occurs
tainty is present in distances within proteins. Lengths frequently with enzymes catalyzing nucleophilic
and probably strengths of hydrogen bonds in proteins displacement reactions and examples will be consid-
can be measured by NMR methods.158a,b For example, ered in Chapter 12. They include the formation of an
solid-state NMR measurements on crystals of amino acyl-enzyme intermediate by chymotrypsin (Fig. 12-11).
acids and other carboxylic acids have provided a plot Several of the coenzymes discussed in Chapters 14 and
of1H chemical shift vs hydrogen bond length.159 For 15 also participate in covalent catalysis. These coen-
veryshort (0.24- to 0.25-nm) hydrogen bonds the 1H zymes combine with substrates to form reactive inter-
chemical shift may be as great as 21 ppm. See also mediate compounds whose structures allow them to
Fig. 3-30 and associated discussion. When dissolved be converted rapidly to the final products.
in an 1H O–2H O mixture strongly hydrogen-bonded
2 2
protons within a protein become enriched in 1H. The
1H / 2H ratio of the hydrogen-bonded protons provides 6. Proximity and Orientation
another measure of the hydrogen bond strength.158c
A short hydrogen bond is also present in such One of the earliest ideas about enzymes was that
cations as the following: they simply brought reactants together and bound
them side by side for a long enough time that the
reactive groups might bump together and finally react.
H3C
+
CH3
How important is this proximity factor? Page and
H3C H CH3
N N Jencks estimated that rate enhancements by factors of
103 or more may be expected solely from the loss in the
entropy of two reactants when they are bound in close
proximity on an enzyme surface.107,175,176 In view of
the large entropy decrease involved, the enthalpy of

--- Page 498 ---

D. Mechanisms of Catalysis 495
binding must be high, and if this explanation is correct state may be very low.128-128b Preorganization of the
thebinding of the substrates to the enzyme provides complex also acts to eliminate the slow components of
much of the driving force for catalysis. Westheimer solvent reorganization required for reaction in aqueous
described this by stating that enzymes use the substrate- solutions.128c,128d
binding force as an entropy trap.108 The losses of The necessity for reacting groups of substrates
translational and rotational entropy, which Page and to collide with an orientation that allows productive
Jencks estimated as up to – 160 to – 210 J /deg /mol, interaction of electronic orbitals is often called a
overcome the unfavorable entropy of activation that stereoelectronic effect. An example is the addition
is usual in bimolecular reactions. reaction of Eq. 9-74. The orbital of an unshared pair
How precise must the orientation of substrates be of electrons on the HO– ion must be perpendicular
for rapid reaction?107,177,177a Compounds such as the to the plane of the double bond. Furthermore, if the
acid shown in Eq. 9-103 form an internal ester (lac- proton becomes attached to the adjacent carbon in a
tone) spontaneously with elimination of water. synchronous or concerted manner it must enter from
the opposite side, as it does in Eq. 9-74.
In many biochemical reactions an alcohol or amine
OH H2O O O is eliminated from a tetrahedrally bonded intermediate
as in Eq. 9-104. Deslongchamps proposed a stereoelec-
tronic theory181,182 according to which elimination of
COOH either NH — R or – O — R from this intermediate will
2 1
(9-103) depend upon the values of the torsion angles θ andθ
1 2
(Eq. 9-104). The theory asserts that for rapid elimination
However, the following compound reacts at a rate of OR (Eq. 9-104a), unshared electron pairs on boththe
1
over 1011 times that of the acid shown in Eq. 9-102. – O– and N atoms must be antiperiplanar to the bond
This is presumably because its conformation is highly being broken (see Figure 2-2). If rotation around the
restricted and the – COOH is constrained to frequently C– O bond (θ ) occurs an orientation can be found in
1
collide with the – OH group.178,179 The three methyl which an electron pair on each of the two oxygens
will be antiperiplanar to the bond to NHR . From this
2
orientation the latter will be eliminated (Eq. 9-104b).
OH The theory has been supported by much experimental
COOH
evidence involving reaction rates and product distri-
bution among competing reactions of small conforma-
tionally restricted organic molecules.181– 184 Although
CH3 more recent experiments185 suggest that stereoelec-
CH3 CH3
tronic factors may be of less significance than had
been assumed, even a small decrease in transition
Trialkyl lock
state energy can be significant in an enzyme-catalyzed
reaction. Enzymes may not only orient substrates in
groups interdigitate and form a trialkyl lock. Orientation accord with stereoelectronic principles but also be able
must also play a large role in enzymatic catalysis. As to promote conformational alterations in intermediates
previously emphasized, enzymes often orient substrates that allow them to take advantage of stereoelectronic
precisely by formation of multiple hydrogen bonds. factors. Examples are considered in Chapter 12.
Small distortions by mutation or substitution of an
essential metal by a different one can have very great
effects. For example, because of an altered coordination R3 R
a HOR1 + R3 C NR2
pattern isocitrate dehydrogenases with Ca2+ in the active
O H
site has a maximum velocity of catalysis only 2.5 x 10–3 O b
that with the normal Mg2+-containing enzyme.180 θ C θ 2 NHR2 + R3 C OR1
1
Bruice and associates concluded that enzymes must
N R2 O
bring reacting groups into close proximity with orbitals O
of the reactants properly aligned in the ground state H
(9-104)
prior to moving to the transition state. They suggested
that enzymes preorganize the enzyme-substrate com-
plex into a near attack conformation in which the
positions of reacting groups, the arrangements of 7. The Microenvironment
hydrogen bonds, and the local dielectric constant in
the active site, resemble those in the transition state. A substrate bound at an active site may be in an
In this conformation the energy barrier to the transition environment quite different than that in an ordinary

--- Page 499 ---

496 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
aqueous solution. In fact, the protein often surrounds the translational energy of solvent or solute molecules
the substrate to the extent that the protein is the solvent. bombarding the complex. Can enzymes act as “energy
What kind of microenvironment does the protein funnels” that effectively channel kinetic energy from
provide and can it assist in the catalytic process? spots on the enzyme surface to the active site?194 This
Charged and dipolar groups of the protein provide could either be through strictly mechanical movement
an electrostatic field that provides part of the binding or through induction by fluctuations of the electrical
energy and which may also assist in catalysis, a con- field.195
cept expressed by Quastel as early as 1926.183a The It is often suggested that enzymes assist in catalysis
ends of protein helices often seem to point at active by distorting bond lengths or angles away from their
centers.186,187 In many cases more than one N terminus normal values. If the distorted structure were closer
with its positive electrical potential (see Chapter 2) or to the transition state geometry than the undistorted
more than one C terminus (negative potential) of a structure, catalysis would be assisted (see lysozyme,
helix point to an active site. These helix dipoles may Chapter 12). However, Levitt196 concluded (see also
be important in stabilizing transition state structures188 Fersht2) that forces provided this way by a protein are
or in altering pK values of functional groups.186 Fluctua- small and that the protein would become distorted
a
tions in charge distribution within a protein and in the rather than a substrate. On the other hand, if binding
hydrogen-bonding pattern of the protein with solvent of a substrate distorts the protein, could the resultant
and substrate may also be important.189 “stored energy” be used in some way to assist in
For some enzymatic reactions a transition state catalysis? If binding of a substrate bends a “spring”
will be favored by a medium of very low dielectric (Section C,4), can the tension in the spring then be used
constant and a correctly constructed active site can to distort the enzyme to be more exactly complemen-
provide just such a surrounding.189a Hydrophobic tary to the transition state? This concept has become
groups may be packed around a site where an ion pair popular.2,113,197
or other ionic interaction between enzyme and substrate The amino acid side chains of proteins are usually
occurs increasing the strength of that interaction. well packed. However, neither the side chains nor the
Conformational changes may enhance such effects. main chain are rigid and immobile. Some regions of
The dehydration of polar groups that must often occur the protein will contain empty spaces – packing defects.
upon binding of substrate may make these groups Lumry called these mobile defects because, as a result
more reactive.187,190,191 It has been suggested that the of fluctuations in side chain packing, they can move
substantial volume changes (∆V‡) that sometimes occur within a protein from one site to another for a consid-
during formation of transition states for enzyme- erable distance.198 Much evidence, including X-ray
catalyzed reactions may result largely from changes studies at low temperatures,199 supports the existence
in hydration of groups on the enzyme surface and that of many conformational substates in proteins. Some
these changes may play an important role in catalysis. substates may bind substrates better than others and
In the past most enzymologists tacitly assumed some may allow conversion to the transition state more
that the external medium in which enzymes act must readily than do others. Rotation of histidine rings,
be aqueous. However, many enzymes function well peptide linkages, – OH groups, or amide side chains199a
in media containing largely hydrocarbons. Enzymes may be required and has, in fact, been observed for
in a dry, powdered form have been suspended directly some enzymes. Perhaps in one of the substates of an
in organic solvents.192,193 Under these conditions, enzyme–substrate complex an especially favorable
enzymes may contain only tightly bound “structural” vibrational mode200 leads the complex to the transition
water, together with less than one equivalent of a mono- state. In the transition state the packing of side chains
layer of water outside the protein. The enzymes often may be especially tight. A mobile defect present in the
remain active and are able to catalyze reactions with active site may have moved elsewhere. The binding of
an altered substrate specificity as well as different substrates to the protein in the transition state will also
reactions overall. be tighter because of the conformational alterations
that have occurred. The binding energy of the sub-
strates is now being utilized to lower the transition
8. Strain and Distortion state barrier. The substrate is literally squeezed into
the transition state configuration.
The fact that enzymes appear to bind their sub- Is it possible that the protein domains forming an
strates in such a way as to surround and immobilize active site act like ferroelectric crystals, which change
them means that something other than the kinetic their dipole moment in response to a change in electric
energy of the substrate is needed to provide energy for field? The highly polarizable hydrogen-bonded net-
the ES complex to pass over the transition state barrier. work, the amide linkages, imidazole rings, guanidinium
What is the source of this activation energy? As with group, etc. of active sites may permit a flip-flop of the
nonenzymatic reactions, it must come ultimately from dipole moment as in domains of ferroelectric crystals.

--- Page 500 ---

E. Classification of Enzymes 497
In such crystals, e.g., those of the hydrogen-bonded existence of the many known dimeric enzymes that do
KH PO , a 180° change of dipole-moment direction not exhibit evident allosteric properties. Attempts
2 4
results from very small movements of heavy atoms to verify this idea have largely failed. However,
together with larger movements of the hydrogen- recent crystallographic studies of both glyceraldehyde
bonded protons.200a,b,c Could a similar flip-flop in a phosphate dehydrogenase206,207 and thymidylate
protein domain be coupled to the passage of a substrate synthase208 are consistent with the proposal. There is
over the transition state barrier? I have not seen any still a possibility that coordinated reciprocal changes
discussion of this possibility, but the structure of pro- in distribution of electrical charges in the two subunits
tein domains would seem to allow it. One could also may also be important.
imagine that with a small change in the hydrogen-
binding arrangement of protein groups an active site
could become preorganized to favor a flip-flop along 10. Summary
a hydrogen-bonded chain in a different direction for a
subsequent step in a reaction sequence. It appears that enzymes exert their catalytic
powers by first bringing together substrates and
binding them in proper orientations at the active site.
9. Why Oligomeric Enzymes? Second, they often provide acidic and basic groups
in the proper orientations to promote proton transfers
As we have seen (Chapter 7), a large fraction of all within the substrate. Third, groups within the enzyme
proteins exist as dimers, trimers, and higher oligomers. (especially nucleophilic groups) may enter into covalent
Oligomeric proteins raise the osmotic pressure much interaction with the substrates to form structures that
less than would the same number of monomeric sub- are more reactive than those originally present in the
units and this may be crucial to a cell. Another advan- substrate. Fourth, the protein often closes around the
tage of oligomers may be reflected in the fact that active substrate to immobilize it and to hold it in an environ-
sites of enzymes are often at interfaces between two or ment, often lacking water, which could impede cataly-
more subunits. This may enhance the ability of enzymes sis. The enzyme is also probably able to make small
to undergo conformational rearrangements that are readjustments of its structure to provide good comple-
required during their action, just as hemoglobin changes mentarity to the substrate at every stage and especially
its oxygen affinity in concert with a change in inter- to the transition state structure. Fifth, the enzyme may
subunit contacts (Fig. 7-25). be able to induce strain or distortion in the substrate
A curious observation is that crystals of the dimeric perhaps accompanying a conformational change within
pig heart malate dehydrogenase bind only one mole- the protein. The following question is often asked:
cule of the substrate NAD+ per dimer tightly; the “Why are enzymes such large molecules?”209 At least
second NAD+ is bound weakly.201,202 Similar anti- part of the answer is that an enzyme usually interacts,
cooperativity has been reported for other crystalline sometimes via special domains, with other proteins.206
dehydrogenases203 and various other enzymes. An Another part of the answer is evident when we con-
intriguing idea is that anticooperativity in binding sider that the formation of a surface complementary to
might reflect a cooperative action between subunits that of the substrate and possessing reasonable rigidity
during catalysis. Suppose that only conformation A requires a complex geometry in the peptide backbone.
of a dehydrogenase bound reduced substrate and In addition, the enzyme must provide functional groups
NAD+, while conformation B bound NADH and at the proper places to enter into catalysis. It may require
oxidized substrate. If reduced substrate and NAD+ a certain bulk to provide a low dielectric medium.
were present in excess and if oxidized substrate were Finally, if essential conformational changes occur
efficiently removed from the scene by further oxidation, during the course of the catalysis, we can only be
the following cooperative events could occur in the surprised that nature has succeeded in packing so
mixed AB dimer. The subunit of conformation A much machinery into such a small volume.
would bind substrates, react, and be converted to
conformation B. At the same time, because of the
strong AB interaction, the subunit that was originally E. Classification of Enzymes
in conformation B would be converted back to A and
would be ready to initiate a new round of catalysis. An official commission of the International Union
Since conformation A has a low affinity for NADH, of Biochemistry (IUB) has classified enzymes in the
dissociation of the reduced coenzyme, which is often following six categories:210
the slow step in dehydrogenase action, would be
facilitated.204–207 Such a reciprocating or flip-flop 1. Oxidoreductases. Enzymes catalyzing dehydro-
mechanism, suggested first by Harada and Wolfe,204 genation or other oxidation and reduction
is attractive because it provides a natural basis for the reactions.

--- Page 501 ---

498 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
2. Transferases. These catalyze group transfer As an example, chymotrypsin is classified EC
reactions. 3.4.4.5 according to the IUB system.210 In this book
3. Hydrolases. Enzymes catalyzing transfer of a more mechanistically based classification is used.
groups to the HO–ion of H O. Because some official names are quite long, traditional
2
4. Lyases. Enzymes promoting addition to double trivial names for enzymes often have been retained.
bonds or the reverse. Remember that to be precise it is always necessary to
5. Isomerases. Enzymes catalyzing rearrangement mention the species from which an enzyme was iso-
reactions. lated and, if possible, the strain. Also remember that
6. Ligases(synthetases). Enzymes that catalyze almost every significant genetic difference is reflected
condensation with simultaneous cleavage of ATP in some change in some protein. It is possible that the
and related reactions. enzyme you are working with is slightly different from
the same enzyme prepared in a different laboratory.
References
1. Fromm, H. (1975) Initial Rate Enzyme Kinetics, 23. Cleland, W. W. (1979) Methods Enzymol.63, 48. Seshagiri, N. (1972) J. Theor. Biol.34, 469–486
Springer-Verlag, New York 103–138 49. Huang, C. Y. (1979) Methods Enzymol.63, 54–84
2. Fersht, A. (1999) Structure and Mechanism in 24. Frieden, C. (1994) Methods Enzymol.240, 311– 50. Chou, K., and Forsén, S. (1980) Biochem. J.187,
Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and 322 829–835
Protein Folding, Freeman, New York 25. Schechter, A. N. (1970) Science170, 273–280 51. Fromm, H. J., Silverstein, E., and Boyer, P. D.
3. Dixon, M., and Webb, E. C., eds. (1979) 26. Cha, S. (1970) J. Biol. Chem.245, 4814–4818 (1964)J. Biol. Chem.239, 3645–3652
Enzymes, 3rd ed., Academic Press, New York 27. Martinez, M. B., Flickinger, M. C., and 52. Fromm, S. J., and Fromm, H. J. (1999) Biochem.
4. Wharton, C. W., and Eisenthal, R. (1981) Nelsestuen, G. L. (1996) Biochemistry35, Biophys. Res. Commun.265, 448–452
Molecular Enzymology, Wiley, New York 1179–1186 53. Silverstein, E., and Boyer, P. D. (1964) J. Biol.
5. Engel, P. C. (1982) Enzyme Kinetics, the Steady- 28. Bull, H. B. (1971) An Introduction to Physical Chem.239, 3901–3907
State Approach, Chapman and Hall, London Biochemistry, 2nd ed., Davis Co., Philadelphia, 54. Hurst, R. O. (1969) Can. J. Biochem. Physiol.47,
6. Hammes, G. G. (1982) Enzyme Catalysis and Pennsylvania 941–944
Regulation, Academic Press, New York 29. Eisenstein, B. I. (1987) Escherichia coli and 54a. Cha, S. (1968) J. Biol. Chem.243, 820–825
7. Kull, F. J. (1994) Principles of Biomolecular Salmonella typhimurium, Am. Soc. Microbiology, 55. Srere, P. A. (1967) Science158, 936–937
Kinetics and Binding, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Washington, D.C., FC Niedhardt, ed. (pp.84– 56. Hiromi, K., ed. (1979) Kinetics of Fast Enzyme
Florida 90) Reaction-Theory and Practice, John Wiley, New
8. Suckling, C. J., ed. (1990) Enzyme Chemistry, 30. Smoluchowski, M. (1917) Z. Phys. Chem92, York
2nd ed., Chapman and Hall, New York 129–168 57. Rentzepis, P. M. (1978) Science202, 174–182
9. Price, N. C., and Stevens, L., eds. (1989) 31. Caldin, E. F. (1964) Fast Reactions in Solution, 58. Hammes, G. G., and Schimmel, P. R. (1970) in
Fundamentals of Enzymology, 2nd ed., Oxford Wiley, New York (pp. 10 and 279) The Enzymes, 3rd ed., Vol. 2 (Boyer, P. D., ed),
Univ. Press, Oxford,England 32. Debye, P. (1942) Trans. Electrochem. Soc.82, pp. 67–114, Academic Press, New York
10. Kuby, S. A. (1990) Enzymes: a Comprehensive 265–272 59. Ahrens, M.-L., Maass, G., Schuster, P., and
Study, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 32a. Elcock, A. H., Huber, G. A., and McCammon, Winkler, H. (1970) J. Am. Chem. Soc.92, 6134–
11. Schulz, A. R. (1994) Enzyme Kinetics From J. A. (1997) Biochemistry36, 16049–16058 6139
Diastase to Multi-enzyme Systems, Cambridge 32b. Selzer, T. and Schreiber, G. (1999) J. Mol. Biol. 59a. Gutfreund, H. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24,
Univ. Press, New York 287, 409–419 457– 460
12. Segel, I. H. (1975) Enzyme Kinetics:Behavior and 33. Mastro, A. M., Babich, M. A., Taylor, W. D., 59b. Beechem, J. M. (1998) Biophys. J.74, 2141
Analysis of Rapid Equilibrium and Steady-State and Keith, A. D. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 60. Fink, A. L. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 8–10
Enzyme Systems, Wiley, New York U.S.A.81, 3414–3418 61. Balashov, S. P., Imasheva, E. S., Ebrey, T. G.,
13. Cornish-Bowden, A. (1995) Fundamentals of 34. French, D. (1957) Brewers Digest32, 50–56 Chen, N., Menick, D. R., and Crouch, R. K.
Enzyme Kinetics, 2nd ed., Portland Press, 35. Cohn, E. J., and Edsall, J. T. (1943) Proteins, (1997)Biochemistry36, 8671–8676
Brookfield, Vermont Amino Acids and Peptides as Ions and Dipolar 62. Fink, A. L., and Geeves, M. A. (1979) Methods
13a. Purich, D. L., and Allison, R. D. (2000) Trends Ions, Van Nostrand-Reinhold, Princeton, New Enzymol.63, 336–370
Biochem. Sci.25, 455 Jersey (pp. 90–93) 63. Alberty, R. A. (1956) Adv. Enzymol.17, 1–64
14. Lowry, O. H., and Passonneau, J. V. (1972) A 36. Koenig, S. H. (1975) Biopolymers14, 2421–2423 64. Dixon, M., and Webb, E. C., eds. (1979)
Flexible System of Enzymatic Analysis, 37. Blacklow, S. C., Raines, R. T., Lim, W. A., Enzymes, 3rd ed., Academic Press, New York
Academic Press, New York Zamore, P. D., and Knowles, J. R. (1988) (pp.138–163)
15. Passonneau, J., and Lowry, O., eds. (1993) Biochemistry27, 1158–1167 65. Cleland, W. W. (1977) Adv. Enzymol.45, 273–
Enzymatic Analysis, 1st ed., Humana Press, 38. Albery, W. J., and Knowles, J. R. (1976) 387
Totowa, New Jersey Biochemistry15, 5627–5631 66. Cleland, W. W. (1982) Methods Enzymol.87,
16. Liu, Y.-M., and Sweedler, J. V. (1995) J. Am. 39. Albery, W. J., and Knowles, J. R. (1976) 390–405
Chem. Soc.117, 8871–8872 Biochemistry15, 5631–5640 67. Kyte, J. (1995) Mechanism in Protein Chemistry,
17. Liébecq, C., ed. (1992) Biochemical Nomencla- 40. Jenkins, W. T. (1982) Adv. Enzymol.53, 307–344 Garland Publ., New York
ture, Portland Press, London and Chapel Hill, 41. Haldane, J. B. S. (1930) Enzymes, Longmans, 68. Ono, S., Hiromi, K., and Yashikawa, Y. (1958)
North Carolina (for the International Union of Green, New York Bull. Chem. Soc. Jap.31, 957–962
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) 42. Cleland, W. W. (1970) in The Enzymes, 3rd ed., 69. Brocklehurst, K., and Dixon, H. B. F. (1976)
18. Caldin, E. F. (1964) Fast Reactions in Solution, Vol. 2 (Boyer, P. D., ed), Academic Press, New Biochem. J.155, 61–70
Wiley, New York York 70. Tipton, K. F., and Dixon, H. B. F. (1979)
19. Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and 43. Dalziel, K. (1957) Acta Chem. Scand.11, 1706– Methods Enzymol.63, 183–234
Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, New York (p. 393) 1723 71. Dixon, M. (1953) Biochem. J.55, 170–171
20. Glick, N., Landman, A. D., and Roufogalis, B. 44. Rebholz, K. L., and Northrop, D. B. (1994) 72. Purich, L. D., and Fromm, H. J. (1972) Biochim.
D. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, N82 – N83 Arch. Biochem. Biophys.312, 227–233 Biophys. Acta.268, 1–3
20a. Wilkinson. (1980) Biochem. J.80, 324 – 45. Volkenstein, M. V., and Goldstein, B. N. (1966) 73. Williams, J. W., and Morrison, J. F. (1979)
21. Orsi, B. A., and Tipton, K. E. (1979) Methods Biokhim.31, 541–547 Methods Enzymol.63, 437–467
Enzymol.63, 159–183 46. Volkenstein, M. V., and Goldstein, B. N. (1966) 74. Morrison, J. F. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7,
22. Wharton, C. W., and Szawelski, R. J. (1982) Biochim. Biophys. Acta.115, 471–477 102–105
Biochem. J.203, 351–360 47. Fromm, H. J. (1970) Biochem. Biophys. Res. 75. Frieden, C. (1964) J. Biol. Chem.239, 3522–3531
Commun.40, 692–697

--- Page 502 ---

499
References
76. Morrison, J. F., and Walsh, C. T. (1988) Adv. 112. Laidler, K. J. (1969) Theories of Chemical 142. Cohen, A. O., and Marcus, R. A. (1968) J. Phys.
Enzymol.61, 201–301 Reaction Rates, McGraw-Hill, New York Chem.72, 4249–4256
77. Gutheil, W. G., and Bachovin, W. W. (1993) 113. Kyte, J. (1995) Mechanism in Protein Chemistry, 143. Marcus, R. A. (1969) J. Am. Chem. Soc.91,
Biochemistry32, 8723–8731 Garland Publ., New York (pp. 199–213) 7224–7225
78. Di Cera, E., Hopfner, K.-P., and Dang, Q. D. 114. Marcus, R. A. (1992) Science256, 1523–1524 144. Guthrie, J. P. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118,
(1996)Biophys. J.70, 174–181 115. Pauling, L. (1948) Nature (London)161, 707–713 12878–12885
79. Botts, J., and Morales, M. (1953) Trans. Faraday 116. Linehard, G. E. (1973) Science180, 149–154 145. Guthrie, J. P. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118,
Soc.49, 696–707 117. Wolfenden, R. (1976) Annu Rev Biophys Bioeng. 12886–12890
80. Monod, J., Wyman, J., and Changeux, J. D. 5, 271–306 146. Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and
(1965)J. Mol. Biol.12, 88–118 117a.Schramm, V. L. (1998) Ann. Rev. Biochem.67, Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, New York
81. Plapp, B. V., Leidal, K. G., Smith, R. K., and 693–720 (pp. 207–213)
Murch, B. P. (1984) Arch. Biochem. Biophys.230, 118. Nielsen, P. A., Glad, S. S., and Jensen, F. (1996) 147. Dewar, M. J. S. (1984) J. Am. Chem. Soc.106,
30–38 J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 10577–10583 209–219
82. Chadha, V. K., Leidal, K. G., and Plapp, B. V. 119. Zheng, Y.-J., and Bruice, T. C. (1997) J. Am. 148. Gandour, R. D., Maggiora, G. M., and
(1983)Journal of Medicinal Chemistry26, 916– Chem. Soc.119, 8137–8145 Schowen, R. L. (1974) J. Am. Chem. Soc.96,
922 120. Merkler, D. J., Kline, P. C., Weiss, P., and 6967–6979
83. Cho, H., Ramaswamy, S., and Plapp, B. V. Schramm, V. L. (1993) Biochemistry32, 12993– 149. Quinn, D. M. (1987) Chem. Rev.87, 955–979
(1997)Biochemistry36, 382–389 13001 150. Klinman, J. P. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14,
84. Westley, A. M., and Westley, J. (1996) J. Biol. 121. Degano, M., Almo, S. C., Sacchettini, J. C., and 368–373
Chem.271, 5347–5352 Schramm, V. L. (1998) Biochemistry37, 6277–6285 151. Rucker, J., Cha, Y., Jonsson, T., Grant, K. L.,
85. Hervé, G., ed. (1989) Allosteric Enzymes, CRC 122. Glad, S. S., and Jensen, F. (1997) J. Am. Chem. and Klinman, J. P. (1992) Biochemistry31,
Press, Boca Raton, Florida Soc.119, 227–232 11489–11499
86. Rubin, M. M., and Changeux, J. D. (1966) J. 123. Schramm, V. L., Horenstein, B. A., and Kline, 152. Hwang, J.-K., and Warshel, A. (1996) J. Am.
Mol. Biol.21, 265–274 P. C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 18259–18262 Chem. Soc.118, 11745–11751
87. Grant, G. A., Schuller, D. J., and Banaszak, L. 124. Kline, P. C., and Schramm, V. L. (1994) J. Biol. 153. Barbara, P. F., Walker, G. C., and Smith, T. P.
J. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 34–41 Chem.269, 22385–22390 (1992)Science256, 975–981
88. Williams, R. O., Young, J. R., and Majiwa, P. 125. Deng, H., Kurz, L. C., Rudolph, F. B., and 154. Kearley, G. J., Fillaux, F., Baron, M.-H.,
A. O. (1979) Nature (London)282, 847–849 Callender, R. (1998) Biochemistry37, 4968–4976 Bennington, S., and Tomkinson, J. (1994)
89. Rabin, B. R. (1967) Biochem. J.102, 22c 125a.Cho, Y.-K., and Northrop, D. B. (1999) Science264, 1285–1289
90. Newsholme, E. A., and Start, C. (1973) Biochemistry38, 7470–7475 154a.Antoniou, D., and Schwartz, S. D. (1997) Proc.
Regulation in Metabolism, Wiley, New York 125b.Wolfenden, R., Snider, M., Ridgway, C., and Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 12360–12365
91. Walsh, C. (1979) Enzymatic Reaction Miller, B. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 7419– 154b.Basran, J., Sutcliffe, M. J., and Scrutton, N. S.
Mechanism, Freeman, San Francisco, 7420 (1999)Biochemistry38, 3218–3222
California 126. Menger, F. M. (1992) Biochemistry31, 5368–5373 154c.Sutcliffe, M. J., and Scrutton, N. S. (2000)
91a. Plapp, B. V. (1982) Methods Enzymol.87, 469– 127. Goldsmith, J. O., and Kuo, L. C. (1993) J. Biol. Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 405–408
499 Chem.268, 18481–18484 154d.Huang, Y., Rettner, C. T., Auerbach, D. J., and
92. Sandler, M., ed. (1980) Enzyme Inhibitors as 128. Lightstone, F. C., and Bruice, T. C. (1996) J. Wodtke, A. M. (2000) Science290, 111–114
Drugs, Univ. Park Press, Baltimore, Maryland Am. Chem. Soc.118, 2595–2605 155. Hibbert, F., and Emsley, J. (1990) Adv. Phys.
93. Bey, P. (1981) Chem. Ind. (London), 139–144 128a.Bruice, T. C., and Lightstone, F. C. (1999) Acc. Org. Chem.26, 255–379
94. Hanson, K. R. (1966) J. Am. Chem. Soc.88, Chem. Res.32, 127–136 156. Gilli, P., Bertolasi, V., Ferretti, V., and Gilli, G.
2731–2742 128b.Bruice, T. C., and Benkovic, S. J. (2000) (1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 909–915
94a. Prelog, V., and Helmchen, G. (1982) Angew. Biochemistry39, 6267–6274 157. Perrin, C. L. (1994) Science266, 1665–1668
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.21, 567–583 128c.Cannon, W. R., Singleton, S. F., and Benkovic, 158. Garcia-Viloca, M., González-Lafont, A., and
95. Bentley, R. (1969) Molecular Asymmetry in S. J. (1996) Nature Struct. Biol.3, 821–833 Lluch, J. M. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119,
Biology, Vol. 1, Academic Press, New York 128d.Cannon, W. R., and Benkovic, S. J. (1998) J. 1081–1086
(pp. 49–56) Biol. Chem.273, 26257–26260 158a.Bao, D., Huskey, W. P., Kettner, C. A., and
96. Bentley, R. (1970) Molecular Asymmetry in 129. Murphy, D. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 4507–4510 Jordan, F. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 4684–
Biochemistry, Vol. 2, Academic Press, New 129a.Warshel, A. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 27035– 4689
York 27038 158b.Garcia-Viloca, M., Gelabert, R., González-
97. Alworth, W. L. (1972) Stereochemistry and its 129b.Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and Lafont, A., Moreno, M., and Lluch, J. M.
Application in Biochemistry, Wiley-Interscience, Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, New York (pp. (1998)J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 10203–10209
New York 210–213) 158c.Bowers, P. M., and Klevit, R. E. (2000) J. Am.
98. Bentley, R. (1978) Nature (London)276, 673–676 130. Hucho, F., and Wallenfels, K. (1971) Eur. J. Chem. Soc.122, 1030–1033
99. Barry, J. M. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 228– Biochem.23, 489–496 159. McDermott, A., and Ridenour, C. F. (1996) in
230 131. Jencks, W. P. (1969) Catalysis in Chemistry and Encyclopedia of NMR, (Emsley, J. W., ed.), pp.
100. Hirschmann, H. (1960) J. Biol. Chem.235, Enzymology, McGraw-Hill, New York (pp. 3820–3824, Wiley, Sussex, England
2762–2767 170–199) 160. Frey, P. A. (1995) Science269, 104–106
101. Post, C. B., and Ray, W. J. J. (1995) Biochemistry 132. Swain, C. G., and Brown, J. F., Jr. (1952) J. Am. 161. Cleland, W. W., Frey, P. A., and Gerlt, J. A.
34, 15881–15885 Chem. Soc.74, 2534–2537 and 2538–2543 (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 25529–25532
102. Tsou, C.-L. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 427– 133. Rony, P. R. (1969) J. Am. Chem. Soc.91, 6090– 162. Cleland, W. W., and Kreevoy, M. M. (1994)
429 6096 Science264, 1887–1890
103. Ferscht, A. R. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 134. Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and 163. Frey, P. A., Whitt, S. A., and Tobin, J. B. (1994)
262–265 Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, New York (p. 199) Science264, 1927–1930
104. Fersht, A. R. (1998) Science280, 541 135. Engdahl, K.-Å., Bivehed, H., Ahlberg, P., and 164. Cassidy, C. S., Lin, J., and Frey, P. A. (1997)
105. Nureki, O., Vassylyev, D. G., Tateno, M., Saunders, W. H., Jr. (1983) J. Am. Chem. Soc. Biochemistry36, 4576–4584
Shimada, A., Nakama, T., Fukai, S., Konno, 105, 4767–4774 165. Halkides, C. J., Wu, Y. Q., and Murray, C. J.
M., Hendrickson, T. L., Schimmel, P., and 136. Hegarty, A. F., and Jencks, W. P. (1975) J. Am. (1996)Biochemistry35, 15941–15948
Yokoyama, S. (1998) Science280, 578–582 Chem. Soc.97, 7188–7189 166. Zheng, Y.-J., and Bruice, T. C. (1997) Proc.
106. Hopfield, J. J. (1980) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 136a.Williams, A. (1999) Concerted Organic and Bio- Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 4285–4288
U.S.A.77, 5248–5252 Organic Mechanisms, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 167. Richard, J. P. (1998) Biochemistry37, 4305–4309
107. Jencks, W. P. (1975) Adv. Enzymol.43, 219–410 Florida 168. Scheiner, S., and Kar, T. (1995) J. Am. Chem.
108. Westheimer, F. H. (1962) Adv. Enzymol.24, 137. Wang, J. H. (1968) Science161, 328–334 Soc.117, 6970–6975
441–482 138. Eigen, M. (1964) Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.3, 169. Warshel, A., Papazyan, A., Kollman, P. A.,
109. Kraut, J. (1988) Science242, 533–539 1–19 Cleland, W. W., Kreevoy, M. M., and Frey, P.
110. Fersht, A. (1985) Enzyme Structure and 139. Metzler, D. E. (1979) Adv. Enzymol.50, 1–40 A. (1995) Science269, 102–106
Mechanism, 2nd ed., Freeman, New York 140. Nagle, J. F., and Morowitz, H. J. (1978) Proc. 170. Shan, S.-o, Loh, S., and Herschlag, D. (1996)
111. Gandour, R. D., and Schowen, R. L., eds. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.75, 298–302 Science272, 97–101
(1978)Transition States of Biochemical Processes, 141. Gerlt, J. A., and Gassman, P. G. (1993) J. Am. 171. Ash, E. L., Sudmeier, J. L., De Fabo, E. C., and
Plenum, New York Chem. Soc.115, 11552–11568 Bachovchin, W. W. (1997) Science278, 1128–1132

--- Page 503 ---

500 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
References
172. Shan, S.-o, and Herschlag, D. (1996) J. Am. 203. Niefind, K., Hecht, H.-J., and Schomburg, D.
Chem. Soc.118, 5515–5518 (1995)J. Mol. Biol.251, 256–281
173. Warshel, A., and Papazyan, A. (1996) Proc. 204. Harada, K., and Wolfe, R. G. (1968) J. Biol.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 13665–13670 Chem.243, 4131–4137
174. Spector, L. B. (1982) Covalent Catalysis by 205. Lazdunski, M., Petitclerc, C., Chappelet, D.,
Enzymes, Springer-Verlag, New York and Lazdunski, C. (1971) Eur. J. Biochem.20,
175. Page, M. I., and Jencks, W. P. (1971) Proc. Natl. 124–139
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.68, 1678–1683 206. Skarzynski, T., Moody, P. C. E., and Wonacott,
176. Kirsch, J. F. (1973) Ann. Rev. Biochem.42, 205– A. J. (1987) J. Mol. Biol.193, 171–187
234 207. Yun, M., Park, C.-G., Kim, J.-Y., and Park, H.-
177. Koshland, D. E., Jr., Carraway, K. W., Dafforn, W. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10702–10710
G. A., Goss, J. D., and Storm, D. R. (1971) Cold 208. Anderson, A. C., O’Neil, R. H., DeLano, W. L.,
Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol.36, 13–20 and Stroud, R. M. (1999) Biochemistry38,
177a.Villà, J., Strajbl, M., Glennon, T. M., Sham, Y. 13829–13836
Y., Chu, Z. T., and Warshel, A. (2000) Proc. 209. Srere, P. A. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 387–
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 11899–11904 390
178. Milstien, S., and Cohen, L. A. (1972) J. Am. 210. Nomenclature Committee of the International
Chem. Soc.94, 9158–9165 Union of Biochemistry and Molecular
179. Karle, J. M., and Karle, I. L. (1972) J. Am. Biology. (1992) Enzyme Nomenclature,
Chem. Soc.94, 9182–9189 Academic Press, San Diego, California
180. Mesecar, A. D., Stoddard, B. L., and Koshland,
D. E., Jr. (1997) Science277, 202–206
181. Deslongchamps, P., Lebreux, C., and Taillefer,
R. (1973) Can. J. Chem.51, 1665–1669
182. Deslongchamps, P. (1975) Tetrahedron31,
2463–2490
183. Perrin, C. L., and Arrhenius, M. L. (1982) J.
Am. Chem. Soc.104, 2839–2842
184. Evans, C. M., Glenn, R., and Kirby, A. J. (1982)
J. Am. Chem. Soc.104, 4706–4707
185. Kuo, L. C., Fukuyama, J. M., and Makinen, M.
W. (1983) J. Mol. Biol.163, 63–105
186. Plogman, J. H., Drenth, G., Kalk, K. H., and
Hol, W. G. J. (1979) J. Mol. Biol.127, 149–162
187. Warshel, A. (1981) Biochemistry20, 3167–3177
188. Hol, W. G. J., van Duijen, P. T., and Berendsen,
H. J. C. (1978) Nature (London)273, 443–446
189. Welch, G. R., ed. (1986) The Fluctuating
Enzyme, Wiley, New York
189a.Mertz, E. L., and Krishtalik, L. I. (2000) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 2081–2086
190. Dewar, M. J. S., and Storch, D. M. (1985) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 2225–2229
191. Dewar, M. J. S., and Dieter, K. M. (1988)
Biochemistry27, 3302–3308
192. Yennawar, H. P., Yennawar, N. H., and Farber,
G. K. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 583–585
193. Schmitke, J. L., Wescott, C. R., and Klibanov,
A. M. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 3360–3365
194. Kell, D. B. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 1
195. Robertson, B., and Astumian, R. D. (1992)
Biochemistry31, 138–141
196. Levitt, M. (1974) in Peptides, Polypeptides and
Proteins (Blout, E. R., Bouey, F. A., Goodman,
M., and Lotan, N., eds), p. 99, Wiley, New York
197. Avis, J. M., and Fersht, A. R. (1993)
Biochemistry32, 5321–5326
198. Lumry, R., and Rosenberg, A. (1974) Colloques
Internationaux du C.N.R.S.246, 53–62
199. Rader, S. D., and Agard, D. A. (1997) Protein
Sci.6, 1375–1386
199a.Word, J. M., Lovell, S. C., Richardson, J. S.,
and Richardson, D. C. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.285,
1735–1747
200. Bialek, W., and Onuchic, J. N. (1988) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 5908–5912
200a.Bystrov, D. S., and Popova, E. A. (1987)
Ferroelectrics72, 147–155
200b.Emsley, J., Reza, N. M., Dowes, H. M.,
Hursthouse, M. B., and Kurodo, R. (1988)
Phosphorus and Sulfur35, 141–149
200c.Rakvin, and Dalal. (1992) Ferroelectrics135,
227–236
201. Banaszak, L. A., and Bradshaw, R. A. (1975) in
The Enzymes, 3rd ed., Vol. 11 (Boyer, P. D., ed),
Academic Press, New York (pp. 369–396)
202. Zimmerle, C. T., and Alter, G. M. (1993)
Biochemistry32, 12743–12748

--- Page 504 ---

501
Study Questions
1. Give two reasons why enzymes are important to 11. The kinetics of the aerobic oxidation of enzymati-
living organisms. cally reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) have been investigated at pH 7.38 at
2. If an enzyme catalyzes the reaction A→ B + C, will 30°C. The reaction rate was followed spectropho-
it also catalyze the reaction B + C → A? tometrically by measuring the decrease in absor-
bance at 340 nm over a period of 30 min. The
3. Can an enzyme use a site to catalyze a reverse reac- reaction may be represented as
tion different from what it uses to catalyze the reaction
in the forward direction? Explain your answer. NADH + H+ + riboflavin →
NAD+ + dihydroriboflavin
4. Define the “steady state” of living cells and con-
Time (days) A (at 340 nm)
trast with a state of chemical equilibrium.
1 0.347
5. How is the instantaneous initial velocity of an 2 0.339
enzymatic reaction measured? What precautions 5 0.327
must be taken to ensure that a true instantaneous 9 0.302
velocity is being obtained? 16.5 0.275
23 0.254
6. How is the rate of an enzyme action influenced by 27 0.239
changes in: 30 0.229
a) temperature
b) enzyme concentration Determine the rate constant and the order of the
c) substrate concentration reaction.
d) pH
12. You have isolated and purified a new enzyme (E)
7. In what ways are enzymatic reactions typical of which converts a single substrate (S) into a single
ordinary catalytic reactions in organic or inorganic product (P). You have determined M by gel
r
chemistry, and in what ways are they distinct? filtration as ~ 46,400. However, in SDS gel electro-
phoresis, a molecular mass of ~ 23 kDa was indi-
8. In general, for a reaction that can take place with cated for the single protein band observed. A
or without catalysis by an enzyme, what is the solution of the enzyme was analyzed in the fol-
effect, if any, of the enzyme on lowing way. The absorbance at 280 nm was found
a) standard Gibbs energy change of the reaction to be 0.512. A 1.00 ml portion of the same solution
b) energy of activation of the reaction was subjected to amino acid analysis and was
c) initial velocity of the reaction found to contain 71.3 nmol of tryptophan. N-
d) temperature coefficient of the rate constant terminal analysis on the same volume of enzyme
revealed 23.8 nmol of N-terminal alanine.
9. What are the dimensions of the rate constant for
zero-, first-, and second-order reactions? If a first- a) What is the approximate molecular mass of the
order reaction is half completed in 2 min, what is enzyme? Discuss this answer. Be sure to use
its rate constant? an appropriate number of significant figures in
this and other calculations.
10. A sample of hemin containing radioactive iron, b) What is the concentration of your enzyme in
59Fe, was assayed with a Geiger-Müller counter at moles per liter of active sites?
intervals of time with the following results: c) What is the molar extinction coefficient ε at 280 nm
Time (days) Radioactive counts per min where A = εcl; A = absorbance, c = mol / liter,
and l = cell width in cm. Assume that all
0 3981
spectrophotometric measurements are made
2 3864
in 1.00 cm cuvettes.
6 3648
10 3437
A second preparation of the enzyme had an absor-
14 3238
bance at 280 nm of 0.485. This enzyme was dilut-
20 2965
ed very carefully: 1.00 ml into 250 ml and this
Determine the half-life of 59Fe and the value for diluted enzyme was used for the following experi-
the decay constant. ments (I to III).

--- Page 505 ---

502 Chapter 9. Enzymes: The Catalysts of Cells
Study Questions
Experiment I. A 1.00 ml portion of the diluted f) Plot l / v vs. l / [ S ] where v is in units of µmol
enzyme was added to 250 ml of buffered substrate per tube and [ S ] in millimoles / liter. Evaluate
at pH 7.0 and was mixed rapidly. The resulting K ,V , and k from this plot. Fit your data
m max cat
initial substrate concentration [ S ] was 1.000 mM. by eye. It is generally agreed that a linear least
o
This reaction mixture was held at 25.0°C and squares fit is inappropriate unless suitable
portions were removed periodically at time t for weighting factors are used.
analysis of the product P formed. The results g) Plot the same data as v / [ S ] vs. v. Again
follow. Plot [ P ] vs. time. evaluateK andV .
m max
Experiment III. The preceding experiment was
Time t(s) [P] (mM) Time t(s) Remaining [S] (mM)
repeated but an inhibitor was present in each tube
200 0.104 2800 0.070 in a concentration equal to 5.00 mM, 10.0 mM, or
400 0.208 3200 0.040 25.0 mM. Two different inhibitors were used, A
800 0.392 3600 0.022 and B. The following results were obtained.
1200 0.554 4400 0.0060
µmol of product formed in 10 min/tube
1600 0.695 6000 0.00048
2000 0.800 [I] = 5.00 mM 5.00 mM 25.0 mM 10.0 mM
[S]
2400 0.881
(mM) Inhibitor: A B Inhibitor: A B
The integrated rate equation corresponding to the 5.00 2.00 1.09 1.50 0.727
Michaelis– Menten equation 2.50 0.71 1.00 1.09 0.667
1.20 1.31 0.848 0.686 0.565
v = V [ S ] / (K + [ S ]) is as follows: 0.800 1.07 0.739 0.505 0.492
max m
0.600 0.900 0.654 0.400 0.436
V ⋅ t = [ S ] - [ S ] + K ln ([ S ] / [ S ]) 0.400 0.686 0.533 0.282 0.356
max o m o
0.200 0.400 0.343 0.150 0.229
d) Plot ([ S ] - [ S ])/ t vs. l / t x ln ([ S ] / [ S ]). From 0.100 0.218 0.200 0.077 0.133
o o
this plot evaluate K and V . Make this and
m max
other plots to appropriate scale on good quality h) Plot l/v vs. l / [ S ] for each of these sets of data.
graph paper. For each case evaluate V , apparent K , and
max m
e) What is k ? inhibitor constants K = [ I ] [ E ]/ [ EI ]. There may
cat I
be two K values.
I
Experiment II. In a second experiment, a series of i) For uninhibited enzymes, when [ S ] = 0.4 mM
test tubes were set up, each containing a different what fraction of the enzyme is ES? Free E?
amount of buffered substrate at pH 7 but each in a j) For enzyme in the presence of 10.00 mM inhibitor
volume of exactly 4.00 ml. The same enzyme and 0.8 mM substrate, what fraction of the total
solution used in part d (absorbance at 280 nm = enzyme is ES? EI? free E?
0.485) was diluted 2.00 ml in 250 ml as in I, then k) Recall that v = [ ES ] k = [ E ][ S ] ⋅k /K in many
cat cat m
again 2.00 ml in 200 ml. Portions of 1.00 ml of this cases. What will be the relative rates of product
twice diluted enzyme were added at t = 0 to each formation from your substrate S and another
of the test tubes of buffered substrate. The reac- competing substrate S’ present at the same concen-
tion was stopped in just 10.0 minutes by adding tration which also reacts with your enzyme with
perchloric acid; a suitable reagent was added to K = 0.01 mM and k = 200 / s if [ S ] = [ S’ ]?
m cat
provide for a colorimetric determination of the
product. The results were as follows: 13. Using the method of graphs, write the initial rate
equation for the following system with A, B, P, and
[S] Amount of product [S] Amount of product
Q present.
(mM) (µmol/tube) (mM) (µmol/tube)
10.0 2.29 0.600 1.31 A B P Q
5.00 2.18 0.400 1.07 k k k k k k k k
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
2.50 2.00 0.200 0.686 E EA EXY EQ E
1.200 1.69 0.100 0.400
0.800 1.48 Odd-numbered rate constants are for forward
reactions; even-numbered constants are for
reverse.

--- Page 506 ---

503
Study Questions
a) Satisfy yourself that 15. Interpret, for each of the following cases, the curve
showing measured initial velocity at constant
–d[A]
= k [A][E]–k [EA] substrate concentration (not maximum velocity)
dt 1 2 against pH for an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
–d[B]
= = k [B][EA]–k [EXY]
dt 3 4
d[P]
= = k [EXY]–k [P][EQ]
dt 5 6
d[Q] v
= = k [EQ]–k [E][Q]
dt 7 8
The determinants (given by the method of graphs)
6 7 8 9 10
which provide the steady-state concentrations of pH
[E] and of the various exzyme–substrate and
enzyme–product complexes are a) The substrate is neutral and contains no acidic
or basic groups. The Michaelis constant is
[E] = k k [k + k ] + k k k [B] + k k k [P] found to be independent of pH over the range
2 7 4 5 3 5 7 2 4 6
studied.
[EA] = k k [k + k ][A] + k k k [A][P] + k k k [P][Q] b) The substrate is neutral and contains no acidic
1 7 4 5 1 4 6 4 6 8
or basic groups, and the maximum velocity is
[EXY] = k k k [A][B] + k k k [P][Q] + k k k [A][B][P] found to be independent of pH.
1 3 7 2 6 8 1 3 6
+k k k [B][P][Q] c) The substrate is an α-amino acid, and the
3 6 8
maximum velocity is found to be independent
[EQ] = k k [k + k ][Q] + k k k [A][B] + k k k [B][Q] of pH.
2 8 4 5 1 3 5 3 5 8
b) To obtain an expression for v the expression
f
for–d[ A ]/ dtmay be multiplied by [ E ] and
t
divided by [ E ] + [ EA ] + [ EXY ] + [ EQ ] = [ E ].
t
Then the above determinants may be substituted.
c) What is V and V ? HINT:
max,forward max,reverse
V is obtained when [P] = [Q] = 0 and
max,forward
[A] = [B] = ∞. What are K and K ? K is
mA mB mA
obtained when [P] = [Q] = 0, [B] = ∞, and v =
1/2V .
max,forward
d) With a knowledge of the kinetic parameters,
indicate how the eight rate constants may be
obtained if the total concentration of enzyme,
[E], is known.
t
14. Anticooperativity was observed in the plot of
velocity vs. substrate concentration for an enzyme.
Can this observation be explained by the Monod –
Wyman – Changeux model for oligomeric enzymes?
By the model of Koshland? Explain.

--- Page 507 ---

504 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
This electron micrograph of a thin section of pancreatic epithelial cells shows parts of two
secretory cells that are synthesizing proenzymes (zymogens). Nuclei (N) are seen at the top
center and lower right. Numerous ribosomes (barely seen here) line the many membranes of
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and are most abundant near lateral and basal (left) surfaces of
the cells. A few mitochondria (M) are present. The synthesized proteins move toward the apical
surfaces (a small piece is seen at upper right), passing through the Golgi region (G) and accumu-
lating in zymogen granules (Z) before secretion. From Porter, K. R. and Bonneville, M. A., Fine
N Structure of Cells and Tissues, Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia 1973. Courtesy of Mary Bonneville.
Contents
505 A. The Starting Materials Boxes
505 1. Digestion 513 Box 10-A An Early Labeling Experiment
507 2. Sources of Energy 517 Box 10-B Discovery of the Citric Acid Cycle
507 B. Catabolism and the Synthesis of ATP 524 Box 10-C Ubiquitin
507 1. Priming or Activation of Metabolites 528 Box 10-D Drawing Those Little Arrows
508 2. Interconversions of Sugar Phosphates
508 3. Glycolysis and Fermentation Tables
511 4. Pyruvate Dehydrogenase 526 Table 10-1 Types of Biochemical Reactions with
511 5. Beta Oxidation Ionic Mechanisms
512 6. The Electron Transport Chain, Oxidative
Phosphorylation
515 7. The Citric Acid Cycle
515 C. Biosynthesis
515 1. Reversing Catabolic Pathways
517 2. Photosynthesis
517 D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules
518 1. Folding and Maturation of Proteins
519 2. Transport of Proteins to Their
Destinations within a Cell
519 Signal sequences and translocation
520 Ticketing destinations
521 Vesicular transport and the Golgi system
521 3. Posttranslational Alterations
522 Proteolytic processing
522 Altered ends
523 4. Intracellular Degradation of Proteins
527 5. Turnover of Nucleic Acids
530 E. Classifying Enzymatic Reactions
531 References
533 Study Questions

--- Page 508 ---

505
10
An Introduction to Metabolism
Z
N
The first section of this book has dealt with the not only supply material for the synthesis of cellular
basic structures and with many of the complexities of constituents but also may be degraded to provide
the materials formed by living cells. In the next major energy. A characteristic of all cells is the ability simul-
section we will look at the chemical reactions that build taneously to synthesize thousands of complex proteins
and maintain a cell and that permit it to grow and to and other materials and, at the same time, to break
be responsive to external stimuli. These reactions are down (catabolize) the same types of compounds. Since
organized into metabolic sequences or pathways that cells both synthesize and catabolize most cellular com-
form a complex, branched, and interconnected network. ponents there is a continuous turnover of the very
It would be pointless to try to memorize all of them. structural components of which they are composed.
However, at this point it will be worthwhile to consider Metabolism encompasses all of these processes.
the significance of a few of the major sequences, which The most rapid catabolic reactions are usually
describe central pathways of metabolism. those that provide the cell’s energy. Organisms vary
Beginning in the nineteenth century, the investigation greatly in the materials used for food. Human beings,
of these pathways and of the associated enzymes has as well as many other organisms, break down carbo-
provided much of our knowledge about the chemistry hydrates, lipids, and proteins to obtain energy and
of living things. The protein products that are encoded starting materials for biosynthesis. In contrast, some
in the structural genes that direct these pathways make organisms use only one or a few simple organic com-
up a large fraction of the material in a cell. It will be pounds while autotrophs satisfy their needs entirely
well worth the reader’s effort to examine the chemistry with inorganic materials. Looking at all of the species
of these metabolic sequences in detail. Regulatory of living things we find an extraordinary range of
mechanisms that are applicable to them, and to other specialization in metabolism as well as in structure.
pathways, are described in Chapter 11 and chemical Nevertheless, there are many common features of
details of enzyme action are considered in Chapters metabolism. For example, most cells utilize glucose
12–16. Then, in Chapter 17, the chemical logic of the or a close relative as a source of biosynthetic interme-
reaction sequences is considered in more detail. diates. Pathways for synthesis of nucleic acids and
proteins are similar in all species. Even the control
of growth and development depends upon proteins
A. The Starting Materials whose structures are often conserved throughout the
living world.
All cells of all organisms take in chemical starting
materials and give off chemical products. They all
have a source of energy and generate heat during their 1. Digestion
metabolism. They all synthesize complex organic
substances and maintain a high degree of organization, We humans must digest most foods before we can
that is, a state of relatively low entropy. The materials utilize them. The same is true for most bacteria, which
taken up by cells are often organic compounds which need amino acids generated by the breakdown of

--- Page 509 ---

506 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
Other sugars,
polysaccharides
ATP, CO2
3-Phosphoglycerate
COO–
O C
CH3
Pyruvate
NADH CO2
H COO–
C L-Alanine
HO CH3
L-lactate
Aspartic acid
Pyrimidines
smota
H
Lipids
O
CH2 CH2 C
R CH2 CH2 S CoA
Coenzyme A derivatives of fatty acids
O
CO2
H3C
C
S CoA
Acetyl-CoA
Photosynthesis.
Energy from light
hυ
noitadixo
β
Glucose
ATP HO
2 Glycogen
Glucose
6-phosphate
H
HO C O
C
H CH2 O P
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
O2 H2O
many
steps
ATP
and
NADPH
H2O O2 O
H2C
COO–
C COO– OH
C
H2C COO–
COO– H2C
Oxaloacetate
COO–
Citrate
Citric acid cycle
sisylocylG
O P
HO O
HO
OH
OH
H atoms
removed from
substrates in
oxidation steps;
attached to
carriers such as
NADH, NADPH,
FADH2
ATP Electron
generated transport
from chain ADP + Pi
HO COO–
C
H CH2 O P
O
P represents the phospho group P O–
OH CO2
CO2
Figure 10-1 An overall view of some metabolic sequences. Several major pathways of catabolism are indicated by heavy lines. The
glycolysis pathway, leading to pyruvate and lactate, starts at the top left, while the β oxidation pathway of fatty acids is on the right.
Biosynthetic routes are shown in green lines. A few of the points of synthesis and utilization of ATP are indicated by the lighter green
lines. Some of the oxidation–reduction reactions that produce or utilize the reduced hydrogen carriers NADH, NADPH, and FADH are
2
also indicated. The citric acid cycle, a major supplier of these molecules, is shown at the bottom right, while photosynthesis, the source of
reduced hydrogen carriers in green plants, and the source of nearly all energy for life, is shown at the bottom left.

--- Page 510 ---

B. Catabolism and the Synthesis of ATP 507
proteins. Our digestive enzymes, which act on carbo- used to metabolize large amounts of food and to produce
hydrates, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, are syn- large amounts of ATP. Because they are also related to
thesized by cells in the salivary glands, stomach, biosynthetic pathways they have a central importance
pancreas, and intestinal lining. The properties of these in virtually all organisms.
enzymes are described in Chapter 12. Bacteria secrete
digestive enzymes into their surroundings. Although
most green plants have no need to digest foods, they 1. Priming or Activation of Metabolites
too have enzymes closely related to our digestive
enzymes. These enzymes break bonds in proteins or After a polymeric nutrient is digested and the
carbohydrate polymers to allow expansion of leaves monomeric products are absorbed into a cell, an
and stems, ripening of fruits, and other physical changes. energy-requiring priming reaction is usually required.
All cells carry out processing or maturation of their For example, the hydrolysis of fats (whether in the
newly synthesized polymers. This often involves the gut or within cells) produces free fatty acids. Before
cutting off of one or more pieces of a protein, poly- undergoing further metabolism, these fatty acids are
saccharide, or nucleic acid. The processing enzymes combined with the thiol compound coenzyme A to
are also relatives of digestive enzymes. formfattyacyl-CoA derivatives. This requires a
thermodynamically unfavorable reaction that necessi-
tates the “expenditure” of ATP, that is, its hydrolysis
2. Sources of Energy to AMP and inorganic pyrophosphate (PP). Likewise,
i
glucose, when taken into cells, is converted into the
All cells require a source of chemical energy. This phosphate ester glucose 6-phosphate (glucose-6-P),
is provided to a large extent by ATP (Chapter 6), whose again with an associated cleavage of ATP. The major
hydrolysis can be coupled to reactions of synthesis, to metabolic pathways often start with one of these two sub-
transport across membranes, and to other endergonic stances: a fatty acyl-CoA derivative or glucose 6-phosphate.
processes. For this reason, all cells have active path- The structures of both are given at the top of Fig. 10-1,
ways for the synthesis of ATP. Biosynthesis often also which is designed to provide an overall view of meta-
involveschemical reduction of intermediates; therefore, bolism.
cells must have a means of generating suitable reduc- The phospho group of glucose-6-P is not very
tants. The reagent of choice is often the hydrogen- reactive but it provides a “handle” which helps enzymes
carrying coenzyme NADPH. It is a phosphorylated form to recognize and to hold onto this glucose derivative.
of NADH, a derivative of the vitamin nicotinamide Likewise, the coenzyme A molecule, whose complete
(Box 15-A), whose structure follows. Reduction of structure is given in Chapter 14, provides a large and
metabolic intermediates by NADPH provides a second complex handle for enzymes. However, from a chemical
mechanism by which chemical energy is harnessed for viewpoint, the formation of the thioester linkage of a
biosynthesis. A third source of energy, which is con- fatty acid with the –SH group of coenzyme A in the
sidered in Chapter 18, is the gradient of hydrogen ions acyl-CoA is more important. This alters the electronic
that is set up across cell membranes by oxidative or structure of the fatty acid molecule, “activating” it
photochemical processes. toward the reactions that it must undergo subsequently.
Thus, priming reactions often provide
chemical changes essential to the mecha-
NH 2 The hydrogen H H O nisms of subsequent reactions.
is carried here
C Activation of a carboxylic acid by
N
N NH 2 formation of an acyl-CoA derivative (Eq.
O O O 10-1) is of special importance because of
N N CH 2 P P CH 2 N its widespread use by all organisms. The
OH HO O O– O O– O basic reaction occurs by two steps. The
O first (Eq. 10-1, step a) is a displacement
This—OH is converted reaction on the phosphorus atom of ATP
to—OPO2– in NADPH OH OH
3 to form an acyl adenylate, a mixed anhy-
The reduced coenzyme NADH
dride of the carboxylic acid and a substi-
tuted phosphoric acid. Such mixed anhy-
dride intermediates, or acyl phosphates,
B. Catabolism and the Synthesis of ATP are central to much of cellular energy metabolism
becausethey preserve the high group-transfer potential
The catabolic sequences by which cells obtain of a phospho group of ATP (Chapter 6) while imparting
energy often appear dominant. For animals, fungi, a high group-transfer potential to the acyl group. This
and nonphotosynthetic bacteria these pathways are allows the acyl group to be transferred in step b

--- Page 511 ---

508 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
– the formation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. The
O
– first step (Fig. 10-2, step a) is the transfer of the phospho
O P O Mg2+ group from ATP to the 6 position of glucose. Step b
is the reversible opening of the sugar ring and step c
O O–
P NH 2 the isomerization of an aldose to a ketose. Step d is a
O second transfer of a phospho group from ATP, another
O
O N N priming reaction that provides the second of the phos-
P phate handles for the two molecules of triose phosphate
–
O that are formed. Step e is an aldol cleavage which breaks
O CH 2 N N
O the C–C bond in the center of the ketose chain, while
O
R C stepf is another sugar isomerization that is chemically
– ATP similar to the one in step c.
O
We see that in the six steps shown in Fig. 10-2 for
Fatty acid (as anion)
HO OH conversion of glucose to two molecules of glyceralde-
hyde 3-phosphate, there are only four kinds of reac-
tion: (1) phospho transfer from ATP; (2) opening of a
a HO
O – O O PP i c 2 2P i sugar ring; (3) aldose-ketose isomerization; and (4)
aldol cleavage. These types of reactions, which are
P
R C O described in more detail in Chapters 12 and 13, occur
O CH 2 Adenine in many places in metabolism. As is indicated in Fig.
O
CoA S– 10-2, glucose 6-phosphate can also be generated from
Coenzyme A anion glycogen or starch. The first step (Fig. 10-2, step g) is
phosphorolysis, cleavage by an inorganic phosphate
ion. This leads directly to glucose 1-phosphate. The
HO OH
latter is isomerized by a phospho transfer process
Acyl adenylate
(steph).
b d
AMP ADP
3. Glycolysis and Fermentation
O ATP ADP
A major route of breakdown of carbohydrates
R C S CoA
is the Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas pathway, often
Acyl-coenzyme A (10-1)
referred to simply as glycolysis. It is indicated on
the left side of Fig. 10-1 and in more detail in Figs.
of Eq. 10-1 onto the sulfur atom of coenzyme A to form 10-2 and 10-3. The pathway begins with the reactions
an acyl-coenzyme A in which the high group transfer of Fig. 10-2, with either free glucose or glycogen as
potential of the acyl group is conserved (see Table 6-6). starting materials. Its end products may be reduced
Two additional steps are linked to this sequence. In materials such as lactic acid or ethanol, which are
stepc the inorganic pyrophosphate that is displaced in formed under anaerobic conditions (Fig. 10-3). How-
stepa is hydrolyzed to two molecules of HPO 2– (P), ever, under aerobic conditions the product is acetyl-
4 i
and in step d the AMP formed is phosphorylated by coenzyme A, whose acetyl group can then be oxidized
ATP to form ADP. The overall sequence of Eq. 10-1 to carbon dioxide and water in the citric acid cycle.
leads to hydrolysis of two molecules of ATP to ADP + After the sugar chain is cleaved in the glycolysis
P. In other words, two molecules of ATP are spent in sequence, the two resultant molecules of glyceraldehyde
i
activating a carboxylic acid by conversion to an acyl- 3-phosphate are oxidized to 3-phosphoglycerate (Fig.
coenzyme A. 10-3, steps a,b). The oxidant is the hydrogen carrier
NAD+, the oxidized form of NADH. Cells frequently
use NAD+ to dehydrogenate alcohols to aldehydes or
2. Interconversions of Sugar Phosphates ketones, with one atom of hydrogen and an electron
from the alcohol becoming attached to the NAD+ to
The strategy employed by most cells in the catabo- give NADH and the other hydrogen being released as
lism of several 6-carbon sugars is to convert them to H+ (Eq. 10-2).
glucose 6-phosphate and, in the several steps outlined The oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is
in Fig. 10-2, to cleave this hexose phosphate to two considerably more complex. The oxidation of an
equivalent molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. aldehyde to a carboxylic acid is a strongly exergonic
This triose phosphate can then be metabolized further. process and the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phos-
Notice the chemical nature of the reactions involved in phate by cells is almost always coupled to the synthesis

--- Page 512 ---

B. Catabolism and the Synthesis of ATP 509
HOCH 2 HO CH 2
O O
HO HO
g HO
HO OH OH
Glucose OH HOCH 2 O P i nonreducing end unit O
ATP P HO of glycogen
a i
ADP H 2 O h HO OH g sy ly n c t o h g a e se n UDP
P O CH
2 O Glucose OP UDP-glucose
HO 1-phosphate
HO
OH
UTP
Glucose 6-phosphate OH PP i
α-pyranose ring form HO
2
b 2P i
H O
C CHOH CHOP
2 2
d
H C OH C O ATP ADP C O
HO C H c HO C H HO C H
H C OH H C OH H C OH
H C OH H C OH P HO H C OH
i 2
CHO P CHO P CHO P
2 2 2
Glucose Fructose Fructose
6-phosphate 6-phosphate 1,6-biphosphate
(open chain)
e
H O
C CH 2 OH
f
Photosynthesis H C OH C O
CH 2 O P CH 2 O P
Glyceraldehyde Dihydroxyacetone
3-phosphate phosphate
Glycolysis Gluconeogenesis
Further Lipids
metabolism
(see Fig. 10-3)
Figure 10-2 The interconversion of glucose, glycogen, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate in the pathways of glycolysis,
gluconeogenesis, and glycogen synthesis. Pathways of catabolism are indicated with black lines and those of biosynthesis
with green lines.
of ATP. The importance of this coupling can be under- a reactant and the product released by the enzyme is
stood by the fact that for many organisms living by anae- 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. This compound, which has
robic fermentation reactions, this one oxidation step provides been formed by the oxidative process, is an anhydride
the sole source of ATP. It is the mechanism for coupling of phosphoric acid with 3-phosphoglyceric acid. The
this oxidation to synthesis of ATP that accounts for the phospho group of such acylphosphates, like that of
complexity of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehy- ATP, has a high group transfer potential and can be
drogenase reaction, whose chemistry is presented in transferred to ADP to generate ATP (Fig. 10-3, step b).
detail in Chapter 15. As is indicated in the simplified Since each glucose molecule is cleaved to two mole-
version of Fig. 10-3 (step a) inorganic phosphate (P) is cules of triose phosphate, two molecules of ATP are
i

--- Page 513 ---

510 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
generated in this process by the fermentation of one an isomerization by means of a phosphotransferase
molecule of glucose. This is enough for a bacterium to (mutase reaction, step c) to form 2-phosphoglycerate
live on if it ferments enough sugar. which then loses water in an elimination reaction (step d).
Further metabolism of 3-phosphoglycerate involves Elimination of a hydroxyl group in a β position relative
to a carboxyl group together with an
O H H O α-proton is another very frequently
used type of metabolic reaction. In
C C
this case the product, phosphoenol-
H NH2 NH2
pyruvate (PEP), is a unique and
R C OH + R C O + + H+ important metabolite. It is a key
N+ N
intermediate in the biosynthesis of
R' R'
aromatic amino acids and in numer-
NAD+ NADH ous other biosynthetic sequences.
(partial structure) (10-2) In the Embden–Meyerhof–
Parnas pathway PEP transfers its
phospho group to ADP (step e) to
generate ATP and pyruvate. The
Glucose Glycogen latter is shown enclosed in brackets
ATP
P in Fig. 10-3 as the enolic form, which,
i
ADP
tautomerizes to the oxo form (step f).
Glucose–6–P The fact that the oxo form of pyru-
ATP vate is much more stable than the
ADP enol gives the phospho group of
O H phosphoenolpyruvate its high group
C COO– transfer potential. The metabolic
2 H C OH significance of this step is that the
2 HO C H CH 2 OH
CHO–P 2 phosphate handles of the glycolytic
2
CH CH
Glyceraldehyde 3 3 intermediates, which were initially
3-phosphate L-Lactate Ethanol
transferred on from ATP, are now
2 NAD+
2P i returned to ADP with the regenera-
h j
tion of an equivalent amount of ATP.
a 2 NADH + 2 H+ The product of this metabolic
2 CO 2 H O sequence,pyruvate, is a metabolite
O O–P 2 C
C COO– i CH of central importance. Its fate depends
3 upon the conditions within a cell
2 H C HO 2 C O Thiamine Acetaldehyde
diphosphate and upon the type of cell. When
CH 2 O–P CH 3 g oxygen is plentiful pyruvate is
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate Pyruvate
O usually converted to acetyl-coenzyme
2 ADP
b f 2 CO 2 2 CH 3 C SCoA A, but under anaerobic conditions
2 ATP it may be reduced by NADH + H+
Acetyl-CoA
–
OO O – to the alcohol lactic acid (Fig. 10-3,
COO
CC
steph). This reduction exactly
2 H C OH 2 C OH Further metabolism balances the previous oxidation
CH with generation of
CH 2 O–P 2 about 36 ATP per step, that is, the oxidation of glycer-
glucose. Three are
3-Phosphoglycerate 2 ATP from reoxidation of aldehyde 3-phosphate to 3-phospho-
c e NADH formed in glycerate (steps a and b). With a
2 ADP stepa.
O O– balanced sequence of an oxidation
C COO – reaction, followed by a reduction
2 H C O P 2 C O–P reaction, glucose can be converted
d
to lactate in the absence of oxygen,
CH 2 OH CH 2
afermentation process. The lactic
2-Phosphoglycerate 2 HO Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)
2 acid fermentation occurs not only in
certain bacteria but also in our own
muscles under conditions of extremely
Figure 10-3 Coupling of the reactions of glycolysis with formation of lactic
vigorous exercise. It also occurs
acid and ethanol in fermentations. Steps a to g describe the Embden–
continuously in some tissues, e.g., the
Meyerhof–Parnas pathway. Generation of 2 ATP in step b can provide all of
transparent lens and cornea of the eye.
the cell’s energy.

--- Page 514 ---

B. Catabolism and the Synthesis of ATP 511
In the well-known fermentation of sugar to etha- O
nol by yeast, the pyruvate generated by glycolysis is
–
first decarboxylated to acetaldehyde (Fig. 10-3, step i).
H3C C COO
NAD +
Pyruvate
This decarboxylation of a 2-oxo acid is chemically
NADH + H +
difficult and the enzyme catalyzing it makes use of a CoA—SH
special reagent known as a coenzyme. For this type
of reaction, the coenzyme is the diphosphate (pyro-
CO2 O
phosphate) ester of thiamin (vitamin B
1
). Its mode of H3C C S CoA
action is discussed in Chapter 14. It is usually needed Acetyl-CoA (10-6)
when a 2-oxo acid is decarboxylated. The alcoholic
fermentation by yeast is completed by reduction of
acetaldehyde to ethanol (Fig. 10-3, step j), again using compound can accept two electrons (plus two protons)
the NADH produced in the oxidation of glyceralde- to form FADH . However, it sometimes serves as a
2
hyde 3-phosphate. The conversion of glucose to lactic one-electron carrier.
acid or to ethanol and CO are just two of many fer- Acetyl-CoA is another major metabolic intermediate.
2
mentation reactions, most of which are carried out by
bacteria and which are dealt with further in Chapter
17. An important requirement is that the Gibbs energy NH2 O
c c h ie a n n t g ly e n fo e r g a th ti e v e o v th er a a t l A l f T e P rm sy e n n t t h a e ti s o i n s c r a e n ac b ti e o c n o b u e p s le u d ff t i- o N N –O P O C H2
O O (HO—C—H)3
it. Thus, using data from Table 6-4: N N
OH HO
CH2
O
P
O–
CH2
O
H3C N N O
C H O (glucose) → 2 C H O (lactate) + 2H+
∆G 6 ’ ( 1 p 2 H 6 7) = –196 kJ/mo 3 l (– 5 46 3 .8 kcal/mol) (10-3) H3C N N H
O
The coenzyme flavin adenine diphosphate (FAD)
2ADP3– + 2P2–+H+→ H O + ATP4–
i 2
∆G’ (pH 7) = +69 kJ/mol (10-4)
It is an acyl-CoA of the type mentioned in Section 1
and can also be formed from acetate, ATP, and coen-
Sum: C H O + 2ADP3– + 2P2–→ zyme A. Although the human diet contains some acetic
6 12 6 i
H O + 2 C H O +2H+ + 2 ATP4– acid, the two major sources of acetyl-CoA in our bodies
2 3 5 3
∆G’ (pH 7) = –127 kJ/mol (10-5) are the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate (Eq. 10-6)
and the breakdown of fatty acid chains. Let us consider
the latter process before examining the further metab-
A requirement for all fermentations is the existence olism of acetyl-CoA.
of a mechanism for coupling ATP synthesis to the
fermentation reactions. In the lactic acid and ethanol
fermentations this coupling mechanism consists of the 5. Beta Oxidation
formation of the intermediate 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
by the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase Whether fatty acids are oxidized to obtain energy
(Fig. 10-3, step a). This intermediate contains parts or are utilized for biosynthesis, they are first converted
of both the products ATP and lactate or ethanol. to their acyl-CoA forms and are then cleaved to the
two-carbon units represented by the acetyl groups of
acetyl-CoA. The beta oxidation sequence, by which
4. Pyruvate Dehydrogenase this occurs, is represented by the solid vertical arrow
on the right side of Fig. 10-1 and is shown in greater
In most organisms undergoing aerobic metabolism, detail in Fig. 10-4. We see from the latter figure that
pyruvate is oxidized to acetyl-CoA in a complex process there are two dehydrogenation steps. The first (step b)
involving its decarboxylation (Eq. 10-6). This oxidative removes hydrogen atoms from the α- and β-carbon
decarboxylation, like the decarboxylation of pyruvate atoms to produce a transα,β unsaturated fatty acyl-CoA
to acetaldehyde, requires thiamin diphosphate. In (Enoyl-CoA). The hydrogen acceptor is FAD. It is
addition, an array of other catalysts participate in the needed because this reaction requires a more powerful
process (see Fig. 15-15). Among these are the electron oxidant than does the dehydrogenation of an alcohol,
carrierflavin adenine diphosphate (FAD), which is for which NAD+ is adequate. Addition of water to the
derived from the vitamin riboflavin. Like NAD+, this double bond of the unsaturated acyl-CoA (step c)

--- Page 515 ---

512 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
R—CH—CH—COO
2 2
Fatty acid
CoASH ATP
“Activation” a Fatty acyl-CoA synthetases
of a fatty acid
AMP + PP
i
H
β H
R C α O
C C
H S CoA
H
“Recycle”
FAD
shortened
Acyl-CoA Acyl dehydrogenase b
FADH
2
H
R C O
R' CH 2 O
trans C C
CH C 2
H S CoA
SCoA
HO
2
c
Enoyl hydratase
H
OH
(10-7)
R C O
CH C
2
S CoA
NAD
3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA
d dehydrogenase
H + NADH
β O
R C O
CH C
CoA S 2
H S CoA
e
O
CH 3 C
S CoA
Figure 10-4 Reactions of fatty acid activation and of
breakdown by β oxidation.
noitadixo
ateB
generates an alcohol which is then dehydrogenated new acyl-CoA with a shortened chain. The latter is
(stepd) by NAD+ to form a β-oxoacyl-CoA. This is “recycled” by passage through the β oxidation sequence
cleaved (step e) by a reaction (thiolysis) with another repeatedly until the chain is shortened to a 2- or 3-carbon
molecule of coenzyme A to form acetyl-CoA and a fragment, acetyl-CoA, or propionyl-CoA. Since most
dietary fatty acids contain an even number of carbon
atoms, acetyl-CoA is the predominant product.
The beta oxidation of fatty acids, like the dehydro-
– genation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, takes place within
the inner matrix of the mitochondria in eukaryotic
organisms. The reduced hydrogen carriers FADH
2
and NADH transfer their electrons to other carriers
located within the inner membrane of the mitochon-
dria. In bacteria the corresponding reactions occur
with electron carriers present in the plasma membrane.
Both FAD and NAD+ are regenerated in this way and
are able to again accept hydrogen from the beta oxida-
tion reactions. This transfer of hydrogen atoms from
substrates to hydrogen carriers is typical of biological
oxidation processes.
Acyl-CoA
6. The Electron Transport Chain, Oxidative
Phosphorylation
Reoxidation of the reduced carriers NADH and
FADH actually involves a sequence of electron carriers,
2
theelectron transport chain, whose function is
indicated below the circle near the center of Fig. 10-1.
Enoyl-CoA
The oxidation of reduced NADH by O (Eq. 10-7) is a
2
highly exergonic process and is accompanied by the
NADH + H+ + 1/2 O → NAD+ + H O
2 2
∆G’ (pH 7) = –219 kJ/mol
generation of about three molecules of ATP (from
L-3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA
ADP and inorganic phosphate). This process, termed
+
oxidative phosphorylation, is the principal source of
usable energy (in the form of ATP) provided by break-
+ down of both carbohydrates and fats in the human
body.
The mechanism of oxidation of NADH in the elec-
tron transport chain appears to occur by transfer of a
hydrogen atom together with two electrons (a hydride
ion H–). Oxidation of FADH to FAD might occur by
3-Oxo-acyl-CoA 2
transfer of two hydrogen atoms or by transfer of H– +
(cid:1)Cleavage H+. However, it is useful to talk about all of these
by thiolysis
compounds as electron carriers with the under-
standing that movement of one or both of the electrons
may be accompanied by transfer of H+. The electron
transport complex is pictured in a very simplified
form in Fig. 10-5.
Acetyl-CoA
The electrons donated from NADH or other reduc-
tants, upon entering this complex, travel from one
carrier to the next, with each carrier being a somewhat
more powerful oxidant than the previous one. The

--- Page 516 ---

B. Catabolism and the Synthesis of ATP 513
final carrier, known as cytochrome aa or
FADH 3
bound 2 to cytochrome oxidase, reacts with molecular
soluble
oxygen. Each molecule of O , together with
enzymes 2
4 H+, is converted to two molecules of water.
Mitochondrial
matrix This stoichiometry requires that two mole-
Electron-
cules of NADH pass four electrons down the
transferring
NADH+H+ flavoprotein Succinate chain for each O reduced.
2
The chemical structures of the components
of the mitochondrial electron transport chain
Flavin 1 Flavin 2 Flavin 3
Mitochondrial are varied but fall into several distinct classes.
inner membrane
(FeS) (FeS) Most are proteins but these proteins always
2HO contain special coenzymes or prosthetic
2
(FeS) Q–Cytb (FeS) Cytc Cytc CuCytaa groups able to engage in oxidation–reduction
2 3
O reactions. At the substrate end of the chain
2
NADH passes a hydrogen atom together
Cytosol with its bonding electron pair to a riboflavin-
O
2
containing coenzyme riboflavin 5'-phosphate
(FMN), which is tightly bound into a protein
(designated Flavin 1 in Fig. 10-5). Similar
Figure 10-5 An abbreviated version of the electron transport
flavoproteins, Flavin 2, and Flavin 3, act
chain of mitochondria. Four electrons reduce O to 2 HO. For
2 2 as oxidants for FADH arising during beta
details see Figs. 18-5 and 18-6. 2
BOX 10-A AN EARLY LABELING EXPERIMENT
In 1904, long before the advent of radioactive even number of carbon atoms, while the benzoic
tracers, Knoop synthesized fatty acids labeled by acid was formed from those with an odd number.
chemical attachment of a benzene ring at the end From these experimental results, Knoop deduced
opposite the carboxyl group. He prepared these thatfatty acid degradation occurs two carbon atoms at a
compounds with both odd and even numbers of time and proposed his famous (cid:1) oxidation theory.
carbon atoms in straight chains and fed them to Later experiments using isotopic labeling with
13 a
dogs. From the dogs’ urine he isolated hippuric C verified Knoop’s proposals, but study of isolated
acid and phenylaceturic acid, which are the amides enzymes was not possible until after the discovery
of glycine with benzoic acid and phenylacetic acid, of coenzyme A in 1950. Then, studies of fatty acid
respectively. Knoop showed that the phenylacetic oxidation by extracts from isolated mitochondria
b
acid was produced from those fatty acids with an established the details of the pathway.
O n is O O
even
CH C CH C CH C
2 2 2
n OH OH N CH 2 COOH
H
Phenylacetic acid
glycine
Phenylaceturic acid
n is
odd
O O
C C
OH N CH COOH
2
H
Benzoic acid
Hippuric acid
a Weinhouse, S. (1995) FASEB J.9, 820–821
b Quastel, J. H. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 117–118

--- Page 517 ---

514 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
oxidation and oxidation of succinate, whose signifi- associated with a specific protein, is the isoprenoid
cance to metabolism is discussed in the next section. quinoneubiquinone or coenzyme Q (Q in Fig. 10-5).
A significant difference between NADH and Ubiquinone apparently serves as a common carrier,
FADH is that the former diffuses freely between the collecting electrons from three or more separate input
2
dehydrogenases that transfer hydrogen to it and the ends of the chain and directing them along a single
flavoprotein NADH dehydrogenase (Flavin 1) that pathway to O .
2
reoxidizes it. However, FAD, whether in its oxidized The final group of mitochondrial redox components
state or as FADH , stays tightly bound to proteins at are one-electron carriers, small proteins (cytochromes)
2
all times. Only hydrogen atoms or electrons are trans- that contain iron in the form of the porphyrin complex
ferred into or out of these proteins. During beta oxida- known as heme. These carriers, which are discussed
tion the FADH generated remains tied to the fatty acyl- in Chapter 16, exist as several chemically distinct
2
CoA dehydrogenase protein. However, the two hydrogen types:a,b, and c. Two or more components of each
atoms of this FADH are transferred to another molecule type are present in mitochondria. The complex cyto-
2
of FAD, which is bound to an electron-transferring chrome aa deserves special comment. Although cyto-
3
flavoprotein. This protein carries electrons one at a chromes are single-electron carriers, the cytochrome aa
3
time, as FADH, by diffusion to the inner surface of the complex must deliver four electrons to a single O
2
inner mitochondrial membrane. There it transfers the molecule. This may explain why the monomeric complex
hydrogen atoms that it carries to the flavoprotein desig- contains two hemes and two copper atoms which are
nated Flavin 2 in Fig. 10-5. The electron-transferring also able to undergo redox reactions.1,2
flavoprotein can also be viewed as a carrier of single Although the components of the electron transport
electrons, each accompanied by H+. chain have been studied intensively, there is still some
A second group of electron carriers in mitochon- mystery associated with the process by which ATP
drial membranes are the iron–sulfur[Fe–S]clusters synthesis is coupled to electron transport (oxidative
which are also bound to proteins. Iron–sulfur proteins phosphorylation). A theory originally proposed by
release Fe3+ or Fe2+ plus H S when acidified. The Mitchell3 and now generally accepted4,5 is that passage
2
“inorganic clusters” bound into the proteins have of electrons through the chain “pumps” protons from
characteristic compositions such as Fe S and Fe S . the inside to the outside of the tight inner mitochon-
2 2 4 4
The sulfur atoms of the clusters can be regarded as drial membrane. As a result, protons accumulate
sulfide ions bound to the iron ions. The iron atoms along the outside of this membrane, as do negative
are also attached to other sulfur atoms from cysteine counterions along the inside. The membrane becomes
side chains from the proteins. The Fe–S proteins are charged like a miniature electrical condenser. The
often tightly associated with other components of the synthesis of ATP takes place in the small knoblike ATP
electron transport chain. For example, the flavoproteins synthase which is partially embedded in the same
Flavin 1, Flavin 2, and Flavin 3 shown in Fig. 10-5 all membranes. The Gibbs energy for the formation of
contain Fe–S clusters as does the Q-cytochrome b ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate is apparently
complex. All of these Fe–S clusters seem to be one- supplied by the flow of protons back to the inside of
electron carriers. the membrane through the ATP synthase. Possible
A third hydrogen carrier of mitochondrial mem-
branes, and the only one that is not unequivocally
N
Fe S
2 2
O
N
O
N Fe N
N N
Fe S N O
4 4
O
N
S
Fe
S from cysteine
Iron in a heme in a btype cytochrome

--- Page 518 ---

C. Biosynthesis 515
ways in which this may occur as well as many other
1. Reversing Catabolic Pathways
aspects of electron transport are dealt with in Chapter 18.
Breakdown of carbohydrates is thermodynamically
spontaneous. Therefore, cells cannot simply use catabolic
7. The Citric Acid Cycle
pathways operating in reverse without finding ways of
coupling the cleavage of ATP to synthesis. In the formation
The 2-carbon acetyl units removed from fatty acid
of glucose from pyruvate in the liver, a process known
chains or generated from sugars by glycolysis and the
asgluconeogenesis, there are three distinct points
action of pyruvate dehydrogenase must be completely
at which the enzymes used differ from those used in
oxidized to carbon dioxide to provide cells with the
catabolism: (1) Pyruvate is converted to phosphoenol-
maximum amount of energy. The oxidation of an acetyl
pyruvate by a mechanism utilizing more than one
group is a difficult chemical process, and probably for
molecule of ATP, a pathway that is discussed in detail
this reason nature has devised an elegant catalytic
in Chapter 17; (2) as is shown in Fig. 10-2, fructose
cycle, the citric acid cycle, which is indicated at the
1,6-bisphosphate is hydrolyzed to fructose 6-phosphate
lower right in Fig. 10-1 and is shown in detail in Fig.
and inorganic phosphate by a phosphatase rather
10-6. The cycle begins when the 4-carbon oxaloacetate
than through reversal of step d, which would form
(also spelled oxalacetate) is condensed with an acetyl
ATP; and (3) glucose-6-phosphate is hydrolyzed by a
group of acetyl-CoA to form the 6-carbon citrate.
phosphatase rather than following the reverse of step
Then, in the remaining reactions of the cycle, two
a in Fig. 10-2. Furthermore, glycogen is synthesized
carbon atoms are removed as CO and oxaloacetate
2 from glucose 6-phosphate, not by reversal of the phos-
is regenerated. Several oxidation steps are involved,
phorylase reaction (Fig. 10-2, step g), but via a new
each of which feeds additional reducingequivalents
intermediate,uridinediphosphate glucose (UDPG),
(i.e., hydrogen atoms removed from substrates) into
whose formation involves cleavage of UTP. The latter
the pool of hydrogen carriers and allows for more
is generated by phospho transfer from ATP. Inorganic
synthesis of ATP via the electron transport chain. The
pyrophosphate (PP) is a product of UDPG formation
importance of this pathway to an organism can be i
and is removed by hydrolytic cleavage to two molecules
understood from the fact that when glucose is oxidized
of inorganic phosphate by the enzyme pyrophosphatase.
completely to CO and water via the citric acid cycle,
2 This reaction helps to make the biosynthesis thermo-
about 38 molecules of ATP are formed, 19 times as
dynamically spontaneous by removing one of the
much as by fermentation.
reaction products.
Although oxaloacetate is regenerated and there-
fore not consumed during the operation of the citric
acid cycle, it also enters other metabolic pathways. O OH
HO OH
To replace losses, oxaloacetate can be synthesized from
pyruvate and CO 2 in a reaction that uses ATP as an H N O CH 2 OH
energy source. This is indicated by the heavy gray line
O O O
leading downward to the right from pyruvate in Fig. O N CH 2 P P
10-1 and at the top center of Fig. 10-6. This reaction OH HO O O– O O–
depends upon yet another coenzyme, a bound form
O
of the vitamin biotin. Pyruvate is formed from break-
Uridine diphosphate glucose (UDPG)
down of carbohydrates such as glucose, and the need
for oxaloacetate in the citric acid cycle makes the oxida-
tion of fats in the human body dependent on the con-
A similar situation exists in the case of fatty acid
current metabolism of carbohydrates.
synthesis, which proceeds from acetyl-CoA and reverses
fatty acid breakdown. However, both carbon dioxide
and ATP, a source of energy, are needed in the synthetic
C. Biosynthesis
pathway. Furthermore, while oxidation of fatty acids
requires NAD+ as one of the oxidants, and generates
At the same time that cells break down foodstuffs
NADH, the biosynthetic process often requires the
to obtain energy, they are continuously creating new
related NADPH. These patterns seen in biosynthesis
materials. The green lines in Fig. 10-1 indicate some
of sugars and fatty acids are typical. Synthetic reactions
pathways by which such biosynthesis takes place.
resemble the catabolic sequences in reverse, but distinct
Examining the left side of the figure, we see that either
differences are evident. These can usually be related to
pyruvate or 3-phosphoglycerate can be converted back
the requirement for energy and often also to control
to glucose 6-phosphate and that the latter can be used
mechanisms.
to synthesize glycogen or other sugars or polysaccha-
rides.

--- Page 519 ---

516 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
COO – Oxidative CO
From decarboxylation 2
c
m
a
e
rb
ta
o
b
h
o
y
l
d
is
r
m
ate O C
Thiamin diphosphate
NAD+ β Oxidation
CH of fatty acids
3
Pyruvate
CO
2 O
ATP, Biotin *
Synthesis of regenerating CH C
3
substrate oxaloacetate Pyruvate
S CoA
carboxylase
Acetyl-CoA
H † COO – H † COO –
i H
H C C
CoASH
h C H C
– OOC OH – OOC O a H † COO –
H COO – † Malate Oxaloacetate H C
HO
2
C
–
C COO
C
HC OH
2
–
OOC H
Fumarate
NAD+
C
*
OO
–
†
H OH
g Citrate b
H COO –
* –
COO
C
HC
FAD§ The oxidants
2 used in the four
dehydrogenation C
CH 2 steps are indicated. HC COO –
– * Their reduced forms are 2
OOC reoxidized by the electron
Succinate transport system to C * OO –
provide energy
cis-Aconitate
(ATP) for
CoASH
cell use.
GTP c H 2 O
f GDP NAD+ N (N A A D D + P+) HO COO –
P H C
i
O S CoA
–
CO C COO
C 2
CO 2 H 2 C H
CH 2 O COO – C * OO –
H 2 C C O COO – d threo-Ds -Isocitrate
C * OO – e C (2R-3S-isocitrate)
CH
Succinyl-CoA CoASH 2
–
HC C COO
2 d’
Oxidative HC H
decarboxylation * – 2
COO
* –
2-oxoglutarate COO
Oxalosuccinate
Figure 10-6 Reactions of the citric acid cycle (Krebs’ tricarboxylic acid cycle). Asterisks designate positions of isotopic label
from entrance of carboxyl-labeled acetate into the cycle. Note that it is not the two carbon atoms from acetyl-CoA that are
immediately removed as CO but two atoms from oxaloacetate. Only after several turns of the cycle are the carbon atoms of
2
the acetyl-CoA completely converted to CO. Nevertheless, the cycle can properly be regarded as a mechanism of oxidation of
2
acetyl groups to CO. Green daggers (†) designate the position of 2H introduced into malate as 2H+ from the medium. FAD§
2
designates covalently bound 8-histidyl-FAD (see Chapter 15).

--- Page 520 ---

D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules 517
BOX 10-B DISCOVERY OF THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE (KREBS’ TRICARBOXYLIC ACID CYCLE)
One of the first persons to study the oxidation in 1940 by the observation that malonate, a close
of organic compounds by animal tissues was T. structural analog and competitive inhibitor of succi-
Thunberg, who between 1911 and 1920 discovered nate, in concentrations as low as 0.01 M blocked the
about 40 organic compounds that could be oxidized respiration of tissues by stopping the oxidation of
by animal tissues. Salts of succinate, fumarate, succinate to fumarate.c
malate, and citrate were oxidized the fastest. Well
aware of Knoop’sβ oxidation theory, Thunberg – OOC—CH —COO –
2
proposed a cyclic mechanism for oxidation of acetate. Malonate
Two molecules of this two-carbon compound were
supposed to condense (with reduction) to succinate, – OOC—CH —CH —COO –
2 2
which was then oxidized as in the citric acid cycle Succinate
to oxaloacetate. The latter was decarboxylated to
pyruvate, which was oxidatively decarboxylated In muscle, 90% of all respiration was inhibited
to acetate to complete the cycle. One of the reactions and succinate was shown to accumulate, powerful
essential for this cycle could not be verified experimentally. proof of the importance of the citric acid cycle in the
It is left to the reader to recognize which one. respiration of animal tissues.
In 1935, A. Szent-Györgyi discovered that all
of the carboxylic acids that we now recognize as a Krebs, H. A., and Johnson, W. A. (1937) Enzymologia4, 148–156
members of the citric acid cycle stimulated respira- b Krebs, H. A. (1981) Reminiscences and Reflections Clarendon
tion of animal tissues that were oxidizing other Press, Oxford
c Fruton, J. S. (1999) Proteins, Enzymes, Genes: the Interplay of
substrates such as glucose. Drawing on this know-
Chemistry and Biology Yale Univ. Press, New Haven, CT
ledge, Krebs and Johnson in 1937 proposed the citric d Quastel, J. H. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, 68–69
a,b,c
acid cycle. Krebs provided further confirmation
esting difference is the use in chloroplasts of NADPH
2. Photosynthesis
+ H+ in reduction of 3-phosphoglycerate (reverse of
stepa in Fig. 10-3).
The principal means of formation of glucose in
A small number of other biosynthetic pathways,
nature is through photosynthesis in green plants (Fig.
which are used by both photosynthetic and nonphoto-
10-1, lower left). Light energy is captured by chloro-
synthetic organisms, are indicated in Fig. 10-1. For
phyll and is used to transfer electrons from chlorophyll
example, pyruvate is converted readily to the amino
to other electron carriers, the most important of which
is NADP+. It is reduced to NADPH which is used to
acidL-alanine and oxaloacetate to L-aspartic acid;
the latter, in turn, may be utilized in the biosynthesis
reduce carbon dioxide to sugar phosphates in a complex
of pyrimidines. Other amino acids, purines, and addi-
series of reactions known as the reductive pentose
tional compounds needed for construction of cells are
phosphate pathway, which is described in Chapter
formed in pathways, most of which branch from some
17. ATP is also required for photosynthetic reduction
compound shown in Fig. 10-1 or from a point on one
of CO . It is generated by allowing some of the electrons
2 of the pathways shown in the figure. In virtually every
to flow back through an electron transport chain in the
instance biosynthesis is dependent upon a supply of
membranes of the chloroplasts. This chain closely
energy furnished by the cleavage to ATP. In many
resembles that from Q to cytochrome c in mitochondria
cases it also requires one of the hydrogen carriers in a
(Fig. 10-5), and the generation of ATP in this photo-
reduced form. While Fig. 10-1 outlines in briefest form
synthetic phosphorylation occurs in a manner anal-
a minute fraction of the metabolic pathways known,
ogous to that in the electron transport chain of mito-
the ones shown are of central importance.
chondria. In green plants the electrons removed from
chlorophyll in one light-requiring reaction are replaced
by electrons formed during the cleavage of water in a
D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules
second light-dependent reaction, a reaction that also
releases oxygen, O , and generates hydrogen ions
2 Proteins make up the bulk of the catalytic machinery
(H+). The first stable product from reduction of CO
2 of cells and together with other macromolecules most
in photosynthesis is 3-phosphoglycerate. It can be
of the structure. Therefore, the synthesis and degrada-
converted to sugars by pathways analogous to those
tion of proteins and the control of those processes are
employed by animals in gluconeogenesis. One inter-
of great importance to cells. Although the emphasis

--- Page 521 ---

518 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
in this section is on proteins, similar considerations in the cytosol or after translocation into the endoplas-
apply to nucleic acids, polysaccharides, and other mic reticulum (ER) or into mitochondria or other
macromolecules. organelles. Each of these proteins consists of two
With the exception of some antibiotics and other functional domains. A 52-kDa domain at the C terminus
short-chain molecules, all polypeptides are formed on binds 7- or 8-residue segments of unfolded peptide
ribosomes, which assemble proteins according to the chains in an elongated conformation.9 At some point
sequences of nucleotides in the messenger RNA in its reaction cycle the N-terminal 40-kDa domain,
(mRNA) molecules. The basic chemistry is simple. which binds ATP tightly, causes the ATP to be hydro-
The carboxyl groups of the amino acids are converted lyzed to ADP and inorganic phosphate: ATP + H O→
2
to reactive acyl adenylates by reaction with ATP, just ADP + P. Binding and release of a polypeptide by
i
as in Eq. 10-1. Each “activated” amino acid is carried theE. coli DnaK protein is coupled tightly to this exer-
on a molecule of transfer RNA (tRNA) and is placed gonicATPase reaction.10a,10b The reaction is depen-
in the reactive site of a ribosome when the appropriate dent upon potassium ions11 and is regulated by two
codon of the mRNA has moved into the site. The co-chaperones, DnaJ (Hsp40)11a-11c and GrpE.10a
growing peptide chain is then transferred by a dis- Both ATP and extended polypeptides bind weakly to
placement reaction onto the amino group of the acti- DnaK, and the ATP in the DnaK·polypeptide·ATP
vated amino acid that is being added to the peptide complex is hydrolyzed slowly to ADP and inorganic
chain. In this manner, new amino acids are added one phosphate.10a,10b,12 Co-chaperone DnaJ, which shares
at a time to the carboxyl end of the chain, which always a largely α-helical structural motif with J-domains in
remains attached to a tRNA molecule. The process various other proteins, binds to the complex.11a, 11b, 11c
continues until a stop signal in the mRNA ends the It probably induces a conformational change that leads
process and the completed protein chain is released to rapid hydrolysis of ATP. In the resulting complex
from the ribosome. Details are given in Chapter 29. both ADP and the polypeptide are bound tightly to
the DnaK protein and dissociate from it very slowly.
TheE. coli co-chaperone GrpE acts as a nucleotide
1. Folding and Maturation of Proteins exchange factor that catalyzes rapid loss of ADP from
the complex. If ATP binds to this DnaK·polypeptide
A newly synthesized peptide chain probably folds complex the polypeptide is released.10a This cycle,
quickly. However, the cytosol provides an environ- which can be repeated, accomplishes the function of
ment rich in other proteins and other macromolecules DnaK in protecting extended polypeptides and releas-
that can interact with the new peptide and may cata- ing them under appropriate conditions. There is also
lyze or inhibit folding. Among the most abundant evidence that DnaK participates in refolding of mis-
proteins of bacteria or eukaryotes are proteins known folded proteins.11d It cooperates with a ribosome-
aschaperonins. They apparently help polypeptide associated prolylisomerase in bacteria.11e The three-
chains to fold correctly, partly by “chaperoning” them dimensional structure of the ATPase domain of Hsp70
through the cytoplasm and across cell membranes, is strikingly similar to that of the enzyme hexokinase
protecting them from becoming entangled with other (Chapter 12) and to that of the muscle protein actin,
proteins and macromolecules while they fold.6–9 There Fig. 7-10.13,14 Archaeal chaperonins lack the Cpn10
are several classes of chaperonins. Most are oligomers ring but have lid-like extensions at the cylinder ends.15a
made up of 10- to 90-kDa subunits. They have a variety The Cpn60 class of chaperonins are amazing cage-
of names, which may be somewhat confusing. The like structures. Each oligomer is composed of two
first chaperonins were identified only as heat shock rings, each made up of seven 60-kDa subunits stacked
proteins (Hsp). They are produced in large amounts back-to-back. Cpn60 structures from archaeobacteria
by bacteria or other cells when the temperature is are similar but may have 8- or 9-subunit rings.15,15a
raised quickly, and are designated Hsp70, Hsp90, etc., The best known member of this group is the E. coli
where the number is the subunit mass in kDa. Other protein known as GroEL whose three-dimensional
chaperonins were recognized as products of genes structure is depicted in Box 7-A.16,17 This 14-subunit
needed for replication of the DNA of bacteriophage λ oligomer of GroEL is a cylinder which is capped by a
inE. coli. Consequently, one major chaperonin of the smaller ring composed of seven 10-kDa subunits of
Hsp70 class is designated DnaK. The Hsp70 protein GroES, a Cpn10 protein.17,18 Like Hsp70, GroEL has
of mitochondria was named “binding protein” or BiP.10 ATPase activity and an ATP binding site in its large
Other workers have abbreviated chaperonins as Cpn70, equatorial domain.16 Archaeal chaperonins lack the
Cpn60, etc. Cpn10 ring but have lid-like extensions at the cylinder
The abbreviations Hsp70, Cpn70, DnaK, and BiP ends.15a
all refer to a group of similar 70-kDa proteins that are Within the GroEL–GroES cage polypeptide chains
apparently found in all organisms. Their role seems to can fold without becoming entangled with other pro-
be to stabilize unfolded proteins prior to final folding teins or being cleaved by protein-hydrolyzing enzymes

--- Page 522 ---

D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules 519
of the cytoplasm. An unfolded or +
NH
3
partially folded protein may diffuse
into the open end of the complex
and bind temporarily via noncova-
Pre-peptide,
lent interactions. The hydrophobic
24 residues
inner surface of the complex may B chain, 30 residues
favor the formation of helices within 1 7
F C
the folding protein. Binding of the 19
24 S C
polypeptide substrate and capping 65 1 6 S S
with GroES causes a major coopera- Q K R G C C S
tive conformational change with S C
S C 20 N
doubling of the internal volume COO–
A chain,
(Box 7-A). The character of the 21 residues
inner wall also changes as a result of
exposure of hydrophilic groups.18a,18b C peptide, 29 residues
Perhaps the expansion also stretches E R R A
30
segments of the unfolded poly- 50
peptide. Subsequent hydrolysis
of ATP may be coupled to release
Figure 10-7 Schematic diagram of the structure of human preproinsulin.
of the bound polypeptide, which
The 24-residue prepeptide, the 29-residue C-peptide and basic residues 31, 32,
may then leave the complex or bind 64, and 65 are cut from the peptide upon conversion to insulin as indicated by
again for another chance to fold the small arrows. Some amino acid residues are identified using the one-
correctly.17,19 The two ends of the letter codes. See Fig. 7-17 for details of insulin structure.
GroEL·GroES complex may func-
tion alternately, with each end in
turn receiving the GroES cap.17
Hsp90 is one of the most abundant cytosolic proteins preproinsulin → proinsulin → insulin
in eukaryotic cells, but it seems to chaperone only a few (110 residues) (86 residues, (51 residues, two
proteins, among which are steroid-hormone receptors.20,20a one chain) disulfide-linked
chains) (10-8)
Another group of over 30 different chaperone proteins
participate in assembly of external bacterial cell-surface
structures such as pili (Fig. 7-9). The chaperone PapD The 24-residue prepeptide is cleaved from preproinsulin
consists of two domains, both having an immunoglobulin- within a few minutes of synthesis. Then, over a period
like fold.20b PapD binds to the pilin subunits, escorting of about an hour additional cleavages occur to give the
them to the site of pilus assembly. Folding of integral final product.21 This crystallizes as the zinc hexamer
membrane proteins may be facilitated by a chaperone (Fig. 7-18) within the “dense cores” of storage vesicles
function of membrane lipids.20c from which it is released into the bloodstream as needed.22
For most proteins the initial synthesis is followed Other examples are described in Section 3.
by a sequence of processing or maturation reactions.
These reactions sometimes involve alteration of amino
acid side chains and very often include hydrolytic 2. Transport of Proteins to Their Destinations
cleavages by which pieces of the peptide chain are cut within a Cell
off. The initially synthesized polypeptides are often
not functional and gain biological activity only after The synthesis of peproinsulin on ribosomes in the
one or more pieces have been removed. For example, cytosol and the release of mature insulin from secretion
digestive enzymes are usually secreted as zymogens vesicles involve not only the chain cleavages but also
orproenzymes which are activated by hydrolytic transport of the polypeptide across membranes of the
cleavages only after secretion into the digestive tract. ER, Golgi compartments, and secretion vesicles.
Many proenzymes are components of the extremely
complex cascades of activating reactions involved in Signal sequences and translocation. In 1971,
blood clotting (Chapter 12) and in the defensive Blobel and Sabatini postulated that for some proteins
complement system (Chapter 31). an N-terminal segment of newly synthesized poly-
Most peptide hormones are cut out from larger peptide chains contains a signal sequence or leader
proteins. For example, human insulin is synthesized peptide of 15–30 amino acids which carries informa-
as a 110-residue preproinsulin which is converted in tion concerning the location of the mature protein in
stages to the active two-chain, 51-residue hormone the cell.23–28b The rather nonpolar signal sequences of
(Eq. 10-8 and Fig. 10-7).20d,20e proteins destined for secretion from cells would interact

--- Page 523 ---

520 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
with and pass through the membrane of the ER. On which are named SEC 61, SEC 62, SEC 63, etc., are
the other side of the membrane, a signal peptidase proteins with corresponding names, e.g., Sec 61 protein
would cut off the signal peptide. In many cases, glyco- (or Sec 61p). Study of these proteins suggested that the
syltransferases would add sugar residues near the N Sec 61, Sec 62, and Sec 63 proteins are all directly
terminus to create a hydrophilic end which would involved in transport into the ER.31,34,35 Additional
help to pull the rest of the peptide chain through the proteins are needed for movement of vesicles out from
membrane. A similar situation would hold for secre- the Golgi and for delivery of secretory vesicles to the
tion of proteins by bacteria. plasma membrane.33d The protein Sec 61p has been
The signal hypothesis has been proven correct but identified as homologous to the α subunit of a similar
with considerable added complexity. It now appears trimericαβγ Sec 61p complex of mammalian tissues.32
that when the N terminus of a new polypeptide chain It also appears to correspond to Sec Y, a protein required
carrying the proper signal sequence emerges from a for secretion of proteins through the plasma mem-
ribosome it is intercepted by a signal recognition brane of E. coli into the periplasmic space. Proteins
particle (SRP), a 250-kDa ribonucleoprotein consist- corresponding to the β and γ subunits of mammalian
ing of six polypeptide chains and a small 300-residue 7S related proteins have been identified in yeast and E.
RNA chain.29–33 Binding to the ribosome, the SRP tem- coli36 and in Arabidopsis, where it is necessary to bring
porarily blocks further elongation of the peptide chain proteins into the thylakoid membrane of the chloro-
until it bumps against and binds to a 72-kDa mem- plasts.37
brane protein called the SRP receptor or docking InE. coli the products of genes SecY, SecE, and
protein. Then translation begins again and the pro- SecG are integral membrane proteins that, together
tein moves into the ER, where it is cleaved by the with additional proteins, form a proteinaceous pore
signal peptidase and is modified further. Although through which proteins pass.38–40a Additional proteins
the bacterial SRP is a single protein called Ffh (for 54 required for translocation of some bacterial proteins
homolog),33a the basic machinery for signal recognition are the chaperonin SecB, a tetramer of 17.3-kDa sub-
and secretion is remarkably conserved from E. coli to units,41 and SecA, a soluble ATPase that may partici-
humans.33b Bacterial proteins that are destined for pate in docking and serve as an engine for transport
secretion or for a function in the periplasmic space or throught the pore.38,40a,42 In eukaryotic cells a membrane-
in external membranes also contain signal sequences bound Ca2+-dependent chaperonin called calnexin
which are cut off by a signal peptidase embedded in assists in bringing the protein into the ER in a properly
the plasma membrane.33c folded state.43,44
Signal sequences vary in structure but usually Unlike transport across the membranes of the ER,
have a net positive charge within the first 5–8 residues transport across plasma membranes of bacteria often
at the N terminus. This region is followed by a “hydro- requires both hydrolysis of ATP and energy provided
phobic core” made up of 8–10 residues with a strong by the membrane electrical potential.33,38,44–48 Secre-
tendency toward α helix formation. This sequence tion into the periplasmic space has been well charac-
is often followed by one or a few proline, glycine, or terized but less is known about transport of proteins
serine residues and then a sequence AXA that immedi- into the external membranes of E. coli.48 A 16 kDa
ately precedes the cleavage site. Here, A is usually periplasmic chaperone may be required.48a
alanine in prokaryotes but may also be glycine, serine, Many bacteria have a second complete secretion
or threonine in eukaryotes. Residue X is any amino system.48b This multi-gene type II system is present
acid.25,27,28a,28b but usually inactive in E. coli. A third (type III) system
is present in many pathogenic bacteria, and has
evolved for delivery of specialized structural and
Cut regulatory proteins into host cells.48c,48d
++
Ticketing destinations. We have seen that
6-8 residues 8-12 Hydrophobic “core” P AXA
proteins that contain suitable signal sequences are
(or G, S) exported from the cytoplasm while other proteins
remain. Some proteins are secreted while others take
up residence as integral or peripheral membrane
It had often been assumed that a hydrophobic proteins or as soluble proteins within an organelle.
signal sequence, perhaps folded into a hairpin loop, All of the available evidence indicates that it is the
spontaneously inserts itself into an ER membrane to sequence of a protein that determines its destination.
initiate translocation. However, study of the genetics Proteins targeted to pass through the inner mitochon-
of protein transport suggests otherwise. Over 50 drial or chloroplast membrane have 20- to 70-residue
different genetic loci affect the translocation of proteins presequences that are rich in arginine and lysine and
in yeast.31,32,33d Products of these secretory genes, which are removed when the protein reaches its

--- Page 524 ---

D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules 521
destination.49–53 Proteins meant to go to the intermem- (Chapter 8, Section C,6, Fig. 10-8).
brane space or the outer membrane of mitochondria At every step in these processes vesicles are formed
have a sequence containing basic amino acids followed and are carried to the next destination where the
by a long stretch of uncharged residues.54 Peroxisomal vesicles fuse with the new membrane and discharge
preproteins may have signal sequences such as SKL at their contents.80–85a This remarkable process is complex
the C terminus54–56 and proteins destined to become and highly specific. Rothman proposed that the vesicles
attached to phosphatidylinositol glycan anchors (Fig. to be transported are “docked” on appropriate receptor
8-13)57 as well as some bacterial surface proteins57a molecules (called SNARES) on the destination mem-
have signal peptides at both N and C termini. Some brane. This is accomplished with the aid of specific
lysosomal membrane glycoproteins have an LE pair soluble marker proteins (called SNAPS) with surfaces
in the N-terminal cytoplasmic tail58 and proteins with complementary to those of the receptors.80 Proteins
suitable dileucine and related pairs are often taken up are sorted in this way according to their destination
in lysosomes.59 Soluble proteins that are resident in the signals. The Golgi system is considered further in
cisternae of the ER often have the C-terminal sequence Chapter 20.
KDEL or HDEL.29,60–64 It may serve both as a retention
signal and as a retrieval signal for return of the protein
Lysosome Endosomes
if it passes on into the Golgi vesicles.65,66
Transport of proteins into mitochondria is depen-
dent upon both cytosolic chaperonins and mitochon-
drial chaperonins of the Hsp70 and Hsp60 classes.67–70
Entrance into mitochondria71–73 resembles passage Plasma
membrane
through membranes of the ER. However, entry to the
nucleus through the nuclear pore complex requires
other localization signals73a as well as specialized Nucleus
proteins.74,74a The sorting of proteins into six different Secretion
vesicles
compartments within a chloroplast requires a whole
series of recognition signals as well as chaperonins
and channel proteins.75–79 The various signal sequences
that determine a protein’s interactions with chaperonins, CGN C M T TGN
docking proteins, and proteinaceous pore complexes
may be complex and overlapping but evolution has
selected sequences that allow cells to live and function.
Computer programs for detecting sorting signals are
Figure 10-8 Current version of protein synthesis and
being developed.79a Not only proteins but also other
processing via ER, Golgi, and secretory vesicles. CGN,
macromolecules are automatically sorted to their
cis-Golgi network: C, T, M are the cis, medial, and trans
correct destination.
compartments of the Golgi stack; TGN, trans Golgi network.
Arrows indicate some of the movements of transport
Vesicular transport and the Golgi system. vesicles.
Movement of secreted proteins through the cytosol
from the ER to the external surface occurs through the
formation and opening up of small vesicles about 70
nm in diameter. It occurs in steps that involve passage 3. Posttranslational Alterations
from the ER to the various Golgi membranes. Figure
10-8 provides a sketch of the system of ER, Golgi, Chemical alterations to a protein begins as soon as
secretion vesicles, and lysosomes.63 Newly formed the peptide chain is formed. Proteins translocated into
secretory proteins flow from the ER into an intermediate the periplasmic space of bacteria or into the cisternae
compartment where vesicles are formed and are carried of the ER of eukaryotic cells meet several important
to the cis Golgi network (CGN). They move step-by- enzymes. Peptidylprolyl isomerase (discussed in Box
step through the Golgi stack (GS) and into the trans 9-F) assists the folding of the peptide chain and protein
Golgi network (TGN). New vesicles are formed to disulfide isomerases help to form disulfide linkages.
carry proteins between each pair of membranous The cytosol provides a reducing environment in which
compartments. In each compartment new glycosylation many proteins that have cysteine side chains carry free
reactions or other modifications may occur. Finally, –SH groups. In contrast, the periplasmic space and the
vesicles carry the mature proteins to the plasma mem- ER have more oxidizing environments in which disul-
brane, lysosomes, or vacuoles.79b A related process is fide bridges may form. As shown in Eq. 10-9, the
uptake of proteins by endocytosis to form, consecutively, oxidizing agent is often assumed to be the disulfide
early and late endosomes which fuse with lysosomes form of the tripeptide glutathione (see Box 11-B),

--- Page 525 ---

522 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
Peptide single proteins, some are polyproteins, which give
chain
CH CH rise to two or more functional peptides. Polyproteins
2 GS-SG GSH 2
SH GS S occur in all cells but are especially prevalent among
SH SH
H+ virally encoded peptides. For example, the polio
CH a CH
2 2 virus polyprotein is cut into at least ten pieces by
proteases, some present in the host cell normally and
b some encoded by the virus.98 Many neurohormones
GSH
arise from polyproteins that undergo processing as
they travel down an axon from the cell body before
CH
2 being secreted into a synapse (Chapter 30). Within our
S S
own brains the peptide prepro-opiomelanocortin
CH
2 undergoes numerous cleavages to give rise to at least
seven different neurohormones (see Fig. 30-2).96,99–101
(10-9)
Altered ends. Proteins often contain “blocked”
which is commonly abbreviated GS–SG. It can react end groups in place of free –NH + or –COO–. For
3
with proteins by disulfide exchange reactions to form many of the cytosolic proteins, which do not carry
mixed disulfide groups with release of reduced gluta- leader sequences, the N-terminal methionine that is
thione, GSH (Eq. 10-9, step a). The mixed disulfides always used to initiate the ribosomal synthesis of
can be converted to disulfide bridges by a second proteins in eukaryotes is removed. If the next residue
exchange reaction (Eq. 10-9, step b). However, in the after the N-terminal methionine is small and uncharged,
bacterial periplasm the dithiol protein DsbA appears the methionine is usually hydrolyzed off enzymatically
to be the major oxidant (see Box 15-C). It functions after 30–40 residues have been added to the growing
together with other proteins, some of which carry peptide chain.102–105 An acetyl group is transferred
electrons from the electron transport chains of the onto the NH termini of about 85% of all cytosolic
2
bacteria.85a,85b The rates of these reactions are greatly proteins, whether or not the initiator methionine has
increased by the protein disulfide isomerases.85a–85e,86–91 been removed.106 In other cases fatty acyl groups may
These enzymes tend to promote formation of disul- be transferred to the terminal –NH group or to side
2
fide linkages between the correct pairs of SH groups. chain SH groups. For example, a myristoyl (tetradeca-
If there are three or more –SH groups in a chain some noyl) group is frequently combined in amide linkage
incorrect pairing may, and often does, occur. The at the N terminus of cellular and virally encoded
protein disulfide isomerases break these bonds and proteins. A palmitoyl group is joined in thioester
allow new ones to form.92 The active sites of these linkage to a cysteine side chain near the N terminus
isomerases contain pairs of –SH groups which can of the E. coli periplasmic lipoprotein (Fig. 8-28).107
be oxidized to internal –S–S– bridges by NAD+- Together with the N-terminal myristoyl group it forms
dependent enzymes. These enzymes and their relatives a membrane anchor for this protein. Polyprenyl groups
thioredoxin and glutaredoxin are discussed further are transferred onto cysteine –SH groups at or near the
in Box 15-C. Glutathione and oxidation–reduction C termini of many eukaryotic proteins to form a differ-
buffering are considered in Box 11-B. ent membrane anchor.108–110 Some of the enzymes act
on the sequence CAAX, where X = M, S, Q, C but not
Proteolytic processing. For proteins exported L or I. After transfer of a farnesyl or geranylgeranyl
from the cytosol, a signal peptidase (or leader peptidase) group onto the cysteine the AAX is removed proteo-
is usually waiting in the bacterial plasma membrane or lytically and the new terminal cysteinyl carboxyl
in membranes of the ER. The E. coli leader peptidase group is methylated. Surface proteins of gram-positive
is an integral membrane protein with its catalytic bacteria are joined by amide linkage from their C
domain in the periplasm.45,93 For insulin the 24-residue termini to a pentaglycine chain of the peptidoglycan
prepiece serves as the signal sequence which is hydro- layer (Fig. 8-28)57a
lyzed off in the ER. However, the other cleavages A pyroglutamyl N terminus is found in the thyro-
shown in Fig. 10-7 appear to take place in immature tropin-releasing hormone (Fig. 2-4) and in many other
secretory granules.21,22 For many proteins proteolytic peptide hormones and proteins. It presumably arises
processing begins earlier than this and may occur in by attack of the α-NH group of an N-terminal gluta-
2
more than one location. Eukaryotic processing proteases mine on the side chain amide group with release of
often resemble the bacterial protease subtilisin20e but NH (Eq. 10-10).111,112
3
cut peptide chains preferentially after dibasic amino Another frequent modification at the C terminus
acid pairs, e.g., Arg-Arg, Arg-Lys.94–96 There are also of peptide hormones and of other proteins is amidation.
other processing enzymes with differing specificities.97 In this reaction a C-terminal glycine is oxidatively
Although most polypeptides leave ribosomes as removed as glyoxylate in an O –, copper- and ascorbate
2

--- Page 526 ---

D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules 523
H2C CH2 H reversible alteration is formation of sulfate esters of
O tyrosine –OH groups.99,123 Reactions by which cofactors
+H C C C N H Peptide become attached to proteins124 are described in Chapters
H2N H2N 15–17.
O Methylation,125 hydroxylation, and other irreversible
modifications often affect specific residues in a protein.
NH3
Oxidative alterations occur during aging of proteins
H2C CH2 H (Chapter 18).126 A few proteins even undergo “splicing”
O C C H that alters the amino acid sequence (Box 29-E).127 All
C N Peptide of these reactions not only affect the properties of the
N
H proteins but also participate in driving the turnover of
O (10-10)
these macromolecules.
O O2 H2O O 4. Intracellular Degradation of Proteins
Peptide C N CH2 COO– Peptide C NH2
H Once a protein has reached its correct location and
O
has acquired its proper function, it usually has a limited
Gly residue A
H2A H C COO– lifetime, which may average only a few hours or a few
(Ascorbate) Glyoxylate days. The protein is then hydrolytically degraded
(10-11) back to its constituent amino acids.128 Defective and
damaged proteins are usually degraded much more
rapidly than are intact proteins.129,130 Under condi-
(vitamin C)-dependent process (Eq. 10-11).113–117 See tions of starvation, proteins are broken down more
also Chapter 18, Section F,2. rapidly than usual to supply the cell with energy.
An example of both of these modifications is forma- Rapid degradation of proteins is often induced at
tion of thyrotropin-releasing hormone shown in Fig. 2-4 certain stages of differentiation. For example, spore-
from its immediate precursor: forming bacteria contain a protease that becomes
activated upon germination of the spore.131 Within
Gln–His–Pro–Gly→ pyroglutamyl–His–Pro–NH minutes this enzyme digests stored proteins to provide
2
amino acids for the synthesis of new proteins during
(10-12)
growth.
Proteins with long C-terminal hydrophobic signal Eukaryotic cells degrade proteins within both the
sequences may become attached to phosphatidylinositol- cytosol and lysosomes. Lysosomes apparently take up
glycan anchors embedded in the plasma membrane many proteins but have a preference for N-terminal
(Fig. 8-13). An example is a human alkaline phospha- KFERQ132 and also for particular types of glycosylation
tase in which the α carboxyl of the terminal aspartate (Chapter 20). Lysosomes act on many long-lived
residue forms an amide linkage with the ethanolamine proteins.133,133a Once within the lysosomes, the proteins
part of the anchor. Attachment may occur by a direct are broken down into amino acids with a half-life of
attack of the –NH group of the ethanolanine on a pep- ~8 minutes. During nutritional deprivation, the rate
2
tide linkage in a transacylation reaction that releases a of uptake of proteins by lysosomes increases markedly.
29-residue peptide from the C terminus.118,119 (See The same is true during certain developmental changes,
Chapter 29). for example, when a tadpole loses its tail.
Many other covalent modifications of proteins are Many short-lived proteins are degraded within the
dealt with in other sections of the book.120–122 A few cytosol in ATP-dependent processes. A major process
are described in Chapter 2, Eqs. 2-14 to 2-22. Reversible involves the small protein ubiquitin (Box 10-C).134
alterations used to regulate enzymes are considered in Once“labeled” by formation of an isopeptide linkage
Chapter 11. Of these, the phosphorylation of –OH to ubiquitin, a peptide is attacked by proteases in the
groups of serine, threonine, and tyrosine is the most proteasome complexes (Box 7-A, Chapter 12). There
important. A large fraction of all cellular proteins appear it is quickly degraded. Other proteases, most of which
to be modified in this way. Protein glycosylation, the do not require ATP, are also present in the cytoplasm
transfer of glycosyl groups onto –OH side chain groups (Chapter 12). How do these enzymes as well as those
of serine and threonine (Chapter 4, and Chapter 20) within the lysosomes work together to produce
and nonenzymatic glycation (Eq. 4-8) also affect many a harmonious turnover of the very substance of our
proteins, often at turns in the peptide chain. Hydroxy- tissues? How is it possible that one protein has a long
lation, glycosylation, and other modifications of col- half life of many days while another lasts only an hour
lagen are described in Chapter 8. Another common or two in the same cell? The answer seems to be that

--- Page 527 ---

524 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
BOX 10-C UBIQUITIN
The small 76-residue protein called ubiquitina-c ATP PP O O
i
is probably present in all eukaryotic cells. Found a
–
Ub COO Ub C O P O Adenosyl
in the nucleus, cytoplasm, cell surface membranes, E
1
and extracellular fluids, ubiquitin is often joined by O – HS-E 1
isopeptide linkages from its C-terminal glycine to b AMP
theε-amino groups of lysine side chains of other O AMP
proteins. Ubiquitin has one of the most conserved
of all known amino acid sequences. No amino acid Ub C S E 1
substitutions have been found among animal species E
2
and only three differences distinguish plant ubiqui- c
tins from that of humans. In its three-dimensional O
E
structure ubiquitin is compact, tightly hydrogen 1
bonded, and roughly spherical. It contains an α Ub C S E 2
helix, a mixed β sheet, and a distinct hydrophobic Protein NH
2
core. E 3 d
O
E
2
Ub C N Protein
H
last step. Most E enzymes, acting
2
without E , couple ubiquitin with
3
amines or with small basic proteins
whose cellular functions are still
unclear. For example, an E which
2
is the product of the yeast gene
CDC34 appears to function in the
cell cycle (Fig. 11-15). Its absence
from yeast is lethalf,i,j and it is
clear that ubiquitin-mediated
hydrolysis of the specialized pro-
teins called cyclins is essential to
operation of the cycle.k,l
The best understood function
Stereoscopic drawing of human ubiquitin. The C terminus is at the top.
From Vijay-Kumar et al.c Courtesy of William J. Cook of ubiquitin is in nonlysosomal
degradation of proteins.j,m,n Pro-
Linkage of ubiquitin to other proteins occurs tein E appears to select the proteins for degrada-
3
through the action of a ligase system which catalyzes tion, binding them and catalyzing the formation of
four sequential reactions as shown in the accom- theisopeptide linkage to substrate. After one ubiquit-
panying equation. In step a a ubiquitin activating in molecule has been attached, and while still held
enzyme (E ) forms a C-terminal acyl adenylate by by E , a second activated ubiquitin is coupled to Lys
1 3
reaction of ubiquitin (Ub) and ATP.d,e In step b a 48 of the first ubiquitin. This process may continue
sulfhydryl group of the same enzyme then displaces until several molecules of ubiquitin are joined by
the AMP part to form a thioester linkage to ubiquitin. Gly-Lys isopeptide linkages to form a polyubiquitin
The chemistry of the reaction is the same as that in chain. Sometimes more than one lysine of the sub-
Eq. 10-1. The activated ubiquitin is next transferred strate becomes polyubiquitinated to form branched
(stepc) by transacylation to several ubiquitin- chains. A free α-NH + group on the protein being
3
conjugating enzymes (E ), also called ubiquitin- degraded is essential for rapid conjugation with
2
carrier proteins.f-i These in turn (step d) transfer the ubiquitin and certain N-terminal residues such as
ubiquitin to amino groups of lysine side chains of arginine favor the conjugation and subsequent
target proteins (Prot-NH ). A third protein, ubiquitin- hydrolytic breakdown. Some proteins become
2
protein ligase (E ), is sometimes required for this attached to ubiquitin only after arginine is transferred
3

--- Page 528 ---

D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules 525
BOX 10-C (continued)
onto their N-termini from an aminoacyl-tRNA.o other cellular processes. Terminal differentiation
Polyubiquitin chains serve as recognition markers of reticulocytes to form erythrocytes involves loss
that induce rapid hydrolysis of the marked proteins of specific enzymes as well as of entire mitochon-
in the 2000 kDa 26S proteasome or multicatalytic dria. These processes also depend upon ubiquitin.
protease.p–s This complex is discussed in Box 7-A Ubiquitin is one of the components of the paired
andagain in Chapter 12. During hydrolytic destruc- helical filaments present in brains of persons with
tion of the protein the ubiquitin is released for reuse Alzheimer’s disease.x
byubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolases or In most organisms there are two arrangements
isopeptidases which cleave the thioester or isopep- for ubiquitin genes. There is a cluster of up to 100
tide linkages that tie ubiquitin to proteins.t,u tandomly repeated genes whose transcription gives
While proteins may be modified to favor rapid rise to polyubiquitin, a chain of ubiquitin molecules
ubiquitination, others may be altered to protect joined by Gly-Met linkages. These must be cleaved,
them from ubiquitination. For example, calmodulin perhaps by the same ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase
produced from a cloned gene in bacteria is a good that releases ubiquitin from its conjugates.y Other
substrate for ubiquitination but within cells it appears ubiquitin genes are fused to genes encoding riboso-
to be protected by the posttranslational conversion mal proteins. The resulting polyproteins have the
of Lys 115 to trimethyllysine.v ribosomal peptides fused to the C termini of the
About 10% of the histone H2A present in higher ubiquitin sequences and must be proteolytically
eukaryotes is ubiquitinated at Lys 119.w In the slime cleaved to give mature proteins.z
moldPhysarumthe content of ubiquitinated histones Recently a variety of modifiers of ubiquitin
H2A and H2B changes rapidly during the various ligases have been discoveredaa,bb as have ubiquitin-
stages of mitosis. Apparently, ubiquitin must be like domains in other proteins.cc These findings
cleaved from the histones to permit packaging of elucidate the complexity of the sorting of proteins
DNA into metaphase chromosomes and must become and removal of improperly folded and otherwise
attached to the histones in some regions of the defective proteins from the secretory pathway and
chromosomes to allow unfolding of the highly return to the proteasomes in the cytosol.dd,ee They
packed nucleosomes. A yeast enzyme that attaches also suggest important roles for ubiquitination in a
ubiquitin to histones is encoded by the gene RAD6, broad range of metabolic controls.
which is required for DNA repair, sporulation, and
a Vijay-Kumar, S., Bugg, C. E., Wilkinson, K. D., Vierstra, R. D., q Löwe, J., Stock, D., Jap, B., Zwickl, P., Baumeister, W., and
Hatfield, P. M., and Cook, W. J. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, Huber, R. (1995) Science268, 533–539
6396–6399 r Thrower, J. S., Hoffman, L., Rechsteiner, M., and Pickart, C. M.
b Vierstra, R. D., Langan, S. M., and Schaller, G. E. (1986) (2000)EMBO J.19, 94–102
Biochemistry25, 3105–3108 s Peters, J.-M. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 377–382
c Vijay-Kumar, S., Bugg, C. E., and Cook, W. J. (1987) J. Mol. Biol. t Stein, R. L., Chen, Z., and Melandri, F. (1995) Biochemistry34,
194, 531–544 12616–12623
d Hershko, A. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 265–268 u Wilkinson, K. D., Tashayev, V. L., O’Connor, L. B., Larsen, C. N.,
e Pickart, C. M., Kasperek, E. M., Beal, R., and Kim, A. (1994) Kasperek, E., and Pickart, C. M. (1995) Biochemistry34, 14535–
J. Biol. Chem.269, 7115–7123 14546
f Jentsch, S., Seufert, W., Sommer, T., and Reins, H.-A. (1990) v Johnston, S. C., Riddle, S. M., Cohen, R. E., and Hill, C. P. (1999)
Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 195–198 EMBO J.18, 3877–3887
g Cook, W. J., Jeffrey, L. C., Sullivan, M. L., and Vierstra, R. D. wDavie, J. R., and Murphy, L. C. (1990) Biochemistry29,
(1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 15116–15121 4752–4757
h Cook, W. J., Jeffrey, L. C., Xu, Y., and Chau, V. (1993) Biochemis- x Mori, H., Kondo, J., and Ihara, Y. (1987) Science235,
try32, 13809–13817 1641–1644
i Blumenfeld, N., Gonen, H., Mayer, A., Smith, C. E., Siegel, N. y Finley, D., and Varshavsky, A. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10,
R., Schwartz, A. L., and Ciechanover, A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 343–347
269, 9574–9581 z Baker, R. T., Tobias, J. W., and Varshavsky, A. (1992) J. Biol.
j Ciechanover, A., and Schwartz, A. L. (1994) FASEB J.8, Chem.267, 23364–23375
182–191 aaTyers, M., and Willems, A. R. (1999) Science284, 601–604
k Barinaga, M. (1995) Science269, 631–632 bbTurner, G. C., Du, F., and Varshavsky, A. (2000) Nature (London)
l Dorée, M., and Galas, S. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1114–1121 405, 579–583
mPickart, C. M. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 544–548 ccHochstrasser, M. (2000) Science289, 563–564
n Johnson, E. S., Ma, P. C. M., Ota, I. M., and Varshavsky, A. ddEllgaard, L., Molinari, M., and Helenius, A. (1999) Science286,
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 17442–17456 1882–1888
o Ciechanover, A., Ferber, S., Ganoth, D., Elias, S., Hershko, A., eePlemper, R. K., and Wolf, D. H. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24,
and Arfin, S. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 11155–11167 266–270
p Goldberg, A. L. (1995) Science268, 522–523

--- Page 529 ---

526 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
TABLE 10-1
Types of Biochemical Reactions with Ionic Mechanisms
Nucleophilic displacement, often via an
1. 3. Elimination
addition–elimination sequence
A. and B. Precisely the opposite of addition
A. B:– + C Y + H + B C + YH
(Eliminations that are the reverse of type 2A are frequent
steps in more complex enzyme mechanisms)
(Examples: methyl-, glycosyl-transferases)
O O C. Decarboxylative elimination
B. B:– + C Y + H + B C + YH
– –
Y C C COO Y + C C + CO2
(Examples: esterases, peptidases)
O O
Formation of stabilized enolate anions and
C. B:– + P Y + H + B P + YH 4. enamines
– –
O O O O
A.
(Examples: phosphatases, kinases,
O O O–
phosphomutases, ribozymes)
C C C C C C
O O H –
D. B:– + S Y + H + B S O – + YH
B.
–
O O
O H + N H + N HN
(Examples: sulfatases, sulfotransferases)
C C C C C C
H –
2. Addition Isomerization reactions
C.
O OH HO OH OH O
A. To polarized double bonds such as C O
C C C C C C
and C N H enediol H
(Example: sugar isomerases)
(This reaction most often occurs as a step in an enzymatic
process e.g., formation of hemiacetals, hemiketals,
hemimercaptals, carbinolamines) D.
O
H
B:– + C O + H + B C OH C C C C (Example: oxosteroid isomerases)
(Example: mutarotase)
O O
B. To double bond conjugated with C O or – H
C C C C C C C C
C N
B:–
+ C C C O B C C C
+ H
+
H
(Examples: acyl-CoA, fumarate hydratases, aspartase)
C. To isolated double bonds (Example: oleate hydratase)
(see p. 689)

--- Page 530 ---

D. Synthesis and Turnover of Macromolecules 527
TABLE 10-1 the turnover rate of a protein is determined
(continued) in large part by its sequence. Some proteins
are tightly folded and have few bends on
the outside that have sequences meeting
Stabilized enolate anions as nucleophiles: formation of the specificity requirements of intracellular
5.
carbon–carbon bonds ((cid:1) condensation) proteolytic enzymes. These have long half
lives. Other proteins may have external
A. Displacement on a carbonyl group loops with sequences susceptible to attack
– or sequences that favor rapid reaction
O O O O
withthe ubiquitin system or uptake into
C C + C Y + H + C C C + YH + lysosomes. Prematurely terminated pro-
teins and peptide fragments from partial
degradation of proteins may tend to be
(Example: 3-Oxoacyl–CoA transferase (Y = —S—CoA)
unfolded at the N terminus and to be
attacked rapidly.128,135 Proteins that have
B. Addition to a carbonyl group: aldol condensation
undergone covalent modifications or oxida-
–
O O
tivedamage also seem to be hydrolyzed
C C + C O + H + C C C OH rapidly.136
Regions rich in proline, glutamate,
serine, and threonine (PEST regions) may
(Examples: aldolases, citrate synthases) be good substrates for Ca2+-activated cyto-
solic proteases.137 The ubiquitin system
C. Addition to a carbon dioxide (β carboxylation); decarboxylation appears to act most slowly on a protein
–
O O O when the normal initiation amino acid
O
methionine is present at the N terminus.
C C + C C C C For example, the half-life of β-galactosidase
–
O
O in yeast is over 20 hours. Replacement
(Examples: phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, oxaloacetate of the methionine with S, A, T, V, or G
decarboxylases) has little effect. However, replacement
with other amino acids shortens the half-
life as follows: I and E, 30 min.; Y and Q,
10 min.; F, L, D, and K, 3 min.; and R, 2
6. Some isomerization and rearrangement reactions min.138–140a
A. Allylic rearrangement (1,3-proton shift)
5. Turnover of Nucleic Acids
H + H
H
Because of its special role in carrying
CH C C CH2 C C
genetic information, DNA is relatively
H stable. An elaborate system of repair
enzymes (Chapter 27) act to correct errors
B. Allylic rearrangement with condensation
and to help DNA to preserve its genetic
Y information. However, in some special-
R C H2C C C R CH2 CH2 C C + HY ized cells such as those forming immuno-
globulin, the DNA too undergoes major
H H
H
rearrangements (Chapter 31). RNA mole-
(Example: condensation of dimethylallyl pyrophosphate with cules are subject to extensive processing.
isopentenyl pyrophosphate) This includes the conversion of RNA
bases to modified forms, chain cleavages
C. Rearrangements with alkyl or hydride ion shift during maturation of ribosomal and trans-
R R H R fer RNAs, cutting and splicing of gene
transcripts to form mRNAs and finally
NADH
C C C C C C
degradation of the mRNA (Chapter 28).
O O O OH OH OH Proteins that serve as RNA chaperones
H assist in folding these molecules.141
(Examples: biosynthesis of leucine and valine,
Glyoxalase
xylose isomerase, glyoxalase)

--- Page 531 ---

528 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
BOX 10-D DRAWING THOSE LITTLE ARROWS
Organic mechanisms are often indicated by arrows that show the flow of electrons in individual steps of
a reaction. Many errors are made by students on exams and even in published research papers. The arrows
are often drawn backward, are too numerous, or do not clearly indicate electron flow. Here are some tips.
1
Always write a mechanism step- –O H+
a
by-step. Never combine two
steps (e.g., a and b at right) in
C CH2 C CH3 CO2 + CH2 C CH3
which electron flow occurs in O NH+ N H
opposite directions. Notice that b
Enzyme Enzyme
stepc, the hydrolysis of a Schiff
base, is also a two-step process.
c
The reaction is a familiar one that
CH3 C CH3 CH3 C CH3
is commonly indicated as shown HO
2
here. However, this scheme does N O
H2N–Enzyme
not show a detailed mechanism
Enzyme
for step c.
Schiff base
2
Identify the nucleophilic and electrophilic
H
centers before starting to write a mechanism. H H O
Oxygen, sulfur, and nitrogen atoms are O , N , C
–
usually nucleophilic, e.g., thosein—OH, O
—NH ,—COO–,—SH,—OPO 2–, and enolate
2 3
anions. The weak nucleophiles — OH and – –
C C O C C O
— SH may be converted into strong nucleo-
philes— O –— S – by removal of a proton by a Enolate anion
basic group of an enzyme. The nonnucleo-
philic— NH + becomes the good nucleophile H – H +
3 C C N C C N
— NH by loss of a proton. Nucleophilic
2
centers contain unshared electron pairs. Enamine
Nucleophiles are basic but the basicity, as
indicated by proton binding (by the pK ), is Groups with nucleophilic centers indicated by
a
not necessarily proportional to nucleophilic unshared electron pairs and/or negative charge.
strength (nucleophilicity). Enolate anions
and enamines provide nucleophilic centers C O C + O–
on carbon atoms, important in formation and
Carbonyl
cleavage of C — C bonds.
H H
Electrophilic centers include acidic hydrogen + +
C N C N
atoms, metal ions, the carbon atoms of car-
bonyl groups, and the β-carbon atoms of α, Protonated imine
β unsaturated acids, ketones, or acyl-CoA O O–
derivatives. Highly polarized groups such as +
C C C S CoA C C C S CoA
carbonyl and enamine generate electrophilic β
centers as indicated by the positive charges. α,β-Unsaturated acyl-CoA
They also affect more distant positions in
conjugated systems, e.g., in α,β-unsaturated
δ+
acyl-CoA derivatives, and in intermediates δ+
N
+
formed from thiamin diphosphate and pyri-
doxal phosphate. δ+
Some electrophilic centers are indicated by + or δ+

--- Page 532 ---

E. Classifying Enzymatic Reactions 529
BOX 10-D (continued)
3
When an ionic organic reaction (the kind
catalyzed by most enzymes) occurs a NH2 H+ NH3 +
nucleophilic center joins with an electro- O O–
philic center. We use arrows to show the HO– C C C HO C C C (Enolate anion)
movement of pairs of electrons. The move-
+
ment is alwaysaway from the nucleophile H
which can be thought of as “attacking” an O
electrophilic center. Notice the first step in
HO C C C
the second example at right. The unsatur-
H
ated ketone is polarized initially. However,
this is not shown as a separate step. Rather,
the flow of electrons from the double bond, O O–
between the α- and β-carbons into the +
C C C C C C
electron-accepting C = O groups, is coordi-
nated with the attack by the nucleophile. Polarized unsaturated ketone
Dotted lines are often used to indicate
bonds that will be formed in a reaction
H
step, e.g., in an aldol condensation (right).
H
Dashed or dotted lines are often used to C C C
indicate partially formed and partially – C C C
O O
broken bonds in a transition state, e.g., for
+
δ–O Oδ+
the aldol condensation (with prior protona- H
tion of the aldehyde). However, do not put Aldol condensation Transition state
arrows on transition state structures.
4
In a given reaction step all of the arrows must
point the same way. The arrows point into bonds
that are forming or toward atoms that will carry
an unshared electron pair in the product. Arrows
–O
originate from unshared electron pairs or from bonds +
C C C N H CO2 + C C N H
that are breaking. O
All arrows point the same way
5 Never start an arrow from the same bond that
another arrow is forming; i.e., electrons flow
out of alternate bonds.
6
For reactions of radicals (homolytic reactions) arrows are used to indicate motion of single electrons
rather than of electron pairs. It is desirable to use arrows with half-heads. For example, reaction of a
superoxide radical
(·O 2 –) with FADH 2 Ribityl H Ribityl
could occur as
H3C N N O H3C N N O
follows:
NH NH
H3C N H3C N
H O H O
O
FADH2
OH
O
O–
Half-heads on arrows indicate one-electron movement

--- Page 533 ---

530 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
provide the driving force for biosynthetic sequences.
E. Classifying Enzymatic Reactions
Complex enzymatic processes are often combinations
of several steps involving displacement, addition, or
The majority of enzymes appear to contain, in their
elimination. The reactions involving formation or
active centers, only the side chains of amino acids.
cleavage of C–C bonds are essential to biosynthesis
Most of the reactions catalyzed by these enzymes can
and degradation of the various carbon skeletons found
be classified into a small number of types as is indicated
in biomolecules, while the isomerization reactions
in Table 10-1: (Type 1) displacement or substitution
provide connecting links between the other kinds of
reactions in which one base or nucleophile replaces
reactions in the establishment of metabolic pathways.
another, (Type 2) addition reactions in which a reagent
In Chapters 12 and 13 the individual reactions
adds to a double bond, and (Type 3) elimination
of metabolism are classified into these types and the
reactions by which groups are removed from a substrate
enzymes that catalyze them are described in some detail.
to create double bonds. Note that the latter are the
The chemistry of coenzymes and metalloenzymes are
reverse of addition reactions. Two other groups of
presented systematically in Chapters 14 to 16, and in
reactions depend upon formation of transient enolic
Chapter 17 the logic of the combining of individual
forms. These include (Type 4) isomerases and
reactions into metabolic sequences is considered. It is
(Type 5) lyases, a large and important group of
not necessary to read Chapters 12–16 in their entirety
reactions that form or cleave carbon–carbon bonds.
since much of their content is reference material. In
Finally, there is a group (Type 6) of isomerization
the later chapters on metabolism, cross-references
andrearrangement reactions that do not appear to
point out the discussions of individual enzymes in
fit any of the foregoing categories. Another quite differ-
Chapters 12–16.
ent group of enzyme-catalyzed reactions, which are
The following are topics that may be especially
considered in Chapter 16, function with the participa-
valuable to the student and which might be read
tion of free radical intermediates.
initially: in Chapter 12, lysozyme (Section B,5), chymo-
Biochemical displacement reactions include all
trypsin (Section C,1), kinases (Section D,9), multiple
of the hydrolytic reactions by which biopolymers are
displacement, reactions (Section G); in Chapter 13,
broken down to monomers as well as most of the
imines (Section A,2), addition to C=C bonds (Section
reactions by which the monomers are linked together
A, 4,5), beta cleavage and condensation (Section C); in
to form polymers. Addition reactions are used to
Chapter 14, thiamin diphosphate (Section D), pyridoxal
introduce oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur atoms into
phosphate (Section E); in Chapter 15, NAD (Section A).
biochemical compounds and elimination reactions often
References
1. Iwata, S., Ostermeier, C., Ludwig, B., and 11c. Westermann, B., and Neupert, W. (1997) J. 18b. Wang, Z., Feng, H.-p, Landry, S. J., Maxwell,
Michel, H. (1995) Nature376, 660–669 Mol. Biol.272, 477–483 J., and Gierasch, L. M. (1999) Biochemistry38,
2. Tsukihara, T., Aoyama, H., Yamashita, E., 11d. Mogk, A., Tomoyasu, T., Goloubinoff, P., 12537–12546
Tomizaki, T., Yamaguchi, H., Shinzawa-Itoh, Rüdiger, S., Röder, D., Langen, H., and 19. Shtilerman, M., Lorimer, G. H., and
K., Nakashima, R., Yaono, R., and Yoshikawa, Bukau, B. (1999) EMBO J.18, 6934 –6949 Englander, S. W. (1999) Science284, 822 – 825
S. (1995) Science269, 1069–1074 11e. Deuerling, E., Schulze-Specking, A., 20. Weaver, A. J., Sullivan, W. P., Felts, S. J.,
3. Mitchell, P. (1966) Biol. Rev. Cambridge Philos. Tomoyasu, T., Mogk, A., and Bukau, B. (1999) Owen, B. A. L., and Toft, D. O. (2000) J. Biol.
Soc.41, 445–502 Nature (London)400, 693 –696 Chem.275, 23045 – 23052
4. Mitchell, P. (1979) Science206, 1148–1159 12. McCarty, J. S., Buchberger, A., Reinstein, J., 20a. Buchner, J. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24, 136–
5. Nicholls, D. G., and Ferguson, S. J. (1992) and Bukau, B. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.249, 126–137 141
Bioenergetics 2, Academic Press, London 13. Flaherty, K. M., DeLuca-Flaherty, C., and 20b. Sauer, F. G., Fütterer, K., Pinkner, J. S.,
6. Gething, M.-J., and Sambrook, J. (1992) Science McKay, D. B. (1990) Nature346, 623–628 Dodson, K. W., Hultgren, S. J., and Waksman,
355, 33–45 14. Flaherty, K. M., Wilbanks, S. M., DeLuca- G. (1999) Science285, 1058 –1061
7. Frydman, J., Nimmesgern, E., Ohtsuka, K., Flaherty, C., and McKay, D. B. (1994) J. Biol. 20c. Bogdanov, M., and Dowhan, W. (1999) J. Biol.
and Hartl, F. U. (1994) Nature370, 111–117 Chem.269, 12899–12907 Chem.274, 36827–36830
8. Buchner, J. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 559 15. Phipps, B. M., Typke, D., Hegeri, R., Volker, 20d. Orci, L., Vassalli, J.-D., and Perrelet, A. (1988)
9. Hartl, F.-U., Hlodan, R., and Langer, T. (1994) S., Hoffmann, A., Stetter, K. O., and Sci. Am.259(Sep), 85–94
Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 20–25 Baumeister, W. (1993) Nature361, 475–477 20e. Zhou, A., Webb, G., Zhu, X., and Steiner, D. F.
10. Flynn, G. C., Pohl, J., Flocco, M. T., and 15a. Schoehn, G., Hayes, M., Cliff, M., Clarke, A. (1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 20745 – 20748
Rothman, J. E. (1991) Nature353, 726–730 R., and Saibil, H. R. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.301, 21. Smeekens, S. P., Montag, A. G., Thomas, G.,
10a. Russell, R., Jordan, R., and McMacken, R. 323–332 Albiges-Rizo, C., Carroll, R., Benig, M.,
(1998)Biochemistry37, 596 – 607 16. Braig, D., Otwinowski, Z., Hegde, R., Phillips, L. A., Martin, S., Ohagi, S., Gardner,
10b. Harrison, C. J., Hayer-Hartl, M., Di Liberto, Boisvert, D. C., Joachimiak, A., Horwich, A. P., Swift, H. H., and Steiner, D. F. (1992) Proc.
M., Hartl, F.-U., and Kuriyan, J. (1997) Science L., and Sigler, P. B. (1994) Nature371, 578–586 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 8822–8826
276, 431– 435 17. Hayer-Hartl, M. K., Martin, J., and Hartl, F. U. 22. Huang, X. F., and Arvan, P. (1995) J. Biol.
11. Wilbanks, S. M., and McKay, D. B. (1995) J. (1995)Science269, 836–841 Chem.270, 20417–20423
Biol. Chem.270, 2251–2257 18. Chen, S., Roseman, A. M., Hunter, A. S., 23. Blobel, G., and Sabatini, D. D. (1971) in
11a. Kelley, W. L. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.23, Wood, S. P., Burston, S. G., Ranson, N. A., Biomembranes, Vol. 2 (Manson, L. A., ed), pp.
222– 227 Clarke, A. R., and Saibil, H. R. (1994) Nature 193–195, Plenum, New York
11b. Martinez-Yamout, M., Legge, G. B., Zhang, 371, 261–264 24. Blobel, G., and Dobberstein, B. (1975) J. Cell
O., Wright, P. E., and Dyson, H. J. (2000) J. 18a. Betancourt, M. R., and Thirumalai, D. (1999) Biol.67, 852
Mol. Biol.300, 805 –818 J. Mol. Biol.287, 627–644

--- Page 534 ---

531
References
25. Landry, S. J., and Gierasch, L. M. (1991) Trends 48. Matsuyama, S.-i, Tajima, T., and Tokuda, H. 77. Schnell, D. J., Kessler, F., and Blobel, G. (1994)
Biochem. Sci.16, 159–163 (1995)EMBO J.14, 3365–3372 Science266, 1007–1011
26. Gierasch, L. M. (1989) Biochemistry28, 923–930 48a. Schäfer, U., Beck, K., and Müller, M. (1999) J. 78. Voelker, R., and Barkan, A. (1995) EMBO J.14,
27. Jain, R. G., Rusch, S. L., and Kendall, D. A. Biol. Chem.274, 24567–24574 3905–3914
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 16305–16310 48b. Russel, M. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.279, 485–499 79. Viitanen, P. V., Schmidt, M., Buchner, J.,
28. Andersson, H., and von Heijne, G. (1993) J. 48c. Galán, J. E., and Collmer, A. (1999) Science Suzuki, T., Vierling, E., Dickson, R., Lorimer,
Biol. Chem.268, 21389–21393 284, 1322–1328 G. H., Gatenby, A., and Soll, J. (1995) J. Biol.
28a. von Heijne, G. (1998) Nature (London)396, 1 48d. Tamano, K., Aizawa, S.-I., Katayama, E., Chem.270, 18158–18164
11– 113 Nonaka, T., Imajoh-Ohmi, S., Kuwae, A., 79a. Nakai, K., and Horton, P. (1999) Trends
28b. Emanuelsson, O., Nielsen, H., Brunak, S., and Nagai, S., and Sasakawa, C. (2000) EMBO J. Biochem. Sci.24, 34–35
von Heijne, G. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.300, 1005–1016 19, 3876–3887 79b. Klionsky, D. J. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 10807–
29. Verner, K., and Schatz, G. (1988) Science241, 49. Schatz, G. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 141–146 10810
1307–1313 50. Pfeffer, S. R., and Rothman, J. E. (1987) Ann. 80. Rothman, J. E. (1994) Nature372, 55–63
30. Rapoport, T. A. (1992) Science258, 931–935 Rev. Biochem.56, 829–852 81. Pryer, N. K., Wuestehube, L. J., and
30a. Batey, R. T., Rambo, R. P., Lucast, L., Rha, B., 51. Lodish, H. F. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 2107–2110 Schekman, R. (1992) Ann. Rev. Biochem.61,
and Doudna, J. A. (2000) Science287, 1232–1239 52. Smeekens, S., Bauerle, C., Hageman, J., Keegstra, 471–516
31. Sanders, S. L., and Schekman, R. (1992) J. Biol. K., and Weisbeek, P. (1986) Cell46, 365–375 82. Bennett, M. K., and Scheller, R. H. (1993) Proc.
Chem.267, 13791–13794 53. Roise, D., and Schatz, G. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 2559–2563
32. Hartmann, E., Sommer, T., Prehn, S., Görlich, 263, 4509–4511 83. Duden, R., Hosobuchi, M., Hamamoto, S.,
D., Jentsch, S., and Rapoport, T. A. (1994) 54. Hurt, E. C., and van Loon, A. P. G. M. (1986) Winey, M., Byers, B., and Schekman, R. (1994)
Nature367, 654–657 Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 204–207 J. Biol. Chem.269, 24486–24495
32a. Clemons, W. M., Jr., Gowda, K., Black, S. D., 55. Aitchison, J. D., Murray, W. W., and 84. Edelmann, L., Hanson, P. I., Chapman, E. R.,
Zwieb, C., and Ramakrishnan, V. (1999) J. Mol. Rachubinski, R. A. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, and Jahn, R. (1995) EMBO J.14, 224–231
Biol.292, 697– 705 23197–23203 84a. Dulubova, I., Sugita, S., Hill, S., Hosaka, M.,
33. Wickner, W. T. (1994) Science266, 1197–1198 56. Wolins, N. E., and Donaldson, R. P. (1994) J. Fernandez, I., Südhof, T. C., and Rizo, J.
33a. Moser, C., Mol, O., Goody, R. S., and Sinning, Biol. Chem.269, 1149–1153 (1999)EMBO J.18, 4372–4382
I. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 11339– 57. Takeda, J., and Kinoshita, T. (1995) Trends 84b. Katz, L., Hanson, P. I., Heuser, J. E., and
11344 Biochem. Sci.20, 367–371 Brennwald, P. (1998) EMBO J.17, 6200–6209
33b. Samuelson, J. C., Chen, M., Jiang, F., Möller, I., 57a. Mazmanian, S. K., Liu, G., Ton-That, H., and 84c. Gerona, R. R. L., Larsen, E. C., Kowalchyk, J.
Wiedmann, M., Kuhn, A., Phillips, G. J., and Schneewind, O. (1999) Science285, 760 –762 A., and Martin, T. F. J. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275,
Dalbey, R. E. (2000) Nature (London)406, 637– 58. Ogata, S., and Fukuda, M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 6328–6336
640 269, 5210–5217 85. Morgan, A., and Burgoyne, R. D. (1995)
33c. Paetzel, M., Strynadka, N. C. J., Tschantz, W. 59. Pond, L., Kuhn, L. A., Teyton, L., Schutze, M.- EMBO J.14, 232–239
R., Casareno, R., Bullinger, P. R., and Dalbey, P., Tainer, J. A., Jackson, M. R., and Peterson, 85a. Glockshuber, R. (1999) Nature (London)401,
R. E. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 9994– 10003 P. A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 19989–19997 30– 31
33d. Guo, W., Grant, A., and Novick, P. (1999) J. 60. Pelham, H. R. B. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 85b. Bolhuis, A., Venema, G., Quax, W. J., Bron, S.,
Biol. Chem.274, 23558–23564 483–486 and van Dijl, J. M. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274,
34. Noël, P. J., and Cartwright, I. L. (1994) EMBO 61. Wilson, D. W., Lewis, M. J., and Pelham, H. R. 24531– 24538
J.13, 5253–5261 B. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 7465–7468 85c. Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P. B.,
35. Brodsky, J. L., Goeckeler, J., and Schekman, R. 62. Mallabiabarrena, A., Jiménez, M. A., Rico, M., and Steitz, T. A. (2000) Science289, 905 – 920
(1995)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 9643–9646 and Alarcón, B. (1995) EMBO J.14, 2257–2268 85d. Berardi, M. J., and Bushweller, J. H. (1999)
36. Dobberstein, B. (1994) Nature367, 599–600 63. Luzio, J. P., and Banting, G. (1993) Trends J. Mol. Biol.292, 151–161
37. Laidler, V., Chaddock, A. M., Knott, T. G., Biochem. Sci.18, 395–398 85e. van den Berg, B., Chung, E. W., Robinson, C.
Walker, D., and Robinson, C. (1995) J. Biol. 64. Peter, F., Van, P. N., and Soling, H.-D. (1992) J. V., Mateo, P. L., and Dobson, C. M. (1999)
Chem.270, 17664–17667 Biol. Chem.267, 10631–10637 EMBO J.18, 4794 – 4803
38. Dalbey, R. E., and Robinson, C. (1999) Trends 65. Beh, C. T., and Rose, M. D. (1995) Proc. Natl. 86. Freedman, R. B., Hirst, T. R., and Tuite, M. F.
Biochem. Sci.24, 17– 22 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 9820–9823 (1994)Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 331–335
39. Douville, K., Price, A., Eichler, J., Economou, 66. Hoe, M. H., Slusarewicz, P., Misteli, T., 87. Martin, J. L., Bardwell, J. C. A., and Kuriyan,
A., and Wickner, W. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, Watson, R., and Warren, G. (1995) J. Biol. J. (1993) Nature365, 465–468
20106–20111 Chem.270, 25057–25063 88. Kishigami, S., Kanaya, E., Kikuchi, M., and
39a. Eichler, J., Brunner, J., and Wickner, W. (1997) 67. Schneider, H.-C., Berthold, J., Bauer, M. F., Ito, K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 17072–17074
EMBO J.16, 2188 – 2196 Dietmeier, K., Guiard, B., Brunner, M., and 89. Jander, G., Martin, N. L., and Beckwith, J.
39b. Matsumoto, G., Yoshihisa, T., and Ito, K. (1997) Neupert, W. (1994) Nature371, 768–773 (1994)EMBO J.13, 5121–5127
EMBO J.16, 6384 –6393 68. Bhattacharyya, T., Karnezis, A. N., Murphy, 90. Kanaya, E., Anaguchi, H., and Kikuchi, M.
39c. Scotti, P. A., Urbanus, M. L., Brunner, J., de S. P., Hoang, T., Freeman, B. C., Phillips, B., (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 4273–4278
Gier, J.-W. L., von Heijne, G., van der Does, and Morimoto, R. I. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 91. Frech, C., and Schmid, F. X. (1995) J. Biol.
C., Driessen, A. J. M., Oudega, B., and 1705–1710 Chem.270, 5367–5374
Luirink, J. (2000) EMBO J.19, 542–549 69. Schmitt, M., Neupert, W., and Langer, T. 92. Chivers, P. T., Laboissiére, M. C. A., and
40. Meyer, T. H., Ménétret, J.-F., Breitling, R., (1995)EMBO J.14, 3434–3444 Raines, R. T. (1996) EMBO J.15, 2659 – 2667
Miller, K. R., Akey, C. W., and Rapoport, T. A. 70. Stuart, R. A., Cyr, D. M., Craig, E. A., and Neupert, 93. Tschantz, W. R., Paetzel, M., Cao, G., Suciu,
(1999)J. Mol. Biol.285, 1789–1800 W. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 87–92 D., Inouye, M., and Dalbey, R. E. (1995)
40a. Yahr, T. L., and Wickner, W. T. (2000) EMBO J. 71. Lithgow, T., Glick, B. S., and Schatz, G. (1995) Biochemistry34, 3935–3941
19, 4393–4401 Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 98–101 94. Steiner, D. F., Smeekens, S. P., Ohagi, S., and
41. Randall, L. L., and Hardy, S. J. S. (1995) Trends 72. Pfanner, N., Craig, E. A., and Meijer, M. (1994) Chan, S. J. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 23435–
Biochem. Sci.20, 65–69 Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 368–372 23438
42. Ulbrandt, N. D., London, E., and Oliver, D. B. 73. Mayer, A., Nargang, F. E., Neupert, W., and 95. De Bie, I., Savaria, D., Roebroek, A. J. M., Day,
(1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 15184–15192 Lill, R. (1995) EMBO J.14, 4204–4211 R., Lazure, C., Van de Ven, W. J. M., and Seidah,
43. Bergeron, J. J. M., Brenner, M. B., Thomas, D. 73a. Heard, T. S., and Weiner, H. (1998) J. Biol. N. G. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 1020–1028
Y., and Williams, D. B. (1994) Trends Biochem. Chem.273, 29389–29393 96. Fisher, J. M., and Scheller, R. H. (1988) J. Biol.
Sci.19, 124–128 74. Görlich, D., Vogel, F., Mills, A. D., Hartmann, E., Chem.263, 16515–16518
44. Jungery, M., Pasvol, G., Newbold, C. I., and and Laskey, R. A. (1995) Nature377, 246–248 97. Rehfeld, J. F., Hansen, C. P., and Johnsen, A.
Weatherall, D. J. (1983) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 74a. Koehler, C. M., Merchant, S., and Schatz, G. H. (1995) EMBO J.14, 389–396
U.S.A.80, 1018–1022 (1999)Trends Biochem. Sci.24, 428–432 98. Ypma-Wong, M. F., Filman, D. J., Hogle, J. M.,
45. Cao, G., Kuhn, A., and Dalbey, R. E. (1995) 75. Smeekens, S., Weisbeek, P., and Robinson, C. and Semler, B. L. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263,
EMBO J.14, 866–875 (1990)Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 73–76 17846–17856
46. Kawasaki, S., Mizushima, S., and Tokuda, H. 76. Pilon, M., Wienk, H., Sips, W., de Swaaf, M., 99. Bateman, A., Solomon, S., and Bennett, H. P. J.
(1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 8193–8198 Talboom, I., van ‘t Hof, R., de Korte-Kool, G., (1990)J. Biol. Chem.265, 22130–22136
47. Wickner, W., Driessen, A. J. M., and Hartl, F.- Demel, R., Weisbeek, P., and de Kruijff, B. 100. Richter, D. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 278–280
U. (1991) Ann. Rev. Biochem.60, 101–124 (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 3882–3893

--- Page 535 ---

532 Chapter 10. An Introduction to Metabolism
References
101. Douglass, J., Civelli, O., and Herbert, E. (1984) 114. Merkler, D. J., Kulathila, R., Consalvo, A. P., 127. Cooper, A. A., and Stevens, T. H. (1995) Trends
Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 665–715 Young, S. D., and Ash, D. E. (1992) Biochemis- Biochem. Sci.20, 351–356
102. Arfin, S. M., and Bradshaw, R. A. (1988) try31, 7282–7288 128. Rechsteiner, M., Rogers, S., and Rote, K.
Biochemistry27, 7979–7984 115. Ping, D., Katopodis, A. G., and May, S. W. (1987)Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 390–394
103. Tolan, D. R., Amsden, A. B., Putney, S. D., (1992)J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 3998–4000 129. Stadtman, E. R. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11,
Urdea, M. S., and Penhoet, E. E. (1984) J. Biol. 116. Eipper, B. A., Milgram, S. L., Husten, E. J., 11–12
Chem.259, 1127–1131 Yun, H.-Y., and Mains, R. E. (1993) Protein Sci. 130. Rivett, A. J. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 300 – 305
104. Rubenstein, P. A., and Martin, D. J. (1983) J. 2, 489–497 131. Loshon, C. A., Swerdlow, B. M., and Setlow, P.
Biol. Chem.258, 3961–3966 117. Bradbury, A. F., and Smyth, D. G. (1991) (1982)J. Biol. Chem.257, 10838–10845
105. Sheff, D. R., and Rubenstein, P. A. (1992) J. Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 112–115 132. Olden, K., Parent, J. B., and White, S. C. (1982)
Biol. Chem.267, 20217–20224 118. Low, M. G., and Saltiel, A. R. (1988) Science Biochim. Biophys. Acta.650, 209–232
106. Kulkarni, M. S., and Sherman, F. (1994) J. Biol. 239, 268–275 133. Chiang, H.-L., and Dice, J. F. (1988) J. Biol.
Chem.269, 13141–13147 119. Lisanti, M. P., and Rodriguez-Boulan, E. Chem.263, 6797–6805
107. Gan, K., Gupta, S. D., Sankaran, K., Schmidt, (1990)Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 113–118 133a.Dell’Angelica, E. C., Mullins, C., Caplan, S., and
M. B., and Wu, H. C. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 120. Graves, D. J., Martin, B. L., and Wang, J. H. Bonifacino, J. S. (2000) FASEB J.14, 1265–1278
16544–16550 (1994)Co-and post-translational modification of 134. Hershko, A., and Ciechanover, A. (1992) Ann.
108. Vogt, A., Sun, J., Qian, Y., Tan-Chiu, E., proteins, Oxford Univ. Press, New York Rev. Biochem.61, 761–807
Hamilton, A. D., and Sebti, S. M. (1995) 121. Tuboi, S., Taniguchi, N., and Katunuma, N., 135. Dice, J. F. (1987) FASEB J.1, 349–357
Biochemistry34, 12398–12403 eds. (1992) Post-Translation Modification of 136. Stadtman, E. R. (1990) Biochemistry29, 6323–6331
109. Parish, C. A., and Rando, R. R. (1994) Proteins, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 137. Rogers, S., Wells, R., and Rechsteiner, M.
Biochemistry33, 9986–9991 122. Barrett, G. C., ed. (1985) Chemistry and (1986)Science234, 364–368
110. Pompliano, D. L., Rands, E., Schaber, M. D., Biochemistry of the Amino Acids, Chapman and 138. Bachmair, A., Finley, D., and Varshavsky, A.
Mosser, S. D., Anthony, N. J., and Gibbs, J. B. Hall, London; New York (1986)Science234, 179–186
(1992)Biochemistry31, 3800–3807 123. Niehrs, C., Kraft, M., Lee, R. W. H., and Huttner, 139. Gonda, D. K., Bachmair, A., Wünning, I.,
111. Busby, W. H., Jr., Quackenbush, G. E., Humm, W. B. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 8525–8532 Tobias, J. W., Lane, W. S., and Varshavsky, A.
J., Youngblood, W. W., and Kizer, J. S. (1987) J. 124. Rucker, R. B., and Wold, F. (1988) FASEB J.2, (1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 16700–16712
Biol. Chem.262, 8532–8536 2252–2261 140. Madura, K., and Varshavsky, A. (1994) Science
112. Fischer, W. H., and Spiess, J. (1987) Proc. Natl. 125. Klotz, A. V., Leary, J. A., and Glazer, A. N. 265, 1454–1458
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 3628–3632 (1986)J. Biol. Chem.261, 15891–15894 140a.Davydov, I. V., and Varchavsky, A. (2000) J.
113. Katopodis, A. G., Ping, D., Smith, C. E., and 126. Oliver, C. N., Ahn, B., Moerman, E. J., Biol. Chem.275, 22931–22941
May, S. W. (1991) Biochemistry30, 6189–6194 Goldstein, S., and Stadtman, E. R. (1987) J. 141. Herschlag, D. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 20871–
Biol. Chem.262, 5488–5491 20874
Study Questions
1. Outline in detail, using structural formulas, the in human semen is about 12 mM, whereas the
enzyme-catalyzed reactions by which cells in the glucose concentration within cells is usually less
human body convert glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate than 1 mM. If the ratio [ NADPH ] / [ NADP+] is
into pyruvate. 104 times higher than the ratio [ NADH ] / [ NAD+],
what is the minimum glucose concentration in
2. Describe, using chemical structural formulas, the cells that could allow formation of 12 mM fruc-
reactions involved in the breakdown of glycogen tose? The standard Gibbs energies of formation
to glucose 1-phosphate and the synthesis of glyco- from the elements Go in kJ/ mol at 25°C are:
f
gen from glucose 1-phosphate. D-glucose– 917, D-fructose– 915.
3. Describe the reaction steps in gluconeogenesis by 6. Outline the reactions by which glyceraldehyde
which pyruvate is converted into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphateis converted to 3-phosphoglycerate
3-phosphate. with coupled synthesis of ATPin the glycolysis
pathway. Show important mechanistic details.
4. Compare the reactions of pyruvate that give rise
to the following three compounds. List coenzymes 7. Why can’t acetyl CoA be converted to glucose in
or electron-carriers involved in each case and indi- animals?
cate any intermediate compounds.
a) Ethanol 8. Describe the parallel reaction sequences between
b) Lactic acid the citric acid cycle and the β oxidation pathway.
c) Acetyl-Coenzyme A
9. Contrary to legend, camels do not store water in
5. Mammalian sperm cells metabolize D-fructose their humps, which actually consist of a large fat
preferentially as a source of energy. Fructose is deposit. How can these fat deposits serve as a
formed in cells of the seminal vesicle from D-glucose source of water? Calculate the amount of water
via reduction to the sugar alcohol sorbitol using (liters) that can be produced by the camel from
NADPH, followed by oxidation of sorbitol to 500 g of fat. Assume for simplicity that the fat
fructose using NAD+. The fructose concentration consists entirely of tripalmitin.

--- Page 536 ---

533
Study Questions
10. A little-known microorganism carries out the –OOC– CHOH – CHO. The latter is then dehydro-
following net reaction in a series of enzymatic steps: genated to D-glycerate. Write out a detailed scheme
for the dicarboxylate cycle. Also indicate how
heptanoyl CoA + CoASH + NAD+ + glucose and other cell constituents can be formed
FAD + H O → pentanoyl CoA + from intermediates created in this biosynthetic
2
acetyl CoA + NADH + FADH + H+ pathway.
2
The net result is exactly the same as that of the 16. Write a balanced fermentation sequence by which
β oxidation pathway, but for this microorganism, glycogen can be converted rapidly to sn-glycerol
the pathway is demonstrably different in that 3-phosphate and pyruvate in insect flight muscle.
pentanal, CH (CH ) CHO, is an intermediate in How many molecules of ATP per glucose unit of
3 2 3
the sequence. Which enzyme(s) of the β oxidation glycogen will be formed?
pathway does this microorganism lack? Propose
an enzymatic reaction to account for the formation 17. Show which parts (if any) of the citric acid cycle
of this intermediate and a series for its conversion are utilized in each of the following reactions and
to the acyl CoA. ATP is not required. what if any additional enzymes are needed in each
case.
11. Most natural fatty acids are even-numbered. What a) Oxidation of acetyl-CoA to CO
2
is the product of the final thiolase reaction to form b) Catabolism of glutamate to CO
2
an odd-chain fatty acid? Give a brief explanation. c) Biosynthesis of glutamate from pyruvate
d) Formation of propionate from pyruvate
12. It has been calculated that an average man takes
in 1.5 kg of solid food and 1.4 kg of water per day. 18. a) If the Gibbs energy change ∆G’ (pH 7) for the
He gives off 3.5 kg of waste and 0.75 kg of sweat. reaction A → B is + 25 kJ/ mol at 25°C, what would
It would thus appear that he should be losing over the ratio of [ B ] / [ A ] be at equilibrium?
1 kg per day through normal activites. How do b) Suppose that the reaction were coupled to the
you account for the fact that his weight remains cleavage of ATP as follows:
relatively constant?
A A–P B–P B
13. Suppose that fatty acids, instead of being broken
ATP ADP H O P
2 i
down in two carbon fragments, were metabolized
in three carbon units. What product(s) would Suppose further that the group transfer potential
Dr. Knoop have observed in the urine of his (–∆G’ ) for the phospho group of A –P at 25°C, pH
experimental dogs? 7 is 12 kJ/mol and that the equilibrium constant
for conversion of A –P to B –P is the same as that
14. A renowned pharmacologist has announced the for conversion of A to B. Calculate the concentra-
discovery of a new drug that specifically inhibits tions of A, B, A –P and B –P at equilibrium if the
the fatty acid oxidation pathway within minutes phosphorylation state ratio R is 104 M–1.
p
of ingestion. The effects last for several hours only.
The drug has no other effects on the subjects. The 19. This problem refers to the 13 meter climb described
pharmacologist argues that this will increase athletic in Chapter 6, Study Question 14.
performance by shifting oxidative metabolism a) Assuming that muscle accounts for 30% of total
entirely to the more rapidly mobilized carbohydrate body mass, estimate the amounts (mmol / kg,
degradation pathway. Assume that the drug does total mmol, and total grams) of each of the
work exactly as he suggests. Explain in a sentence or following in their coenzyme forms: nicotinamide,
two how the drug would affect the performance of pantothenic acid, thiamin. You may be able to
a) a sprinter in the 100 meter dash obtain rough estimates from the vitamin content
b) a long-distance runner in a marathon of pork.
b) Calculate how many times, on the average,
15. Some bacteria use a “dicarboxylic acid cycle” to each molecule of nicotinamide would undergo
oxidize glyoxylate OHC – COO – to CO . The reduction and re-oxidation (i.e., turn over)
2
regenerating substrate for this cycle is acetyl-CoA. during the climb. Do the same for pantothenic
It is synthesized from glyoxylate by a complex acid (cycling between acyl-CoA and free CoA
pathway that begins with conversion of two mole- forms) and for thiamin through its catalytic
cules of glyoxylate to tartronic semialdehyde: cycles.

--- Page 537 ---

534 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
Much of the control of cellular metabolism is accomplished by hormones and other molecules
that bind to receptor proteins embedded in the plasma membrane. Left: Many receptors are
Extracellular 127 3 S 6 S 4 5 C 7 N 6 s fa e m ve i n ly - h (C el h ix a p tr t a e n r s 2 m 3) e . m C b e r n a t n e e r : p A ro r te e i l n at s e , d th a e d b r e e s n t e k rg n i o c w re n c e b p e t in or g , v th ie e w li e g d h t h r e e r c e e f p r t o o m rs t o h f e t e h x e t r rh ac o e d ll o u p l s a i r n
Intracellular 1 D O 79 COHO Y3 O 16 CO D – 1133 HH+HNHO S H SOS165 OH HHO H H O OSS220074 5 s re id c e e , p h to a r s s a i n m te o r le a c c u t l w e i o th f t G he T h P o -h rm yd o r n o e ly a z d in re g n “ a G lin p e r ( o g t r e e i e n n s ) ,” b w ou h n ic d h i n p a th ss e s c i e g n n t a e l r s ( , F o i f g t . e 1 n 1 - f 6 o ) r . s R h i o g r h t t p : e T ri h o e d s s e
2 4 of time, to enzymes and other proteins. One structural domain of a G protein (Fig. 11-7C) shown
here contains a β propeller domain which binds to the Ras-like domain of the α subunit. A few
residues of the latter are visible in the center of this image.
Contents
535 A. Pacemakers and the Control of Metabolic Flux Boxes
538 B. Genetic Control of Enzyme Synthesis 546 Box 11-A Cholera Toxin and Other Dangerous
538 1. One Gene or Many? Proteins
538 2. Repression, Induction, and Turnover 550 Box 11-B Glutathione, Intracellular Oxidation–
539 3. Differences among Species Reduction Buffer
539 C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 557 Box 11-C The Attraction of Dictyostelium to
539 1. Allosteric Control Cyclic AMP
540 Regulatory subunits 573 Box 11-D Cancer
541 Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis
541 2. Covalent Modification by Phosphorylation and Tables
Dephosphorylation 543 Table 11-1 A Few Covalent Modification Reactions
541 Protein kinases and cyclic AMP Utilized to Control Metabolism
544 Protein phophatases 554 Table 11-2 Some Molecules (Second Messengers)
545 Phophorylation in bacteria That Carry Intracellular Signals
545 3. Other Modification Reactions Involving Group 572 Table 11-3 A Few Oncogenes That Have Interested
Transfer Biochemists
549 4. Thiol–disulfide Equilibria 577 Table 11-4 A Few Abbreviations Used in Discussions
549 5. Regulatory Effects of H+, Ca2+, and Other of Cell Signaling
Specific Ions
552 6. Compartments and Organized Assemblies
553 D. Hormones and Their Receptors
553 1. Beta Adrenergic Receptors and Related
Seven-Helix Proteins
556 2. Adenylate Cyclases (Adenylyl Cyclases)
557 3. Guanine Nucleotide-Binding Proteins
(G Proteins)
558 Monomeric G proteins
559 Acylation and prenylation
559 Three-dimensional structures
561 4. Guanylate Cyclase (Guanylyl Cyclase), Nitric
Oxide, and the Sensing of Light
561 5. Bacterial Chemoreceptors
563 E. Calcium, Inositol Polyphosphates, and
Diacylglycerols
563 1. Alpha Adrenergic Receptors
563 2. Phosphatidylinositol and the Release of
Calcium Ions
566 F. Regulatory Cascades
566 1. Advantages of Regulatory Cascades
567 2. Substrate Cycles
567 G. Insulin and Related Growth-Regulating
Hormones
568 1. Metabolic Effects of Insulin
568 2. Insulin Receptors
569 3. A Second Messenger for Insulin?
571 H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell Cycle
571 1. Oncogenes and Proto-oncogenes
576 The ras oncogenes
576 Transcription factors
578 2. The MAP Kinase Cascade
580 3. The Cell Cycle and Control of Growth
581 References
587 Study Questions

--- Page 538 ---

535
The Regulation of Enzymatic 11
Activity and Metabolism
S S
Extracellular
N
1 2 7 6 4 5 C
3 7 6
Intracellular 1 D O 79 COHO
Y31
O
6
C O D – 11 3 3 H H +HN HO S H S O S165 HO
H HO
H
H
O O SS220074 5
2 4
Living cells must operate with controls that provide and inhibits the enzyme. Enzyme activity may also be
a stable environment and a relatively constant supply turned on or off by the effect of a hormone, by some
of materials needed for biosynthesis and for meeting other external stimulus, or by internal mechanisms
the energy needs of cells. They must also be responsive that sense the metabolic state of the cell. Enzymes,
to changes in their environment and must be able to other than the pacemaker, that catalyze reactions in a
undergo mitosis and reproduce when appropriate. pathway may not be regulated and may operate at a
The necessary control of metabolism and of growth steady state close to equilibrium.
is accomplished largely through mechanisms that If conditions within a cell change, a pacemaker
regulate the locations, the amounts, and the catalytic reaction may cease to be rate limiting. A reactant
activities of enzymes. The purpose of this chapter is plentiful in one circumstance may, in another, be de-
to summarize these control mechanisms and to intro- pleted to the point that the rate of its formation from
duce terminology and shorthand notations that will a preceding reaction determines the overall rate. Thus,
be used throughout this book. Many of the control as we have seen in Chapter 10, metabolism of glucose
elements considered are summarized in Fig. 11-1. in our bodies occurs through the rapidly interconvertible
phosphate esters glucose 6-phosphate and fructose
6-phosphate. The pacemaker enzyme in utilization of
A. Pacemakers and the Control of Metabolic glucose or of glycogen is often phosphofructokinase
Flux (Fig. 11-2, step b) which catalyzes further metabolism
of fructose 6-phosphate. However, if metabolism by
Metabolic control can be understood to some this route is sufficiently rapid, the rate of formation
extent by focusing attention on those enzymes that of glucose 6-phosphate from glucose catalyzed by
catalyze rate-limiting steps in a reaction sequence. hexokinase (Fig. 11-2, step a) may become rate limiting.
Suchpacemaker enzymes1–4 are often involved in Some catabolic reactions depend upon ADP, but
reactions that determine the overall respiration rate of under most conditions its concentration is very low
a cell, reactions that initiate major metabolic sequences, because it is nearly all phosphorylated to ATP. Reactions
or reactions that initiate branch pathways in metabolism. utilizing ADP may then become the rate-limiting pace-
Often the first step in a unique biosynthetic pathway makers in reaction sequences. Depletion of a reactant
for a compound acts as the pacemaker reaction. Such sometimes has the effect of changing the whole pattern
a reaction may be described as the committed step of of metabolism. Thus, if oxygen is unavailable to a yeast,
the pathway. It usually proceeds with a large decrease the reduced coenzyme NADH accumulates and reduces
in Gibbs energy and tends to be tightly controlled. pyruvate to ethanol plus CO (Fig. 10-3). The result is
2
Both the rate of synthesis of the enzyme protein and a shift from oxidative metabolism to fermentation.
the activity of the enzyme, once it is formed, may be Pacemaker enzymes are often identified by the
inhibited by feedbackinhibition which occurs when fact that the measured mass action ratio, e.g., for the
an end product of a biosynthetic pathway accumulates reaction A + B → P + Q ,the ratio [P][Q]/[A][B], is far

--- Page 539 ---

536 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
Precursor
molecule, A A B C D E P
ATP
cAMP
“second messenger”
Figure 11-1 Some control elements for metabolic reactions. Throughout the book modulation of the activity of an enzyme by allosteric
effectors or of transcription and translation of genes is indicated by dotted lines from the appropriate metabolite. The lines terminate in
a minus sign for inhibition or repression and in a plus sign for activation or derepression. Circles indicate direct effects on
enzymes, while boxes indicate repression or induction of enzyme synthesis.
from that predicted by the known equilibrium constant determined by the rate of diffusion of a compound
for the reaction. Another approach to identifying a through a membrane. Thus, membrane transport
pacemaker enzyme is to inhibit it and observe resulting processes can serve as pacemakers.
changes in steady-state metabolite concentrations.5 If A general approach to analysis of complex meta-
the pacemaker enzyme is inhibited, its substrate and bolic pathways or to cell growth was introduced by
other compounds preceding the step catalyzed by this Savageau,9–11 and similar approaches have been followed
enzyme will accumulate. At the same time the concen- by others.3,12– 19 They emphasize the flux of material
trations of products of the pacemaker reaction will through a pathway under steady-state conditions and
drop as a result of their relatively more rapid removal recognize that every enzyme in a sequence can have
by enzymes catalyzing subsequent steps. However, some effect on the overall rate. Consider a chain of
conclusions drawn by this approach may sometimes enzymes E to E acting on substrate S , which is
1 n 0
be erroneous.6 converted via substrates S , S ... S into product S :
1 2 n–1 n
In spite of its usefulness, the pacemaker concept
is oversimplified. It is often impossible to identify a
specific pacemaker enzyme. When both catabolism
(11-1)
and biosynthesis occur (e.g., as in the scheme in Fig.
11-2) it may be more useful to model the entire system The flux F = d[S ]/dt is a constant. If the concentration
n
with a computer than to try to identify pacemakers.7,8 of E were to change by an infinitesimal amount a
i
It is also important to realize that reaction rates may be corresponding change in F might be observed. The
enarbmem
lleC
Steroid
Complex
hormone
Binding
protein
+
Activated mRNA Enzymes as well
nucleotides + ± – a re s g s u tr l u at c o tu ry r a p l r a o n te d ins
Complex Transcription affect every step
in metabolism.
Binding
Activated
protein Proteins
amino acids
± –
Translation Feedback
repression
Feedback inhibition
Precursor
Catabolism
activation
– (Product)
– +
Further
Isoenzymes – biosynthesis
with differing
Hormone regulatory C' D' P'
receptor properties
Hormone E–P(active) H O
2
“messenger” ADP
+ Phosphatase
ATP
E (inactive) P
i
E E E E E
1 2 3 n–1 n
S S S S S S
0 1 2 3 n–1 n

--- Page 540 ---

A. Pacemakers and the Control of Metabolic Flux 537
Stored glycogen
f
P H O
i 2
Glucose
6-phosphatase
Glucose Glucose 6-phosphate
Hexokinase
ATP a ADP
ATP
Phosphofructokinase-2
Fructose 6-phosphate
ADP d
2 – O 3 POCH 2 O O β PO 3 2 – β-Fructose 2,6- e P i
HO bisphosphate H O b c
CH OH 2
2
OH
+ –
Fructose 1,6-
Phosphofructokinase
+ – bisphosphatase
2 – O POCH CH OPO 2 –
AMP 3 2 O α 2 3
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate HO
OH
OH
Further From
metabolism lactate
and
amino acid
metabolism
➞
Figure 1➞1-2 Roles of phosphofructose kinase and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase in the control of the breakdown ( ) and
storage ( ) of glycogen in muscle. The uptake of glucose from blood and its release from tissues is also illustrated. The
allosteric effector fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (Fru-2,6-P ) regulates both phosphofructokinase and fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase.
2
These enzymes are also regulated by AMP if it accumulates. The activity of phosphofructokinase-2 (which synthesizes
Fru-2,6-P ) is controlled by a cyclic AMP-dependent kinase and by dephosphorylation by a phosphatase.
2
ratio of the change in flux to the change in [E] is the the ratio of the logarithmic change in velocity to the
i
sensitivity coefficient Z: change in the concentration of an effector:
i
κ = d ln v/d ln [P] (11-4)
dF F dlnF
Z = =
i
d[E i ] [E i ] dln[E i ] (11-2) It follows that the logarithmic change in flux d ln F can
be related to the change in effector concentration [P] in
The sensitivity coefficient can range from 1 for a pace- the following way:
maker enzyme to almost zero for a very active enzyme
that does not significantly limit the flux. The sum of dlnF = Zκdln[P] (11-5)
i
Z to Z is equal to 1:
1 n
From this equation we see that for the flux to be sensi-
∑i=1 tively dependent upon [P], both Z
i
and κ must be rea-
Z = 1 sonably large. This is exactly the case for many of the
i
(11-3) enzymes that have been identified as pacemakers.
n
This approach can be applied to many aspects of
Not only can the concentration [E] change but also allo- metabolic control including cell growth.20
i
steric effectors can alter the activity. Kacser and Burns
defined this in terms of a controllability coefficient (cid:1),

--- Page 541 ---

538 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
both subunits in different proportions. The two sub-
B. Genetic Control of Enzyme Synthesis
units are encoded by separate genes which are expressed
to different extents in different tissues. Thus, heart
All cellular regulatory mechanisms depend upon
muscle and liver produce mainly subunit B, while
the synthesis of proteins, that is, upon the expression
skeletal muscle produces principally subunit A. A
of genetic information. Within a given cell many
third subunit type (C) is found only in the testes.29
genes are transcribed continuously but others may
Why do cells produce isoenzymes? One reason
remain unexpressed. The rates of both transcription
may be that enzymes with differing kinetic parameters
and degradation of mRNA are regulated, as are the
are needed.30 Substrate concentrations may vary greatly
rates of synthesis of enzymes on the ribosomes in the
between different tissues; between different subcellu-
cytoplasm and the rates of protein turnover. Although
lar compartments; and at different developmental
a single copy of a gene in each member of a pair of
stages of an organism. While the need for various
chromosomes is often adequate, there are situations
isoenzymes of lactate dehydrogenase is not well un-
in which extra copies of part of the DNA of a cell are
derstood,31 it is easier to understand the roles of the
formed. Such gene amplification, which is dealt
multiple forms of hexokinase, the enzyme that catalyzes
with further in Chapter 27, provides the possibility for
the reaction of step a in Fig. 11-2. The brain enzyme
very rapid synthesis of an enzyme or other protein. It
has a high affinity for glucose (K = 0.05 mM). Thus,
often happens in highly specialized cells such as those m
it is able to phosphorylate glucose and to make that
of the silkworm’s silk glands which must make enor-
substrate available to the brain for metabolism, even
mous amounts of a small number of proteins.21
if the glucose concentration in the tissues falls to low
values.31a On the other hand, glucokinase, the hexo-
kinase isozyme found in liver, has a much higher K
1. One Gene or Many? m
of ~10 mM. It functions to remove excess glucose
from blood, whose normal glucose content is ~5.5 mM.
Many enzymes exist within a cell as two or more
Glucokinase reaches its maximal activity only when
isoenzymes, enzymes that catalyze the same chemical
the glucose concentration becomes much higher.32
reaction and have similar substrate specificities. They
This happens after a meal when the absorbed glucose
are not isomers but are distinctly different proteins
passes through the portal circulation directly to the
which are usually encoded by different genes.22,23 An
liver.
example is provided by aspartate aminotransferase
Another important source of variation in enzymes
(Fig. 2-6) which occurs in eukaryotes as a pair of cyto-
as well as in other proteins is alternative splicing
solic and mitochondrial isoenzymes with different
of mRNA.33 For example, transcription of the mouse
amino acid sequences and different isoelectric points.
α-amylase gene in the salivary gland starts at a different
Although these isoenzymes share less than 50% se-
site (promoter) than does transcription in the liver.
quence identity, their internal structures are nearly
The two common isoforms of the insulin receptor (Fig.
identical.24– 27 The two isoenzymes, which also share
11-11) arise because a 36-nucleotide (12-amino acid)
structural homology with that of E. coli,28 may have
exon is spliced out of the mRNA for the shorter protein.
evolved separately in the cytosol and mitochondria,
Isoenzymes of aldolase34 and of many other proteins
respectively, from an ancient common precursor. The
are formed in a similar manner. Frame-shifting
differences between them are concentrated on the
during protein synthesis (Chapter 29) and also post-
external surface and may be important to as yet un-
translational alterations may give rise to additional
known interactions with other protein molecules.
modified forms. They are often synthesized in rela-
Isoenzymes are designated in various ways. They
tively small amounts but may be essential to the life
are often numbered in the order of decreasing electrophoretic
of the cell. In addition, genetic variants of almost any
mobility at pH 7 to 9: Most enzymes are negatively
protein will be found in any population. These often
charged in this pH range and the one that migrates
differ in sequence by a single amino acid.
most rapidly toward the anode is numbered one. This
is the same convention used in the electrophoresis of
blood proteins (e.g. see Box 2-A).
2. Repression, Induction, and Turnover
Lactate dehydrogenase exists in the cytoplasm
of humans and most animals as five forms which are
The synthesis of some enzymes is referred to as
easily separable by electrophoresis and are evenly
constitutive, implying that the enzyme is formed no
spaced on electropherograms.8 This enzyme is a tetra-
matter what the environmental conditions of the cell.
mer made of two kinds of subunits. Isoenzyme 1, which
For example, many bacteria synthesize the enzymes
has the highest electrophoretic mobility, consists of
required to catabolize glucose under all conditions of
four identical type B subunits. The slowest moving
growth. Other enzymes, known as inducible, are
tetramer (isoenzyme 5) consists of four type A subunits,
often produced only in small amounts. However, if
while the other three forms, AB , A B , and A B, contain
3 2 2 3

--- Page 542 ---

C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 539
cells are grown in specific inducing conditions for residues in an enzyme may be invariant among many
these enzymes, they are synthesized in larger quanti- species. However, there are usually many differences
ties. For example, when E. coli is cultivated in the in the distribution of amino acid residues on the
presence of lactose, several of the enzymes required surface of the proteins. Since changes in the surface
for the catabolism of that disaccharide are formed. shape of a protein molecule may alter the sensitivity to
Synthesis of these enzymes is normally repressed. a potential allosteric effector, very different regulatory
The genes which code for them are kept turned off properties are sometimes found between species.
through the action of protein repressors which bind
to specific sites on the DNA and block transcription of
the genes that they control (Fig. 11-1). Repressors have C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes
allosteric properties; in one conformation they bind
tightly to DNA but in another they do not bind. For Some regulation of metabolism is provided by the
example, the free tryptophan repressor binds to DNA kinetic properties of the enzymes. Thus, the value
only weakly, but if a high concentration of tryptophan (mol/l) of the Michaelis constant K for an enzyme is
m
develops within the cell the tryptophan binds to an usually low if the substrate normally occurs in very
allosteric site on the repressor protein (Fig. 5-35). This low concentration. It is likely to be higher if the enzyme
changes the conformation to one that binds tightly to acts on an abundant substrate. A tightly bound product
the appropriate control sequence in the DNA. In the of an enzymatic reaction will be released slowly from
case of lactose catabolism the free repressor binds to an enzyme if the product concentration within the cell
control sequences in the DNA until the inducer, allo- is too high. However, while some regulation of meta-
lactose (Chapters 4 and 28), binds at an allosteric site. bolism is provided in such simple ways, the rapid
This decreases the affinity of the repressor for DNA changes that result from stimulation by hormones or
and the controlled genes are derepressed. There are by nerve impulses depend upon additional specific
also many protein transcription factors that have a regulatory mechanisms that are discussed in the fol-
positive effect, binding to DNA and promoting tran- lowing sections.
scription of specific genes.
Synthesis of many enzymes is repressed most of
the time. The appearance of an enzyme at a particular 1. Allosteric Control
stage in the life of an organism as well as the differing
distributions of isoenzymes within differentiated tissue Probably the most common and widespread control
result from derepression. The control of enzyme syn- mechanisms in cells are allosteric inhibition and
thesis may also be exerted during the splicing of tran- allosteric activation. These mechanisms are incorpo-
scripts and at the translational level as well. These rated into metabolic pathways in many ways, the most
control mechanisms are often relatively slow, with frequent being feedback inhibition. This occurs when
response times of hours or even days. However, an end product of a metabolic sequence accumulates
effects on the synthesis of some hormones, such as and turns off one or more enzymes needed for its own
insulin (Section G), may be observed within a few formation. It is often the first enzyme unique to the specific
minutes. biosynthetic pathway for the product that is inhibited. When
Genetic factors influence the rate of not only a cell makes two or more isoenzymes, only one of
synthesis of proteins but also their breakdown, i.e., them may be inhibited by a particular product. For
the rate of turnover. As we have seen in Chapter 10, example, in Fig. 11-1 product P inhibits just one of the
some enzymes are synthesized as inactive proenzymes two isoenzymes that catalyzes conversion of A to B;
which are later modified to active forms, and active the other is controlled by an enzyme modification
enzymes are destroyed, both by accident and via reaction. In bacteria such as E. coli, three isoenzymes,
deliberate hydrolytic pathways. Protein antienzymes which are labeled I, II, and III in Fig. 11-3, convert
may not only inhibit enzymes but may promote their aspartate to β-aspartyl phosphate, the precursor to the
breakdown.35 An example is the antienzyme that end products threonine, isoleucine, methionine, and
controls ornithine decarboxylase, a key enzyme in lysine. Each product inhibits only one of the isoenzymes
the synthesis of the polyamines that are essential to as shown in the figure.
growth.36,37 As with all cell constituents, the synthesis of Feedback can also be positive. Since AMP is a
enzymes and other proteins is balanced by degradation. product of the hydrolysis of ATP, its accumulation is a
signal to activate key enzymes in metabolic pathways
that generate ATP. For example, AMP causes allosteric
3. Differences among Species activation of glycogen phosphorylase, which catalyzes
the first step in the catabolism of glycogen. As is shown
Catalytic mechanisms of enzymes have usually in Fig. 11-5, the allosteric site for AMP or IMP binding
been conserved throughout evolution, and certain is more than 3 nm away from the active site. Only a

--- Page 543 ---

540 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
COO– subtle conformational change accom-
HOOC panies binding of IMP.38 However, 31P
H NH3 + NMR studies indicate that binding of
L-Aspartate the activator may induce a change in the
I II III state of protonation of the phosphate
group of the coenzyme pyridoxal phos-
phate at the active site as explained in
Chapter 12.
A second pattern of allosteric con-
trol may be referred to as precursor
activation or feed-forward control.
O COO– A metabolite acting as an allosteric
C effector turns on an enzyme that either
–HO3P O
H NH3 + acts directly on that metabolite or acts
β−Aspartyl phosphate on a product that lies further ahead in
the sequence. For example, in Fig. 11-1,
NADH + H+ metabolite C activates the enzyme that
NAD+ + P catalyzes an essentially irreversible
i
reaction of compound D. An actual
O COO–
C L-Lysine example is provided by glycogen synthase,
H whose inactive “dependent” or D form
H NH3 +
is activated allosterically by the glycogen
Aspartate semialdehyde
precursor glucose 6-phosphate.39 See
also phosphorylase kinase (Section 2).
Regulatory subunits. Some
enzymes consist not only of catalytic
subunits, which contain the active sites,
COO– but also of regulatory subunits. The
HO CH2 L-Methionine latter bind to the catalytic subunits and
serve as allosteric modifiers. The bind-
H NH3 +
ing of inhibitors or activators to specific
L-Homoserine
sites on the regulatory subunits induces
conformational changes in these subunits,
altering their interaction with the cata-
COO–
–HO3P OH2C lytic subunits. A well-known example is
aspartate carbamoyltransferase (ACTase)
H NH3 +
from E. coli (Fig. 7-20).40– 42 Its regulatory
subunits carry binding sites for cytidine
triphosphate (CTP), which acts as a
HO H
specific allosteric inhibitor of the en-
COO–
zyme. The significance of this fact is
H3C
that ACTase catalyzes the first reaction
H NH3 +
specific to the pathway of synthesis of
L-Threonine pyrimidine nucleotides (Chapter 25).
CTP is an end product of that pathway
and exerts feedback inhibition on the
CH2 COO– enzyme that initiates its synthesis. ATP
H3C also binds to the regulatory subunits
and causes inhibition of the enzyme.
O
L-Isoleucine 2-Oxobutyrate
Figure 11-3 Feedback inhibition of enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of threonine, isoleucine, methionine, and lysine in
E. coli. These amino acids all arise from L-aspartate, which is formed from oxaloacetate generated by the biosynthetic reactions
of the citric acid cycle (Fig. 10-6). Allosteric inhibition. Repression of transcription of the enzyme or of its synthesis on
ribosomes.

--- Page 544 ---

C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 541
In the presence of CTP the binding of the substrates is
2. Covalent Modification by Phosphorylation
cooperative, as would be anticipated if there is a two-
and Dephosphorylation
state conformational equilibrium involving the catalytic
subunits. This would be similar to the case depicted
Rapid alteration of the activities of enzymes is often
in Fig. 9-13 except that trimers rather than dimers are
accomplished by reversible covalent modification.39,47
involved and the inhibitor is a part of the regulatory
Many different modification reactions are known
subunit and is controlled by binding of CTP.
(Table 11-1) and there are doubtless many more to be
Binding of ATP to ACTase decreases the coopera-
discovered. Probably the most widespread and certainly
tivity in substrate binding, again as predicted for a two-
the most studied is phosphorylation, the transfer of a
state model. However, as suggested by its structure,
phospho group from ATP or other suitable donor to a
this enzyme system is more complex, as also indicated
side chain group on the enzyme. An example is the
by the observed anticooperative binding of the activator
phosphorylation by ATP of hydroxyl groups of specific
CTP. X-ray studies show that binding of ligands causes
serine residues in the two enzymes glycogen phospho-
a movement along subunit interfaces as well as local-
rylase and glycogen synthase. These modifications are
ized conformational changes within the subunits. These
accomplished through a series or cascade of reactions
are reminiscent of the changes seen upon binding of
initiated by the binding of hormones to cell surface
oxygen to hemoglobin (Fig. 7-25).
receptors or by nerve impulses as is shown in Fig. 11-4.
In the absence of such a stimulus, glycogen phospho-
Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. The highly
rylase is present in its unphosphorylated or b form.
regulated enzymes phosphofructokinase and fructose
Although this form can be activated allosterically by
1,6-bisphosphatase catalyze steps b and c of the reactions
AMP, it is normally nearly inactive. When an appro-
in Fig. 11-2, reactions that control glucose metabolism
priate hormone binds to the cell surface a cascade of
in cells. These enzymes have been studied for many
reactions, as described in Section D, leads to activation
years but the important allosteric effector(cid:2)-fructose
of an enzyme called phosphorylase kinase.47a This
2,6-bisphosphate was not discovered until 1980.43–46
enzyme transfers a phospho group from ATP to the
– OH group of the side chain of Ser 14 in each subunit
2–O3P–O–CH2 O O–PO3 2– (Fig. 11-4, left center), converting the enzyme into the
active glycogen-degrading phosphorylasea. This
HO CH2OH switches the cellular metabolism from that designed
to deposit the storage polysaccharide glycogen to one
OH
that degrades glycogen to provide the cell with energy.
β-Fructose
Serine 14 of glycogen phosphorylase is located adjacent
2,6-bisphosphate
to the allosteric AMP binding site (Fig. 11-5) and is
surrounded by positively charged arginine and lysine
This compound, which is formed from fructose 6-phos-
side chains. Phosphorylation induces a rearrangement
phate by a new enzyme, phosphofructokinase-2 (also
of hydrogen bonds involving these residues and in
called fructose 6-phosphate 2-kinase) in step d, Fig. 11-2
some way sends an appropriate signal to the active site.
activates phosphofructokinase allosterically. At the
It also increases the affinity for AMP in the allosteric
same time it inhibits fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, an
sites.48,48a Phosphorylase kinase is allosterically acti-
enzyme required for reversal of glycogen breakdown,
vated by AMP, a product of its action – a feed-forward
that is, for the conversion of various metabolites arising
activator.
from amino acids into glycogen (Fig. 11-2, step c).46a
The control of glycogen phosphorylase by the
These same two key regulated enzymes are also affected
phosphorylation–dephosphorylation cycle was dis-
by many other metabolites. For example, ATP in excess
covered in 1955 by Edmond Fischer and Edwin Krebs50
inhibits phosphofructokinase, decreasing the overall
and was at first regarded as peculiar to glycogen break-
rate of glucose metabolism and consequently of ATP
down. However, it is now abundantly clear that similar
production. Citrate, which is exported from mito-
reactions control most aspects of metabolism.51 Phos-
chondria when carbohydrate metabolism is excessive,
phorylation of proteins is involved in control of carbo-
inhibits the same enzyme. On the other hand, AMP
hydrate, lipid, and amino acid metabolism; in control
acts together with fructose 2,6-bisphosphate to activate
of muscular contraction, regulation of photosynthesis
the pathway for glycogen breakdown and to inhibit
in plants,52 transcription of genes,51 protein syntheses,53
that for its synthesis (Fig. 11-2). The concentration of
and cell division; and in mediating most effects of
the regulator fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is controlled
hormones.
by mechanisms that are discussed in the following
section.
Protein kinases and cyclic AMP. Phosphorylase
kinase is one of hundreds of different protein kinases
which differ in specificity toward their substrates, in

--- Page 545 ---

542 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
Nerve
impulse
Glucagon Vasopressin
Adrenaline Phosphatidyl Angiotensinogen II Adrenaline
(epinephrine) inositol
PI Membrane
Glucagon β adrenergic α adrenergic
receptor receptor receptor
ATP cAMP Inositol trisphosphate (Ins-P)
3
+ + + +
(R-cAMP)
2
+ Ca2+,
+ sequestered
Inactive
protein kinase A
RC
2 2
Free Ca2+
2C(Active protein kinase A)
Inactive Active
phosphorylase phosphorylase
kinase kinase
Glycogen Inactive
P i phosphorylaseb ATP ADP glycogen synthase H 2 O
(inactive)
Active protein + Active protein
phosphatase -2 phosphatase 1
Many
kinases
Glycogen
H 2 O phos ( p a h ct o iv ry e l ) asea ADP ATP glycog A e c n t i s v y e nthase P i
Glycogen
P i ( o n f g re lu si c d o u s e e s ) UDP
Glycogen Glycogen
breakdown synthesis
Glycogen
Glc-1-P (n-1 residues UDP-Glc
HO
of glucose) 2
PP 2P
i i
UTP
Glc-1-P
P HO
i 2
Glucose Glc-6-P
Glycolytic pathway
Figure 11-4 Cascades of p➞hosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions involved in the control of the metabolism of
glycogen. Heavy arrows ( ) show pa➞thways by which glucosyl units of glycogen are converted into free➞ glucose or enter
the glycolytic pathway. Green arrows ( ) trace the corresponding biosynthetic pathways. Gray arrows ( ) trace the
pathway of activation of glycogen phosphorylase by a hormone such as adrenaline (epinephrine) or glucagon and by the
action of protein kinases. A few of the related pathways in the network of reactions that affect glycogen metabolism are also
shown. This includes protein phosphatases, which remove phospho groups from proteins and allow cells to relax to the state
that preceded activation. One of these (protein phosphatase 1) is activated by phosphorylation by an insulin-stimulated
protein kinase.49 However, the significance is uncertain; control of glycogen synthase is complex.49a

--- Page 546 ---

C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 543
TABLE 11-1
A Few Covalent Modification Reactions Utilized to Control Metabolism
Reaction Example Location of discussion
A. Phosphorylation–dephosphorylation
Phosphorylation of Ser, Thr Glycogen phosphorylase This section
Phosphorylation of Tyr Insulin receptor Section G
Adenylylation, Uridylylation Glutamine synthetase Chapter 25
ADP-ribosylation This section
B. Methylation of carboxyl groups Bacterial glutamyl Section D,5
Aspartyl Box 12-A
Protein phosphatase 2A Section C,3
Ras Section D,3
C. Formation of carbamino groups
In hemoglobin Eq. 7-23
In ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase Chapters 13,23
D. Acylation
Acetylation Histones Chapter 27
Palmitoylation Ras Section D,3
Prenylation Ras Chapter 22
E. Disulfide formation and cleavage Chapters 10,15
Section C,4
Catalytic site’
Figure 11-5 Schematic diagram of the
Glycogen glycogen phosphorylase dimer. The
storage site’ view is down the twofold axis of the
dimer with the allosteric and Ser-P
sites toward the viewer. Access to the
catalytic site is from the far side of the
molecule. The diagram shows the
major change in conformation of the
amino-terminal residues on phospho-
rylation. Residues 10 – 23 of glycogen
Allosteric phosphorylaseb are shown as a thick
solid line. These residues are not well
effector site’
ordered and make intrasubunit con-
Cap
tacts. Upon phosphorylation, residues
Allosteric
10– 23 change their conformation and
effector site
are shown dark crosshatched with the
position of Ser14-P indicated at the
intersubunit interface. The fold of
residues 24 – 80 through the α1 helix,
the cap, and the α2 helix is shown
lightly cross-hatched. The AMP allo-
steric effector site is located between
theα2 helix and the cap region of the
other subunit. The glycogen storage
site is located on the surface of the
Glycogen subunit and is associated with a long
storage site α helix. The catalytic site is at the
center of the subunit where the two
domains come together. Courtesy of
Catalytic site Louise N. Johnson.48

--- Page 547 ---

544 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
the functional groups phosphorylated, and in their kinase is present in some mammalian tissues67,68 and is
allosteric activators.39,51,54– 56 There may be more than widespread in invertebrates.51,67 The cyclic nucleotide-
1000 different protein kinase genes in vertebrate animals, binding domains of these kinases have structures
accounting for ~2% of the genome.57 Many cytosolic similar to that of the E. coli catabolite activator protein
protein kinases transfer a phospho group from ATP to (Fig. 28-6)51,68 and the catalytic domains are structurally
either a serine or threonine side chain at a β bend or similar to those of many other kinases.
other surface feature of the substrate protein. Some Among the kinases that phosphorylate glycogen
sites of phosphorylation in the substrate proteins synthase is a casein kinase, named for the fact that
contain lysine or arginine residues, separated from the milk protein casein is also a good substrate. A
the serine or threonine by only one residue but many family of casein kinases are found in the cytoplasm and
other sequences may also surround phosphorylation nuclei of all eukaryotic cells. They phosphorylate serine
sites.51,58 In the case of the 750-residue glycogen and threonine side chains but have structures distinct
synthase, seven serine residues in different parts of from those of the cAMP-dependent kinases.69– 72 Casein
the chain are phosphorylated by the action of at least kinase-2 (CK2) phosphorylates many proteins, including
five different kinases.49,49a,59,60 The various kinases several that function in gene replication, transcription,
phosphorylate groups at different sites and their effects and cell growth and division.72a Theileriosis, a para-
are roughly additive. sitic disease of cattle in Africa, is caused by the tick-
Some of the best known protein kinases (designated borne protist Theileria parva. The condition is often
PKA or cAPK) are those that depend upon 3', 5'-cyclic fatal as a result of a leukemia-like condition resulting
AMP (cAMP) as an allosteric effector. They are oligo- from overexpression of the casein kinase-2 gene.72
meric proteins of composition R C , where R is a regula- Phosphorylase kinase is one of a large group of
2 2
tory subunit and C is a catalytic subunit. Unless specialized protein kinases, each of which acts on a
small number of proteins. It is regulated both by
NH2 covalent modification and allosterically by calcium
ions.73– 78 It contains four different kinds of subunits
N ranging in size from 17 kDa to about 145 kDa and
N
has the composition (αβγδ) . Phosphorylation of one
4
serine on each of the 145-kDa α and 120-kDa β regula-
N N tory subunits is catalyzed by a cAMP-dependent
CH2 O protein kinase. The δ subunit is the Ca2+-binding
O
protein calmodulin (Fig. 6-8) and serves as a regula-
–O
P tory subunit sensitive to Ca2+. The 45-kDa γ subunit
O OH
O contains the catalytic domain as well as a calmodulin-
3',5'-cyclic AMP binding domain.79 Other Ca2+-dependent protein
kinases include the protein kinase C family, which
cAMP is present, the regulatory subunits interact with is discussed further in Section E, Ca2+/calmodulin-
the catalytic subunits, keeping them in an inactive dependent protein kinases,80,81 and a plant kinase
inhibited form. However, when cAMP is present it with a regulatory domain similiar to calmodulin.82
binds to the regulatory subunit dimer, releasing the Protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) place phospho
two active catalytic units (Eq. 11-6). This reaction is groups on the phenolic oxygen atoms of tyrosyl residues
of some proteins.83– 85 The resulting phosphotyrosine
R C + 4 cAMP → R (cAMP) + 2C (11-6) accounts for only about 1/3000 of the phospho groups
2 2 2 4
in proteins but has aroused interest for two reasons.
reversible and as the concentration of cAMP is reduced First, binding of growth hormones, such as epidermal
by hydrolysis (see Eq. 11-8) the regulatory units recom- growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor
bine with the catalytic subunits and again inhibit them. (PDGF), and insulin, to their receptors stimulates
There are two prominent types of mammalian tyrosine-specific protein kinase activity of the receptor
cAMP-dependent protein kinases.51,61 The catalytic proteins (see Figs. 11-11 to 11-13).69,83,86 Second, a
subunit is identical for both; the 41-kDa peptide as number of cancer-causing oncogenes encode similar
isolated from beef heart has 350 residues and an N kinases (Section H). Tyrosine protein kinases are essen-
terminus blocked by a myristoyl (tetradecanoyl) group.62 tial components of the cell division cycle (see Fig. 11-15).
One phosphoserine and one phosphothreonine are also
present.51 The ~50-kDa regulatory subunits vary in Protein phosphatases. Most regulatory alter-
size and may also be subject to additional regulation by ations in enzymatic activity are spontaneously revers-
phosphorylation.63 Three-dimensional structures are ible. The concentration of the allosteric effector soon
known for both the catalytic62,64,65 and the regulatory66 drops and the covalent modifications are reversed so
subunits. A cyclic GMP (cGMP)-activated protein that the system relaxes to a state approximating the

--- Page 548 ---

C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 545
original one. Among the enzymes required for this E. coli enzyme,107,108 causing isocitrate to build up in
reversal are the protein phosphatases that remove the the citric acid cycle (Fig. 10-6) and to be diverted into
phospho groups placed on amino acid side chains by the glyoxylate pathway, which is depicted in Fig. 17-16.
kinases.54,86– 91 For example, four different phosphatases In this instance, it appears likely that the negative
act on the (inactive) phosphorylated glycogen synthase charge of the added phospho group causes electrostatic
and on the phosphorylated forms of glycogen phos- repulsion of the substrate isocitrate. In agreement
phorylase and phosphorylase kinase. At least one of with this concept, mutation of Ser 113 of this enzyme
these (a protein phosphatase 1; see Fig. 11-4) is regulated to Asp (mutant S113 D) also inactivates the enzyme.109
by phosphorylation that is stimulated by insulin.49,49a In addition to kinase–phosphatase cycles, bacteria
The matter is made yet more complex by the presence use at least two other ATP-dependent regulatory mech-
in tissues of small protein inhibitors which can prevent anisms.110 In the sensor kinase/response regulator
the action of these phosphatases.88,92– 94 Another natu- (or“two-component”) systems110-111 a sensor protein,
rally occurring inhibitor is the polyether fatty acid upon being allosterically activated, phosphorylates
okadaic acid, a “shellfish poison,” actually produced itself (autophosphorylation) on a specific histidyl
by dinoflagellates but which accumulates in sponges residue to form an N-phosphohistidine derivative.
and in mussels and other bivalves.94 See also Chapter 12, The phosphohistidine then transfers its phospho
D,4. group onto a specific aspartyl group in the response
Most protein phosphatases are specific toward regulator causing the regulator to bind to its target
phosphoserine and phosphothreonine89,95 or toward protein and to exert its regulatory effect. The best
phosphotyrosine residues.90,96– 98 Some have a dual known example involves the control of the motion of
specificity.99 There are Ca2+-activated phosphatases100 bacterial flagella which is discussed briefly in Section
and phosphatases with transmembrane segments D,5 and further in Chapter 19.
connected to receptors on the external cell surface. The third bacterial regulatory device is the phospho-
Some phosphorylation–dephosphorylation regulatory enolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase system (Eq. 8-4).
systems utilize bifunctional enzymes consisting of a It is involved not only in transport but also in control-
protein kinase fused to a protein phosphatase. For ling a variety of physiological processes.110,112,113
example, the same E. coli enzyme that phosphorylates
isocitrate dehydrogenase also hydrolyzes off the phos-
pho group that it has put on.101 Another bifunctional 3. Other Modification Reactions Involving
kinase–phosphatase catalyzes both the formation Group Transfer
(reaction d of Fig. 11-2) and breakdown (reaction e) of
fructose 2,6–bisphosphate in eukaryotic tissues. This Nucleotidylation, the transfer of an entire nucleo-
kinase–phosphatase enzyme is, in turn, controlled by tidyl unit, rather than just a phospho group, to a protein
phosphorylation by a cAMP-dependent protein kinase. is sometimes utilized for regulation. For example, gluta-
In the liver, this latter phosphorylation strongly inhibits mine synthetase of E. coli is modified by adenylylation,
the kinase activity preventing buildup of fructose transfer of an adenylyl group from ATP to a tyrosine
2,6-bisphosphate, the allosteric activator of phospho- side chain.114 – 116 Relaxation to the unmodified enzyme
fructokinase-1, which catalyzes reaction b of Fig. 11-2. is catalyzed by a deadenylylating enzyme. A regulatory
Consequently, when a pulse of cAMP is generated within protein that undergoes reversible uridylylation117 also
a hepatocyte, glycolysis is blocked but glycogenolysis, functions in this system (see Fig. 24-7). Several mito-
the breakdown of glycogen by phosphorylase, is stim- chondrial and cytoplasmic proteins are modified by
ulated. The glucose 6-phosphate that is formed is attachment of ADP-ribosyl groups to specific guanidino
hydrolyzed by glucose-6-phosphatase releasing glucose groups of arginine and other side chain groups.114,118– 123
into the bloodstream. On the other hand, in heart and ThisADP–ribosylation requires the coenzyme NAD+
probably in most other tissues, a different isoenzyme as the ADP-ribosyl donor and is also catalyzed by
form of the bifunctional enzyme is present. Phospho- bacterial toxins such as cholera toxin (Box 11-A) and
rylation by cAMP activates the kinase and inhibits the by diphtheria toxin (Box 29-A). A second kind of ADP–
phosphatase. Consequently, in these tissues cAMP ribosylation occurs within nuclei where the enzyme
induces the activation of glycogenolysis and glycolysis poly(ADP–ribose) synthase catalyzes both an initial
coordinately.102– 105 In brain a different allosteric activator, ADP–ribosylation of an amino acid side chain group
ribose 1, 5-bisphosphate, may regulate phospho- and also addition of more ADP-ribosyl units to form
fructokinase-1.106 a polymer124 (see Chapter 27).
Like inorganic phosphate, inorganic sulfate can be
Phosphorylation in bacteria. A bacterial enzyme converted into an activated form in which the sulfate
whose activity is controlled by phosphorylation is resembles the terminal phospho group of ATP (Eq. 17-38).
isocitrate dehydrogenase. Transfer of a phospho The resulting activated sulfo group can be transferred
group to the – OH of Ser 113 completely inactivates the to other compounds including enzymes. Formation of

--- Page 549 ---

546 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
BOX 11-A CHOLERA TOXIN AND OTHER DANGEROUS PROTEINS
As recently as 1980 it was estimated that there
were ~ 100 million cases of acute diarrhea in Asia,
Africa, and Latin America;ain 1991 there were four
million deaths among children under five years of
age.b The causative agents are bacteria and one of
the most dangerous is Vibrio cholerae,which multiplies
in the small intestine and secretes an exotoxin.
Cholera toxin causes such a rapid loss of fluid and
salts from the body that death occurs very quickly,
even in adults. There is little cellular damage and
almost all deaths can be prevented by intravenous
administration of water, salts, and the antibiotic The three-dimensional structure of cholera toxin.e Side
tetracycline. Fluids can also be given orally if view of the β subunit pentamer as a ribbon drawing.
glucose, which promotes intestinal absorption, is Bound noncovalently to it are five molecules of the gan-
included with the Na+, K+, Cl–, and HCO
3
– salts.b glioside G M1 (compare with the structure in Fig. 7-5). The
diacyl glycerol parts of the gangliosides are buried in the
Cholera toxin consists of one 240-residue A sub-
membrane that lies below the toxin molecule. Courtesy
unit and a ring of five 103-residue B subunits.c–e The
of W. G. J. Hol.
latter is a “targeting complex,” a bacterial lectin each
subunit of which binds to the galactose and sialic acid
termini of a single molecule of ganglioside G . cut by bacterial proteases to give A and A fragments
M1 1 2
joined by an S – S bridge. Within the victim’s cells
the disulfide is reduced to generate the active toxin,
Galβ1→3Galβ1→4Galβ1→4Glcβ1– Ceramide the 192- to 194- residue A fragment.f,g
1
3 This toxin subunit is an enzyme, an ADP-ribo-
↑
syltransferase which catalyzes transfer of ADP-
NeuNAcβ2 ribosyl units from the coenzyme NAD+ to specific
arginine side chains to form N-ADP-ribosyl deriva-
Ganglioside G (See also Fig. 20-11) tives of various proteins. Of the proteins modified
M1
by cholera toxin, the most significant is the guanyl
nucleotide regulatory protein G of the adenylate
s
The nonpolar ceramide chains of the ganglioside cyclase system.c,f,h ADP ribosylation of arginine
are buried in the membrane bilayer. The initial tight 201 of the α subunit of protein G inhibits the GTP
s
binding (K ~ 2 x 107 M–1) of the toxin is followed by hydrolysis that normally allows the protein to relax
f
a poorly understood process in which the A subunit to an unactivated form.e The ADP-ribosylated G
s
enters the cell. The peptide chain of this subunit is keeps adenylate cyclase activated continuously and
+
NH2
H2N N Protein
H
Arginine side chain NAD+
Cholera toxin
NH2
Nicotinamide
N
N
O O O
N
N H2C P P CH2
O
H
OH HO O O– O O– N Protein
N
O H
OH OH NH+
2

--- Page 550 ---

C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 547
BOX 11-A (continued)
(A) Stereoscopic view of the G M1 A Asn 90 Asn 90
pentasaccharide binding site, Lys 91 Lys 91
showing both direct and solvent-
mediated hydrogen bonding inter- Asn 14 Trp 88 Asn 14 Trp 88
Glu 51 Glu 51
actions between sugar and protein
residues. The viewpoint is from His 13 His 13
“underneath” the membrane bind- Gln 56 Gln 56
Tyr 12 Tyr 12
ing surface of the B pentamer.
His 57 His 57
Starred residues are from an adja-
cent monomer. The terminal galac-
Gly 33* Gly 33*
tose residue of the pentasaccharide Gln 61 Gln 61
(upper right) is most deeply inserted Glu 11 Glu 11
into the binding site and is involved
in the greatest number of identifiable
binding interactions. The sialic acid
residue, near the bottom of the figure, B
is also involved in several hydro-
gen-bonding interactions. Hydro-
phobic interactions include the
approach of the sialic acid acetyl
group to the edge of the Tyr 12
phenyl ring and the positioning
of the terminal galactose sugar ring
parallel to the indole ring of Trp 88.
Figures generated using program
MolScript (Kraulis, 1991). From
Merrittet al.e (B) Side view of the
intact AB toxin as an α-carbon
5
trace. The nicked A chain is at the
top. The nick can be seen in the
upper right corner, as can a disulfide
bridge connecting the A and A
1 2
segments. A single α helix extends
into the “pore” in the center of the B
C
pentamer. The side chains of Trp 88
of the B subunits have been added
to mark the ganglioside binding
sites. These side chains are also
seen in (A). (C) View of the AB
5
molecule from the bottom showing
the helix from the A fragment
2
surrounded by a tight cage of five
long helices from the B subunits.
Residues 237–240 of the A frag-
2
ment have the KDEL sequence and
may extend from the pore to contact
the membrane. (B) and (C) courtesy
of Edwin M. Westbrook. See Zhang
et al.c
generating abnormally high concentrations of cAMP. bacterial virus similar to M13 (Chapter 5), which
It is the effect of the cAMP on proteins of the intestinal carries the toxin gene. Entrance into the Vibrio cell
mucosal cell membranes that causes the disastrous occurs with the help of pili which are present in
excessive secretion of water and salts that are charac- many strains.i,j
teristic of cholera. Many other bacterial toxins have AB structures
n
Most strains of V. cholerae are relatively harm- similar to that of cholera toxin. For example, toxin-
less but they may suddenly be transformed into a producing strains of E. coli are also important causes
virulent toxin-producing form by infection with a of diarrhea in humans and in domestic animals.k–m

--- Page 551 ---

548 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
BOX 11-A CHOLERA TOXIN AND OTHER DANGEROUS PROTEINS (continued)
The heat-labile E. coli enterotoxin, whose gene is its ADP-ribosylating toxin, produces a calmodulin-
carried on a plasmid, is a close relative of cholera stimulated adenylate cyclase which, when taken up
toxinn,o and also catalyzes ADP ribosylation of argi- by phagocytic cells, disrupts their function in the
nine 201 of the G sα subunit.m Bordetella pertussis, body’s defense system.t–w In addition to the heat-
which causes whooping cough, forms a similar labile enterotoxin, some strains of E. coli produce
toxin that attacks the inhibitory regulatory protein heat-stable toxins, small 18-residue peptides related
Gp,q as well as transducin and inactivates them by in structure to the intestinal peptide guanylin.l,x
i
ADP ribosylation. Diphtheria toxin (Box 29-A), These peptides bind to a membrane-bound guanylate
the exotoxin from Pseudomonas aeruginosa,and cyclase activating fluid secretion into the intestine.
the toxin from Clostridium botulinum also catalyze Why do our cells obligingly provide both initial
ADP-ribosylation reactions.k,r receptors and means of uptake for these dangerous
Some bacteria produce effects similar to those toxic proteins? Some ADP-ribosylation reactions
of cholera toxin in different ways. For example, are a natural part of cell functiony and some hor-
among a variety of toxic proteins produced by mones, for example thyrotropin, seem to stimulate
Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax, their activity. It may be that the toxins use mecha-
is an adenylate cyclase that is able to enter the nisms designed to respond to normal hormonal
host’s cells.s Similarly, B. pertussis, in addition to stimulation.
a Holmgren, J. (1981) Nature (London)292, 413–417 M., Rappuoli, R., and Hol, W. G. J. (1995) Biochemistry34,
b Hirschhorn, N., and Greenough, W. B., III (1991) Sci. Am. 10996–11004
264(May), 50–56 n Sixma, T. K., Pronk, S. E., Kalk, K. H., van Zanten, B. A. M.,
c Zhang, R. -G., Scott, D. L., Westbrook, M. L., Nance, S., Berghuis, A. M., and Hol, W. G. J. (1992) Nature (London)355,
Spangler, B. D., Shipley, G. G., and Westbrook, E. M. (1995) J. 561–564
Mol. Biol.251, 563–573 o Sixma, T. K., Kalk, K. H., van Zanten, B. A. M., Dauter, Z.,
d Zhang, R. -G., Westbrook, M. L., Westbrook, E. M., Scott, D. L., Kingma, J., Witholt, B., and Hol, W. G. J. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.230,
Otwinowski, Z., Maulik, P. R., Reed, R. A., and Shipley, G. G. 890–918
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.251, 550–562 p Antoine, R., and Locht, C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 6450–6457
e Merritt, E. A., Sarfaty, S., van den Akker, F., L’Hoir, C., Martial, q Goodemote, K. A., Mattie, M. E., Berger, A., and Spiegel, S.
J. A., and Hol, W. G. J. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 166–175 (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 10270–10277
f Moss, J., Stanley, S. J., Morin, J. E., and Dixon, J. E. (1980) J. Biol. r Ohtsuka, T., Nagata, K. -i, Iiri, T., Nozawa, Y., Ueno, K., Ui, M.,
Chem.255, 11085–11087 and Katada, T. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 15000–15005
g Janicot, M., Fouque, F., and Desbuquois, B. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. s Arora, N., Klimpel, K. R., Singh, Y., and Leppla, S. H. (1992) J.
266, 12858–12865 Biol. Chem.267, 15542 –15548
h Tsai, S.-C., Adamik, R., Moss, J., and Vaughan, M. (1991) t Benz, R., Maier, E., Ladant, D., Ullmann, A., and Sebo, P. (1994)
Biochemistry30, 3697–3703 J. Biol. Chem.269, 27231–27239
i Williams, N. (1996) Science272, 1869 – 1870 u Heveker, N., Bonnaffé, D., and Ullmann, A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
j Waldor, M. K., and Mekalanos, J. J. (1996) Science272, 1910– 269, 32844 –32847
1914 v Otero, A. S., Yi, X. B., Gray, M. C., Szabo, G., and Hewlett, E. L.
k Moss, J., and Vaugham, M., eds. (1990) ADP – Ribosylating Toxins (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 9695–9697
and G Proteins: Insights into Signal Transduction, American w Hackett, M., Guo, L., Shabanowitz, J., Hunt, D. F., and Hewlett,
Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC E. L. (1994) Science266, 433–435
l Sato, T., Ozaki, H., Hata, Y., Kitagawa, Y., Katsube, Y., and x Ozaki, H., Sato, T., Kubota, H., Hata, Y., Katsube, Y., and
Shimonishi, Y. (1994) Biochemistry33, 8641–8650 Shimonishi, Y. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 5934–5941
m van den Akker, F., Merritt, E. A., Pizza, M. G., Domenighini, y Moss, J., and Vaughan, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 12327–12330
tyrosine-O-sulfate residues may be a widespread (Section D,5, Fig. 11-8, and Chapter 19). Demethylation
regulatory mechanism.125– 127 One of the proteins occurs by hydrolysis, which is catalyzed by esterases.
known to contain a tyrosine sulfate residue is the blood Carboxylmethylation also occurs in eukaryotic cells
protein fibrinogen. Many polysaccharides and oligo- but is often substoichiometric and part of a mechanism
saccharides on glycoproteins exist in part as sulfate for repair of isomerized or racemized aspartyl residues
esters (Fig. 4-11).128,129 in aged proteins (Box 12-A). However, the major eukary-
Carboxyl groups of certain glutamate side chains otic protein phosphatase 2A is carboxylmethylated at
in proteins that control bacterial chemotaxis are its C terminus,131 as are the Ras proteins discussed in
methylated reversibly to form methyl esters.130 This Section D,3.
carboxylmethylation occurs as part of a reaction It was pointed out in Chapter 4 that many proteins,
sequence by which the bacteria sense compounds that especially those secreted from cells or taking up resi-
can serve as food or that indicate the presence of food dence within membranes, are glycosylated. Specific

--- Page 552 ---

C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 549
glycosyl groups may be removed or added to a protein. reactions. Reduction of these disulfides by reduced
Such alterations may all be regarded as parts of control glutathione will return the enzymes to their reduced
mechanisms that direct the proteins to their proper states. The small protein glutaredoxin, whose eukary-
locations or determine the length of time that they remain otic forms are also called thioltransferase, resembles
active. The nuclear histones undergo extensive and thioredoxins. It undergoes reduction by glutathione
reversible acetylation132,133 which is thought to be and, in turn, reduces S – S linkages in a different set of
important to replication of DNA and to transcription proteins than those reduced by thioredoxin.
(Chapters 27 and 28). Low-molecular-mass thiols such as coenzyme A
and protein-bound thiol cofactors such as phospho-
pantetheine are present in all cells. Their SH groups
4. Thiol-Disulfide Equilibria can also be oxidized to disulfides and it is of interest
that in resting bacterial spores these compounds exist
The activity of enzymes is sometimes controlled largely as disulfides or mixed disulfides. Upon germi-
by the formation or the reductive cleavage of disulfide nation of the spores special enzymes reduce the disul-
linkages between cysteine residues within the protein. fides.136 Some proteins involved in control of protein
An example is provided by the effects of light on en- synthesis contain SH groups that add covalently to
zymes of chloroplasts. Light absorbed by the photo- C-6 atoms of a uracil ring in specific mRNA molecules.
synthetic reaction centers generates NADPH, which Control of their state of reduction may also be impor-
in turn reduces thioredoxin. This is a small protein tant.137
containing a readily accessible S – S bridge that can be
reduced to a pair of SH groups (Box 15-C). Within
illuminated chloroplasts, these newly formed SH groups 5. Regulatory Effects of H+, Ca2+, and Other
reduce disulfide bridges to activate a series of enzymes Specific Ions
including fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase that participate in
the photosynthetic incorporation of CO into sugars134,135 The pH of the cytoplasm is controlled tightly. Yet
2
(see Chapter 23). Thioredoxins also function within transient changes can occur and may affect many aspects
bacteria, fungi, and animals, serving as electron carriers of metabolism. For example, rapid glycolysis leads to
for processes, some of which are involved in metabolic lactic acid formation with an associated drop in internal
control. A number of known enzymes and other pH. Both increases and decreases in pH have been
proteins, including insulin, contain reducible S – S associated with successive stages in embryonic or
bridges within peptide loops as in the thioredoxins. larval development.138 Cytoplasmic pH changes may
Another possible control mechanism for SH-containing serve as regulatory signals. A well-understood example
enzymes depends upon formation of mixed disulfides is the Bohr effect on oxygenation of hemoglobin
with small SH-containing metabolites. For example, (Chapter 7). Another is the protein kinase C-stimulated
cysteamine disulfide, a minor constituent of cells, H+/Na+ exchange through membranes. Because the
cysteine, or some small disulfide, could be released Na+ concentration is high outside cells and low inside,
the exchange leads to an increase in cytosolic pH with
H +N–CH –CH –S–S–CH –CH –NH + many resultant effects on metabolism.139,140 Exchange
3 2 2 2 2 3
of external Cl– for internal HCO – also affects pH.141
Cysteamine disulfide (cystamine) 3
Uptake of Ca2+ into cells, or release of this ion
from intracellular stores, is a major regulatory mecha-
following hormonal or other stimulation and could
nism in many if not all cells (see Section E). Mn2+
react by disulfide exchange (Eq. 11-7) to either inactivate
activatesphosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Eq.
or activate an enzyme.
13-46) and may be a regulator of gluconeogenesis.142
Iron controls the synthesis of ferritin and of transferrin
E–SH E–S–S–R receptors137 (Chapter 16). The specific metal ions
present in many biological macromolecules are likely
R–S–S–R R–SH
to participate in additional regulatory processes.
Cystamine Cysteamine
Phosphate and bicarbonate ions are important
(Cystine) (Cysteine) (11-7)
substrates for many enzymatic processes and as such
have regulatory functions. Bicarbonate controls the key
Almost all cells contain a high concentration (3–9
enzyme of photosynthesis, ribulose bisphosphate
mM) of the thiol-containing tripeptide glutathione
carboxylase, by carbamate formation (Fig. 13-12).
(G– SH, Box 11-B). In its disulfide form it participates
Chloride ions activate amylases and may affect the
in forming disulfide bridges in secreted extracellular
action of “G proteins” that mediate hormone actions.
proteins (Eq. 10-9) via intermediate mixed disulfides.
Other observed effects of ions are too numerous to
Mixed disulfides with glutathione as well as with other
mention.
thiols can also be formed within cells by oxidative

--- Page 553 ---

550 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
BOX 11-B GLUTATHIONE, INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION–REDUCTION BUFFER
O may involve the cooperation of glutathione, glutare-
H NH3 + H doxin (Box 15 - C), and ascorbic acid.j
N Another protective function is fulfilled by the
–OOC N COO–
H formation of soluble mercaptides and other “conju-
H
O H2C gates” of glutathione with many foreign substances
(xenobiotics).These conjugates are made by the action
SH
of a large family of glutathione transferasese,k,l
γ
Glutathione( -L-Glutamyl-L-cysteinylglycine)
(see also Chapter 13) which catalyze addition reactions
of the thiolate group of glutathione with epoxides,
In 1888, de Rey-Pailhade discovered the sulfur- alkylating compounds, and chlorinated aromatic
containing tripeptide that we now know as gluta- hydrocarbons. The addition step is often followed
thione (G –SH).a By 1929 it had been characterized by elimination, e.g., of chloride ion, as in the follow-
by F. G. Hopkins and others as an unusual tripeptide ing example. Two steps of hydrolysis and an acety-
present in most, if not all, eukaryotic cells. Within lation by acetyl-CoA form a mercapturic acid:
animal cells the concentration is typically 1–5 mM.
Lower levels are found in many bacteria.b– g
The most interesting chemical characteristics of
glutathione are the γ-glutamyl linkage and the pres- NO2
ence of a free SH group. The latter can be oxidized
to form a disulfide bridge linking two glutathione O2N Cl
molecules.
G-SH
2G— SH – 2[H] → G— S— S— G Addition and
E°’ (pH 7) = –0.25 V elimination
Cl–
It is this redox reaction that has focused attention on NO2
glutathione as an intracellular reducing agent whose O
primary function may be to keep the SH groups H
O2N S CH2 C C N CH2 COO–
of proteins reduced (see Section C). Glutathione H
is usually maintained in its reduced form by the NH
flavoprotein glutathione reductase (Fig. 15-12).
HO C H
Although it is primarily an intracellular com- 2 O CH2 CH2 C COO–
pound, glutathione is secreted by epithelial and Hydrolysis Glutamate NH3 +
other cells. It may regulate the redox state of pro-
teins in plasma and other extracellular fluids as well
HO
2
as within cells. In addition, glutathione released
from the liver may be an important source of cysteine
Glycine
for other tissues. In the endoplasmic reticulum and
the periplasm of bacteria glutathione functions in
NO2
crosslinking thiol groups in newly formed proteins
H
(Eq. 10-9). O2N S C COO–
Glutathione also has a series of protective
NH3 +
functions. It reduces peroxides via the selenium-
Acetyl-S-CoA
containingglutathione peroxidase (Box 15-H) and
is part of a system for trapping and detoxifying harm-
CoA-SH
ful free radicals. The importance of this function is
suggested by the fact that Entamoeba histolytica, an NO2
organism that lacks both mitochondria and aerobic
respiration, produces no glutathione.h It may be O2N S C H COO–
that the primary function of glutathione in eukaryotes
HN
is to protect cells against oxygen toxicity associated
with their mitochondria.i The renewal of free Mercapturic acid C CH3
radicals and regeneration of protein –SH groups O

--- Page 554 ---

C. Regulation of the Activity of Enzymes 551
BOX 11-B (continued)
The mercapturic acids and related compounds Synthesis of glutathione occurs within cells
can then be exported from cells by an ATP-dependent via the ATP-dependent reactions in the following
export pump.m Glutathione is a coenzyme for scheme.n,o Much more γ-glutamylcysteine is synthe-
glyoxalase (Eq. 13-33), maleylacetoacetate sized than is converted to glutathione and the excess
isomerase (Eq. 13-20), and DDT dehydrochlorinase. is degraded by γ-glutamyl cyclotransferase to form
The latter enzyme catalyzes elimination of HCl from the cyclic amide 5-oxoproline. Cleavage of ATP
molecules of the insecticide and is especially active is required to reopen the ring to form glutamate.
in DDT-resistant flies.a Glutathione is said to be the Although biosynthesis is exclusively intracellular,
specific factor eliciting the feeding reaction of Hydra; most glutathione appears to be secreted and degraded
that is, the release of glutathione from injured cells by extracellular enzymes. The membrane-bound
causes the little animal to engulf food. γ-glutamyl transferase catalyzes hydrolysis of
Oxidized glutathione
(G—S—S—G)
NAD(P)H + H+
radi F c r a e l e s Peroxides T h r y a d n r s o - - Glutathione reductase
genase
NAD(P)+
PROTECTIVE
FUNCTIONS Glutathione (G—SH) COENZYME
γ—Glu—Cys—Gly FUNCTIONS
Electrophiles, X
SH
Uptake and
HO recycling
2 ADP + P
γ—Glu—Cys—Gly
Amino
i
acid Glutathione synthetase
S outside γ-Glutamyl
X of cell transferase
on membrane ATP
outer surface
Mercaptides
leukotrienes
prostaglandins
estrogens Cys-Gly Glycine BIOSYNTHESIS
melanins
etc.
γ—Glu—Cys (or AA)
Glutamate ADP + P γ-Glutamyl
i cysteine γ-Glutamyl
synthetase cyclotransferase
γ-Glutamyl- Cysteine
amino acid ATP
Cysteine
Recycle
excess
γ-Glu-Cys
Glutamate
COO–
ADP + P i 2H 2 O
5-Oxoprolinase
HN
ATP
Amino acid
inside cell
O
5-Oxoproline
Scheme illustrating interrelationships of the biosynthesis and protective, coenzymatic, and transport functions of
glutathione. See also Meister.c

--- Page 555 ---

552 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
BOX 11-B GLUTATHIONE, INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION–REDUCTION BUFFER (continued)
glutathione to cysteinylglycine which is further e Orrenius, S., Ormstad, K., Thor, H., and Jewell, S. A. (1983) Fed.
cleaved by a peptidase. The activity of γ-glutamyl- Proc.42, 3177–3188
f Viña, J., ed. (1990) Glutathione: Metabolism and Physiological
transferase varies among tissues and is especially
Functions, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida
high in cells of the kidney tubules. The cysteine and g Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and Avramovic, O., eds. (1989) Glu-
glycine released by the peptidase may reenter the tathione-Chemical, Biochemical and Medical Aspects (Coenzymes
cells by a Na+-dependent process. Meister proposed and Cofactors), Vol. 3, Wiley, New York (Parts A & B)
that the γ-glutamyltransferase, acting on amino h Fahey, R. C., Newton, G. L., Arrick, B., Overdank-Bogart, T., and
Aley, S. B. (1984) Science224, 70–72
acids, forms γ-glutamyl amino acids (see scheme) i Garcia de la Asuncion, J., Millan, A., Pla, R., Bruseghini, L.,
which are released withincells and are cleaved by Esteras, A., Pallardo, F. V., Sastre, J., and Viña, J. (1996) FASEB J.
γ-glutamyl cyclotransferase.c The cleavage of gluta- 10, 333–338
j Meister, A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 9397–9400
thione would provide the driving force for amino
k Ji, X., Johnson, W. W., Sesay, M. A., Dickert, L., Prasad, S. M.,
acid uptake. However, this is probably a minor Ammon, H. L., Armstrong, R. N., and Gilliland, G. L. (1994)
pathway.p Biochemistry33, 1043–1052
Trypanosomes contain little glutathione but a l Hebert, H., Schmidt-Krey, I., and Morgenstern, R. (1995) EMBO
J.14, 3864–3869
large amount of trypanothione [N1,N8-bis (gluta-
mIshikawa, T. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 463–468
thionyl) spermidine].q This diamide of spermidine n Polekhina, G., Board, P. G., Gali, R. R., Rossjohn, J., and Parker,
(Chapter 24) is in equilibrium with its disulfide, a M. W. (1999) EMBO J.18, 3204–3213
24-membered macrocyclic structure, and appears o Lu, S. C. (1999) FASEB J.13, 1169–1183
p Lee, W., Hawkins, R., Peterson, D., and Viña, J. (1996) J. Biol.
to have functions similar to those of glutathione.
Chem.271, 19129–19133
Trypanothione reductase, which is unique to trypa- q Henderson, G. B., Ulrich, P., Fairlamb, A. H., Rosenberg, I.,
nosomes, is a potential target for antitrypanosomal Pereira, M., Sela, M., and Cerami, A. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
drugs,q– s as is trypanothione synthetase.t Bacteria U.S.A.85, 5374–5378
r Bollinger, J. M., Jr., Kwon, D. S., Huisman, G. W., Kolter, R., and
that do not synthesize glutathione usually accumulate
Walsh, C. T. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 14031–14041
some other thiol, e.g., α-glutamylcysteine or coen- s Sullivan, F. X., Sobolov, S. B., Bradley, M., and Walsh, C. T.
zyme A, in high concentrations.u,v (1991)Biochemistry30, 2761–2767
t Henderson, G. B., Yamaguchi, M., Novoa, L., Fairlamb, A. H.,
and Cerami, A. (1990) Biochemistry29, 3924–3929
a Meister, A. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 185–188 u Sundquist, A. R., and Fahey, R. C. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 719–
b Bernofsky, C., and Wanda, S.-Y. C. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257,
725
6809–6817 v Swerdlow, R. D., Green, C. L., Setlow, B., and Setlow, P. (1979) J.
c Meister, A. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 17205–17208
Biol. Chem.254, 6835–6837
d Inoue, M. (1985) in Renal Biochemistry (Kinne, R. K. H., ed), pp.
225–269, Elsevier, Amsterdam
6. Compartments and Organized Assemblies secutive reactions may form complexes within which
substrates are channeled.143–147 Many enzymes are
The geometry of cell construction provides another attached to membranes where they may be held close
important aspect of metabolic control. In a bacterium, together as organized assemblies.146 This appears to
the periplasmic space (Fig. 8-28) provides a compart- be the case for oxidative enzymes of mitochondria
ment that is separate from the cytosol. Some enzymes (Chapter 18) and for the cytoplasmic fatty acid synthe-
are localized in this space and do not mix with those tases (Chapter 21). In bacterial fatty acid synthesis,
within the cell. Other enzymes are fixed within or the product of the first enzyme is covalently attached
attached to the membrane. Eukaryotic cells have more to a “carrier” and, while so attached, is subjected to
compartments: nuclei, mitochondria (containing both the action of a series of other enzymes. In eukaryotes
matrix and intermembrane spaces), lysosomes, micro- several enzymes form domains of a single fatty acid
bodies, plastids, and vacuoles. Within the cytosol the synthase. Efficient substrate channeling results. Tryp-
tubules and vesicles of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) tophan synthase (Fig. 25-3) passes indole through a
separate off other membrane-bounded compartments. tunnel between subunits.146a Both NH and carbamate
3
The rate of transport of metabolites through the mem- ions pass through tunnels between subunits of E. coli
branes between compartments is limited and often is carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (Eq. 24-22). The
controlled tightly. product carbamoyl phosphate may then be passed
While many enzymes appear to be dissolved in directly to aspartate carbamoyltransferase for synthesis
the cytosol and have no long-term association with of carbamoylaspartate in the pyrimidine biosynthetic
other proteins, enzymes that catalyze a series of con- pathway.146b Channeling is sometimes difficult to

--- Page 556 ---

D. Hormones and Their Receptors 553
prove. Geck and Kirsch have provided a generally while the degradation of the receptor complex at a later
useful technique for testing. A large amount of a time releases peptides that may be additional second
genetically modified, inactive form of an enzyme is messengers. This is one way in which hormones may
added. Unless channeling occurs, this will decrease elicit a rapid response followed by delayed responses.
the rate of a reaction whose rate is limited by diffusion While many hormones bind to surface receptors
or by instability of an intermediate.146c the steroid hormones, which are lipid in nature, pass
Proteasomes (Box 7-A) have enzymatic sites within through the cell membrane and bind to receptor pro-
a protected box which limits the escape of long peptide teins in the nucleus. The resulting hormone–protein
fragments. Membrane anchors (Chapter 8), often con- complexes induce changes in gene expression through
sisting of acyl or polyprenyl groups, hold many proteins regulation of transcription (Fig. 11-1, top). These
to cell surfaces and strong protein – protein bonds hold receptors are considered in Chapter 22 and hormones
many others.146d Enzymes involved in cell signaling, are considered further in Chapter 30.
and discussed in the following section, are often
anchored close together on membrane surfaces.148,149
1. Beta Adrenergic Receptors and Related
Seven-Helix Proteins
D. Hormones and Their Receptors
Sites that bind adrenaline (epinephrine),
A major element in the control of the metabolism noradrenaline (norepinephrine), and related
of a cell is provided by chemical messages sent from catecholamines(see Chapter 30) to almost all cell
other cells and sensed by receptors on the cell mem- surfaces are classified as either (cid:3) adrenergic or
brane or in the cytoplasm. Hormones such as insulin, (cid:2) adrenergic receptors. The β receptors, which have
adrenaline, and the sex hormones are released from an been studied the most,150 occur as two major types.
organ and travel through the blood, affecting tissues Theβ receptors have approximately equal affinity for
1
throughout the body. There are many such hormones. adrenaline and noradrenaline, whereas the β receptors,
2
A large number of other hormones have more local the most common type, are more nearly specific for
effects, influencing mostly adjacent cells. When re- adrenaline. Binding of the hormone or other agonist
leased at nerve endings these substances are called such as isoproterenol to any of the β receptors stimu-
neurotransmitters. Chemical messages are probably lates cAMP formation within the cell.153 The receptors
sent from virtually all cells to their immediate neighbors, belong to a family of integral membrane proteins
affecting both their growth and their behavior. In related in sequence to the opsins of the retina and
recent years the very reactive and toxic compounds the light-operated proton pump bacteriorhodopsin
nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide (CO) have (Fig. 23-45) and probably have a very similar three-
been identified as important hormones. These com- dimensional structure. Based upon the known
pounds can diffuse rapidly and react with many com- three-dimensional structures of rhodopsin and bacterio-
pounds within cells. Their actions are more rapid, rhodopsin (Chapter 23), sequence comparisons, and
more rapidly ended, and probably less specific than much other evidence, all of these receptors are probably
those of most hormones. folded into groups of seven hydrophobic membrane-
Hormones bind to receptors on their “target” spanning helices arranged as closely packed bundles
cells. The receptors are often integral membrane with folded loops protruding into the cytoplasm and
proteins on cell surfaces. Binding of the hormone into the extracellular space. The N termini of the proteins
often causes a conformational alteration that “activates” are thought to be in the extracellular space and the C
the receptor. In some cases the receptor is an enzyme termini in the cytoplasm as shown in Fig. 11-6.153a,b,c
and the hormone an allosteric activator. In others, the Defects in structure or functioning of human β receptors
activated receptor interacts with an enzyme in the have been associated with both asthma154 and heart
cytoplasm or on the membrane facing the cytoplasm. failure.155,155a,b
This enzyme may generate a second messenger, a Among the proteins phosphorylated in response
substance that can diffuse throughout the cell and alter to formation of cAMP are the β adrenergic receptors
metabolism by exerting allosteric effects on various themselves. Phosphorylation occurs within a cluster
other enzymes. The best known second messenger is of serine and threonine residues near the C terminus as
cyclic AMP but there are many others, a few of which is indicated in Fig. 11-6A by the action of various kinases
are listed in Table 11-2. including a receptor kinase156,156a which may be an-
Some hormone–receptor complexes enter the cell chored nearby.157 The effect of this C-terminal phospho-
via endocytosis in coated vesicles. Within the cell both rylation is to decrease the sensitivity of the receptor so
the receptor and the bound hormone, if a peptide, may that after a few minutes it conveys a diminished response.
be degraded by proteases. The initial binding of the Thus, cAMP exerts feedback inhibition of its own
hormone may induce the release of a second messenger, synthesis. Desensitization upon continuous occupancy

--- Page 557 ---

554 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
TABLE 11-2
Some Molecules (Second Messengers) That Carry Intracellular Signals
Compound Metabolic state Response Location of discussion
Cyclic AMP Stimulation of β Increased glycogenolysis, Sections C,2 and D,2;
adrenergic receptors glycolysis
Cyclic GMP Visual stimulation Neuronal signal Chapter 23, Section D
Ca2+ Ca2+ channels open Muscular contraction, Box 6-D, Section E
others Chapter 19, Section B,4
Inositol-1,4,5- Stimulation of α Opens Ca2+channels in ER Section E
trisphosphate and adrenergic receptors,
related compounds various other stimuli
Diadenosine 5'- Oxidative or heat Chapters 28, 29
tetraphosphate (Ap A) stress
4
Guanosine 5'- Nutritional stress Chapter 29
diphosphate,
3-diphosphate (ppGpp)
Mn2+ Low glucose Increased PECK activity Chapter 17, Section L
Increased arginase activity Chapter 16, Section E
Cyclic ADP-ribose Chapter 15, Section E
(cADPR) and
2'-P-cADPR
HO HO
H
+ +H
CH2 N H CH2 NH
H
HO C
H
CH3 HO C
H
C
CH3
OH OH CH3
Adrenaline (epinephrine) Isoproterenol
HO +H
+ CH2 NH
H
CH2 NH3
CH2 C
H
C
HO C H CH3
O OH CH3
OH
Noradrenaline Propranolol
by an agonist is a property of many other receptors as well. one of the pancreatic hormones regulating glucose
When a receptor is no longer occupied, phosphatases metabolism;159,160vasopressin (Fig. 2-4);161,162lutropin,
remove the phospho groups added by the receptor another pituitary hormone;163 other gonadotropins;164
kinase permitting the sensitivity to rise again. This thethyrotropin-releasing factor (TRF; Fig. 2-4);165
phosphorylation–dephosphorylation cycle appears a receptor for KDEL peptide sequences. The KDEL
to be only one of several mechanisms by which cells receptor functions in the return of soluble proteins
regulate receptor sensitivity.155b,158,158a,158b containing the KDEL motif from the Golgi to the endo-
Many other receptors also have a seven-helix plasmic reticulum.152
structure similar to that of the adrenergic receptors.
These include receptors for the following: glucagon,

--- Page 558 ---

555
AH S RN P AL L F A G NG P QGM NH2
H D S
D
T V NE T
Q Q R 1 A D K I E V E I N S R F V V G V I A M L G W L I M A Q T V F V L V G L T V I V 2 T M F F N L H V Y D G I G A V I L M T A L C L W P V K S A A A M T F 3 G D W S C N R I T I A A Y F D F F L V S E W E T V V C T C I V 1 A L 8 S 1 4 0 S 6 C 4 Y N P H A S I S A W I I W A G K R F L Q N I Y L H E V M L M K Q V R T T T I V A C C 5 R V D F F V Q S S V F V V Y E Y A F Y L I M A T F V I N P S Q I S A 6 I C V L F T F M H W K N G T F L V G L I I L A I T I P V K Q H D E N 7 P D Y K L S N N S F G Y L N I I R L R F I C V R L V L I C G K W E P Y A I F Q E P L a a L l n m 3 c C 4 h i 1 t o L o r y R R S S l
AK RQ L Q F
I L K K L
Cytoplasmic surface T S S L H F R G E S K D I S K
PF K Y Q V S A
Q
R Y
Segments involved in coupling to G s N L S QV EQDGR T GHG L R G
N
G
Q E VHY G S Q E G T NGN S S Y
E
K
E
NK L L C E D L P G T E D F VG
H
O
G
L L S DN T S CNR GQ S D I ND S P V T
Phosphorylation sites for
β adreneric receptor kinase
A esanik nietorp
rof
setis
noitalyrohpsohP
D. Hormones and Their Receptors
A
P
Extracellular surface 113 79
HOOC
B
S S
Extracellular
C
N
6 4
1 7 C
2 5
3
7 6
Y316
H
O H
H H O
O– H+ H N O H S S 2 2 0 0 7 4 5
Intracellular 1 O HO O C HO H O
O H
C D113 O
D79 3 S S S165
4
2
Figure 11-6 (A) Proposed organization of the human β adrenergic receptor. The 413-residue polypeptide chain is arranged
2
according to the model for rhodopsin as seven transmembrane helices. The two N-glycosylation sites, which may carry very large
oligosaccharides, are indicated by Y. The palmitoylated cysteine 341 is shown with its alkyl side chain embedded in the membrane.
Aspartates 79 and 113, also shown in (C), are shaded. After Strosberg151 and Scheel and Pelham.152 (B) Arrangement of the seven
helices suggested by the rhodopsin structure. (C) Hypothetical view of the receptor from the external membrane surface showing
a molecule of noradrenaline bound to hydrophilic residues deep in the cleft between the helices. From Strosberg.151

--- Page 559 ---

556 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
cAMP-dependent protein kinases regulates several
2. Adenylate Cyclases (Adenylyl Cyclases)
enzymes concerned with energy metabolism or with
the control of cell division. Phosphorylation reactions
All of the effects of the catecholamines bound to
β adrenergic receptors and of glucagon,ACTH, and can lead to different responses in different specialized
cells. Proteins of membranes, microtubules, and ribo-
many other hormones appear to be mediated by
somes are phosphorylated, as are nuclear histones.
adenylate cyclase. This integral membrane protein
Cyclic AMP mediates the action of some neurotrans-
catalyzes the formation of cAMP from ATP (Eq. 11-8,
mitters released at synapses and functions as a signal
stepa). The reaction, whose mechanism is considered
between cells of some slime molds (Box 11-C). Tran-
in Chapter 12, also produces inorganic pyrophosphate.
scription of genes can be either stimulated or inhibited
The released cAMP acts as the second messenger and
by cAMP.170 Even in E. coli cAMP is generated and acts
diffuses rapidly throughout the cell to activate the
as a positive effector for transcription of some genes
cAMP-dependent protein kinases and thereby to
(Chapter 28). Cyclic AMP may function in signaling
stimulate phosphorylation of a selected group of
stress in plants.171
proteins (Fig. 11-4). Subsequent relaxation to a low
The isolation and characterization of adenylate
level of cytosolic cAMP is accomplished by hydrolysis
cyclases have been difficult because of their location
of the cAMP by a phosphodiesterase (Eq. 11-8, step
within membranes and because there is so little (usually
b).166,167 In the absence of phosphodiesterase cAMP
only 0.001– 0.01%) of the membrane protein.172 The
is extremely stable kinetically. However, it is thermo-
1060 - to 1250-residue, 120 kDa proteins are also easily
dynamically unstable with respect to hydrolysis.
denatured. However, the sequences of cloned adenylate
The existence of cAMP as a compound mediating
cyclase genes and the observed patterns of synthesis
the action of adrenaline and glucagon on glycogen
of the corresponding mRNAs have been revealing.
phosphorylase was first recognized in 1956 by Suther-
There are at least eight mammalian adenylate cyclase
land.168,169 However, for many years most biochemists
genes with complex regulatory properties.173– 177
regarded cAMP as a curiosity and the regulatory chem-
The sequences suggest that most of the isoenzymes
istry of phosphorylase as an unusual specialization.
are integral membrane proteins, each with 12 transmem-
That view was altered drastically when cAMP was
brane helices organized as two sets of six with a large
found to function as a second messenger in the action
~ 40-kDa cytoplasmic domain between the sets. This
of over 20 different hormones. Phosphorylation by
is similar to the organization of the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (Box 26-A) and
some other membrane transporters. However, there is
O –O O HO no firm evidence that adenylate cyclases contain ion
HO O channels. These enzymes are also discussed in Chapter
P P P O Adenine 12, Section D,9.
–O O O O A quantitative indication of the importance of
O the cAMP system within cells can be derived from
H OH measurement of the kinetics of the incorporation of
18O from water into the α-phospho groups of AMP,
a
Adenylate cyclase ADP, and ATP. This incorporation will result from
P P i N NH 2 hydrolysis of cAMP by the phosphodiesterases that
allow relaxation to a low cAMP level (Eq. 11-8). It is
thought that in human blood platelets this represents
N N
–O 5' O the major pathway of this labeling (Eq. 11-9), which
O N occurs at a rate of about 1.1 µmol of 18O kg–1s–1.
P 3'
O O
OH
3',5'-Cyclic AMP (cAMP) –O O
Adenine
P O
HO
2 O O
Mg2+ b 18OH2 OH
Phosphodiesterase
O
–O P O Adenine O
HO
O –O
P O
Adenine
O
HO OH
18OH
5'-Adenylic acid (AMP) (11-8) HO OH (11-9)

--- Page 560 ---

D. Hormones and Their Receptors 557
Stimulation of the platelets by prostacyclin (prosta- which are activated by the binding of hormones, diffuse
glandin I ; see Chapter 22) leads to a 10- to 40- fold within the membrane until they make contact and form
2
increase in cAMP concentration and a 4- to 5-fold molecules of the G·GDP complex (Eq. 11-10, step b).
s
increase in the rate of 18O incorporation.178 A quite The complex then undergoes a rapid exchange of the
different soluble adenylate cyclase is present in sper- bound GDP for GTP, after which the hormone and
matozoa. It is stimulated directly by bicarbonate ions. receptor dissociate. The Gα ·GTP complex may also
It may be a bicarbonate sensor in sperm cells and in dissociate from the complex, perhaps entering the
some other bicarbonate-responsive tissues as well as cytosol as a soluble protein (Eq. 11-10, step c). The
in cyanobacteria.178a,178b Gα ·GTP complex combines with adenylate cyclase
(stepd) and activates it to generate cAMP. However,
the activation is transient. Gα also contains GTP-
3. Guanine Nucleotide-Binding Proteins hydrolyzing (GTPase) activity and within a few min-
(G Proteins) utes Gα ·GTP is completely converted to Gα ·GDP and
the adenylate cyclase dissociates (Eq. 11-10, step e).
Theβ adrenergic receptors are not coupled directly The Gα ·GDP recombines with the βγ complex which
to adenylate cyclase but interact through an inter- may serve as a membrane anchor, to complete the
mediary stimulatory protein G , which contains three regulatory cycle. The overall effect is for hormone
s
subunits,α,β, and γ.179– 182 We know that the G protein binding to cause a rapid release of cAMP in a short
s
associated with β adrenergic stimulation is only one of burst that may last only about 15 s.
a very large number of related G proteins, so named It is not the binding of GTP but a slow subsequent
because of their property of binding and hydrolyzing conformational alteration that activates the Gα ·GTP
GTP. In its unactivated state the α subunit of a Gαβγ adenylate cyclase complex. This was deduced by study
heterotrimer carries a molecule of bound GDP. Appar- of analogs of GTP, such as guanosine 5'-(β,γ-imido)
ently, the G proteins and the hormone receptors, triphosphate (GMP-P-(NH)-Por GppNp), which are
s
BOX 11-C THE ATTRACTION OF DICTYOSTELIUM TO CYCLIC AMP
In higher animals cyclic AMP (cAMP) is an lead cells in a slug become the stalk.a,c
intracellular second messenger, but in the cellular Two types of G protein-coupled cAMP receptors
slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum it serves to in the cell membranes of the amebas have been
convey signals between cells.a– c As was mentioned identified. One leads to activation of adenylate
on p. 20, the organism exists as individual amebas cyclase and the release of new pulses of cAMP and
until the food supply is exhausted. Then the cells the other to activation of guanylate cyclase.e This
begin to signal their lack of food by secreting pulses enzyme causes a rapid 7- to 10-fold increase in intra-
of cAMP. Because they also secrete a phosphodiester- cellular cGMP which plays an important role in
ase, the cAMP is short-lived.d However, it is present controlling chemotaxis.
long enough for any other nearby ameba to sense Some species of cellular slime molds use other
the gradient of cAMP concentration from one end chemical attractants (acrasins). For example, D.
of the cell to the other. As little as a 2% difference in minutum secretes an analog of folic acidf and cells
concentration can induce chemotaxis.e The amebas of Polysphondylium violaceum are attracted by the
move toward the source of cAMP and emit pulses ethyl ester of N-propionyl-γ-L-glutamyl-L-ornithine-
of the compound. This results in the formation of δ-lactam.g
aggregation centers in which the concentration of
cAMP oscillates spontaneously as the cAMP moves a Gerisch, G. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 853 – 879
outward in waves. The cells move up the concentra- b Devreotes, P. (1989) Science245, 1054 – 1058
c Alberts, B., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K., and Watson,
tion gradient until the peak of a wave reaches them.
J. D. (1994) Molecular Biology of the Cell, 3rd ed., Garland, New
Then they move in a random direction until the next York
wave reaches them and again orients their motion. d Levine, H., Aranson, I., Tsimring, L., and Truong, T. V. (1996)
After ~50 movement steps an aggregation center Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 6382 – 6386
e Kuwayama, H., and Van Haastert, P. J. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.
contains ~105 cells which now follow a “development
271, 23718 –23724
program.” The amebas adhere to each other to form f Schapp, P., Konijn, T. M., and van Haastert, P. J. M. (1984) Proc.
1- to 2 mm-long multicellular “slugs” in which all of Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.81, 2122 –2126
the cells move forward together. About 30 h after g Shimomura, O., Suthers, H. L. B., and Bonner, J. T. (1982) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.79, 7376 –7379
aggregation begins the slugs stop and form stalks
with spore-containing fruiting bodies on top. The

--- Page 561 ---

558 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
Receptor (R) in nerve transmission, secretion, and endocytosis.187
Mammals can form at least 23 different α subunits,
Hormone (H) a s
Hormone which are coded for by 16 genes. Some of the forms
H·R arise by alternative splicing of mRNA transcribed from
a single gene.180 There are at least 6 β and 12 γ sub-
Gαβγ·GDP b units.179,180,182,188,189 Other G proteins, found in heart
G protein,
GDP complex H·R·Gαβγ·GDP muscle, induce the opening of K+ or Ca2+ channels in
cell membranes.185,190 It has often been assumed that
GTP c all of the effects of G proteins are mediated by activated
α subunits. However, the βγ complex, which sticks
GDP together very tightly, can also have signaling func-
βγ tions.191 For example, an auxiliary protein called
phosducinbinds to the βγ complex of G, slowing
Gα·GDP Gα·GTP
the reconversion to the αβγ trimer.192 Ph
s
osducin was
Activated G protein
discovered in rod cells of the retina but has been
AC d found to be distributed broadly in other tissues as
aden I y n l a a c te ti v cy e clase well.192,193 In yeast the βγ subunit of a G protein linked
to the receptor for the yeast mating factor initiates the
e pheromone response of a cell.193a
Gα·GTP·AC
There is another large class of receptors whose
Active adenylate cyclase
P H 2 O occupancy by an agonist leads to inhibition of adenylate
i cyclase. These include the α adrenergic receptors,
ATP cAMP 2
receptors for acetylcholine, adenosine, prostaglandin
Cyclic AMP (11-10)
E (Chapter 21), somatostatin, and some receptors for
2
dopamine. Their responses are mediated by inhibitory
not hydrolyzed to GDP. These compounds may require proteins G, which closely resemble G in their sizes,
i s
many minutes to activate the complex, but because amino acid sequences, and heterotrimeric structures,
the GppNp is not hydrolyzed, the complex remains but which inhibit adenylate cyclase when activated.180
activated and able to catalyze cAMP formation contin- A clear distinction between the G and G proteins is
s i
uously. evident in the fact that G is irreversibly activated by
s
the action of cholera toxin, while G loses its ability
i
to respond to occupied receptors when modified by
O
the action of Pertussis toxin (Box 11-A). A specialized
heterotrimeric G protein known as transducin
N i
HN mediates the light-induced activation of a cyclic GMP
H
O α O β N O phosphodiesterase in the retina194,195 (see Chapter 23).
5’
H2N N N CH2 P P P
O
Itsα subunit is designated α
t
. The related gustducin
–O O –O O HO is found in taste buds.196
OH OH
O
Monomeric G proteins. An entirely different
Guanosine 5'-(β,γ-imido) triphosphate (GppNp); class of G proteins was discovered when it was found
in place of the NH, O is present in GTP, S is present is GTPγS
that the small 189-residue, 21-kDa protein products of
the human oncogenes and proto-oncogenes known as
Occupied receptors for adrenaline, glucagon, ras are monomeric G proteins.186,197–200 There are over
ACTH, and histamine activate adenylate cyclase via G 80 related proteins of this group of nine families.200a
s
proteins. Other G proteins, which contain subunits They include the much larger elongation factor EF-Tu,
s
designatedα and which exist as a number of subtypes, which functions in protein synthesis (Chapter 29).
olf
mediateolfactory responses. Subunit α is another Even though there is a large difference in size, the
o
specialized polypeptide which is located primarily in three-dimensional structures of the GTP-binding
neural tissues. A variety of additional G proteins have domains of EF-Tu201–204 and of the 21-kDa Ras p21
been discovered in organisms ranging from bacteria proteins205– 209 are very similar (Fig. 11-7). They also
to mammals.179,183– 186 All have similar structures with resemble that of adenylate kinase (Fig. 12-30).205 The
39 - to 45-kDa α subunits, 35- to 36-kDa β subunits human genome contains four “true”ras genes: H-ras,
and 5 - to 8-kDa γ subunits. Whereas the α subunits N-ras, K-ras, and K-rasB. The occurrence of mutations
are unique to each G protein, β and γ subunits may be in these genes in human cancer is discussed in Section
shared among several G proteins. These proteins appear H, as are the complex signaling functions of ras genes,
to function with many kinds of hormone receptors and (see also Fig. 11-13).210

--- Page 562 ---

D. Hormones and Their Receptors 559
Other proteins in the Ras superfamily include converted within cells to a thioether with all-trans-
some members of the Rho family, which function in farnesol or longer polyprenyl alcohols.225 Another
the cytoskeleton.200a,211,212,212a,b,c,213 These include at nearby cysteine may form a thioester with palmitic
least 14 mammalian proteins, among them RhoA, RhoB, acid,221,226,227 for example:
etc., Rac1, Rac2, etc., and Cdc42. The latter is associated
with the formation of fingerlike extensions of the cell
membrane containing actin bundles.200a,212d,212e Genes O Palmitoyl group
rac1 and rac2 encode proteins involved in the initiation S
186
of superoxide radical formation by activated phagocytes . . . –T–N–G–C–M–G–L–P–C–V–V–M C terminus
(Chapter 18).214 The Rab family of proteins are involved
S
in exocytosis and endocytosis and vesicular transport. Shaded residues are removed and
C186 is converted to methyl ester
There are 24 or more human rab genes.212,215,216 Yeast
Farnesyl group
cells also contain Ras proteins. One RAS gene must be
N-ras p21
present for yeast to form spores.217 ADP-ribosylation
factors (ARFs), which stimulate the action of cholera
toxin A subunit (Box 11-A) are also members of the The farnesyl (or longer) polyprenyl and palmitoyl
Ras superfamily.120,217a groups, together with nearby nonpolar side chains,
Like the trimeric G proteins, the monomeric pro- serve as a membrane anchor. After the prenylation
teins also serve as “timed switches” that are turned the C-terminal three amino acids (VVM in N-rasp21)
on by GDP–GTP exchange and are turned off by the are removed proteolytically and the new terminal
hydrolysis of the bound GTP. In the absence of other carboxyl group of the farnesylated Cys 186 is converted
regulatory proteins both the exchange of bound GDP to a methyl ester.212c,225,228 N-terminal myristoylation
for GTP and the hydrolysis of bound GTP are slow. is usually regarded as irreversible. However, the thio-
While the receptor-associated trimeric G proteins are ester linkages by which palmitoyl groups are attached
activated by the hormone receptors, the monomeric to proteins are labile and may be cleaved rapidly by
G proteins are activated toward GDP–GTP exchange hydrolases. It follows that palmitoylation can be a
by binding to proteins called guanine nucleotide rapid, regulated modification of proteins,229–230a,b
dissociation stimulators (GDSs).217b They speed the strongly affecting the location and extent of adherance
release of GDP from the G protein allowing the active to membrane surfaces.
GTP complex to be formed. The velocity of hydrolysis
of the bound GTP in the activated G protein is greatly Three-dimensional structures. The structure
increased by GTPase activating proteins (GAPs). of the GTP-binding domain of elongation factor EF-Tu
These auxiliary proteins can be thought of as signaling was determined by Jurnak in 1985201 and that of the
molecules that pass their messages to the G protein, complete three-domain structure later.202,203 When the
controlling the extent of its activation and therefore structure of the catalytic domain of the first Ras protein
the strength of a signal that it sends on to the processes was determined (Fig. 11-7A) it was clear that it was
that it is controlling.200,210,218 One group of GAP proteins similar to that of EF-Tu.205,207 The same was true for the
are known as regulators of G-protein signaling transducinα t ,194,231,232 for the inhibitory G iα1 ,218b,233,234
(RGS).218-218b These proteins, which contain a charac- and for other G proteins.235 In every case the differ-
teristic 12-residue core, were first recognized as ences in structure of the enzyme with GDP or with
negative regulators of signaling in yeast cells called analogs of GTP were small and limited to a region
GDP-dissociation inhibitors (GDIs).219 They can close to the γ-phospho group of the bound GTP. This
also be regarded as a family of GAPs. group can be seen clearly in Fig. 11-7A adjacent to
residue 60 of the protein. See also Fig. 12-36.
Acylation and prenylation. The amino terminus Theβ strands and helices in the GTP-binding domain
(usually glycine) of the α subunit of any G protein is of the G proteins are connected by a series of loops.
nearly always converted to an N-myristoyl group.220–223 The first, second, and fourth loops (residues 10 – 17,
This modification occurs in a cotranslational process 32– 40, and 57 – 65, respectively) in the Ras structure of
after removal of the initiating methionine (Chapter Fig. 11-7A form the catalytic site in which the hydro-
29) and can be described as an acyl transfer from lysis to GDP takes place. The first loop, also called
coenzyme A.224 The C termini of the γ subunits of the P loop, is conserved in all GTP-binding proteins.
heterotrimeric G proteins, and also of the monomeric In the Ras proteins it has the following sequence:
proteins of the Ras family, also undergo processing.
For example, the C-terminal end of an intact Ras 10 17
protein contains 18 residues which probably assume a G–A–G–G–V–G–K–S Ras
largely α-helical conformation. A cysteine side chain G–X–X–X–X–G–K–S(T) Consensus
near the terminus and having the sequence CAAX is

--- Page 563 ---

560 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
A
B C
Figure 11-7 (A) Stereoscopic drawing showing α-carbon positions in the 166-residue “catalytic domain” of the human c-H-ras
gene product and the bound GTP analog GppNp (solid bond lines). The intact protein contains an additional 23-residue
C-terminal extension. From Pai et al.241 (B), (C) Ribbon drawings showing two nearly orthogonal views of a hetero-trimeric
inhibitory G brain protein produced using a cloned bovine gene. (B) The amino termini (N) of the three subunits are seen in
i
the left-to-right order: γ,β,α. A side view of the β propeller domain of the β subunit is seen at top center. The Ras-like domain
and the additional large helical domain of the α subunit are marked. (C) View from the flared end of the β propeller looking
toward the α subunit. The strands of each propeller blade are labeled A, B, C, and D and the seven blades are numbered
around the periphery of the propeller. From Wall et al.242 (B) and (C) courtesy of Stephen Sprang.
Also shown here is the “consensus” sequence for all GTP or bound GDP, the GDP form being opened up
GTP-binding proteins. Cancer cells frequently have by a hinging motion of ~ 90° between domains I and
mutations in Ras at Gly12, which may be substituted II.202,203 The conformational change is triggered by
by Asp, Lys, Val, or Arg, and at Gly 13 and Gln 61. the GDP–GTP exchange. An enhanced rate of GTP
The latter is in loop 4, a part of the sequence that hydrolysis, which results from binding of a transfer
appears especially mobile but is highly conserved. These RNA and binding to a ribosome, is apparently accom-
mutations all activate the protein, i.e., they decrease plished by interaction with loop 2 of the catalytic do-
the GTPase activity, allowing the G protein to remain main (corresponding to residues 32 – 40 in Fig. 11-7A).
in its active conformation longer than normal. The function of this protein is considered further in
Ras proteins fulfill their functions by interacting Chapter 29.
closely with two or more proteins in signaling pathways Transducin has a 113-residue domain inserted into
as described in Section H. Other G proteins have loop 2 of the catalytic domain. In this case, too, a large
additional domains. The 405-residue EF-Tu from hinging movement is associated with the GDP–GTP
Thermus thermophilus has three domains: the C-terminal exchange. The light-activated receptor rhodopsin
nucleotide-binding domain and two β-barrel domains induces the conformational change.194,231 Again,
following it. A major difference in conformation is structural changes resulting from the presence or absence
observed between forms of the protein with bound of interactions of the protein with the γ-phospho group

--- Page 564 ---

D. Hormones and Their Receptors 561
of GTP are involved. The GTPase activity of hetero- epithelium.245,251 The receptors for both of these peptides
trimeric G proteins can also be activated by aluminum are transmembrane proteins with cytoplasmic domains that
fluoride AlF .232,236 From the X-ray structure of the have guanylate cyclase activity. The released cGMP appears
4
transducinα·GDP·AlF – complex it is seen that hydrated to induce relaxation of smooth muscles of the blood
4
AlF – is covalently bonded in the position of the γ-phospho vessel walls. Another mediator of smooth muscle
4
group and makes hydrogen bonds to active site groups, relaxation is the endothelial cell-derived relaxing
mimicking a possible transition state for the GTPase factor, which is evidently nitric oxide, NO252 (see
reaction232 (see Chapter 12, Section D). Chapter 18). A soluble guanylate cyclase appears to be
an NO receptor and is activated by binding of the NO
to a heme group in one of the two subunits of the
F F
2– cyclase.253– 255 The cyclase can also be activated by carbon
β
GMP O O Al OH2 monoxide, CO, in a similar fashion.256,257 Carbon mon-
P
oxide is produced in the body by degradation of heme
O O– F F (Fig. 24-24) and is thought to be a neurohormone.258
Cyclic GMP also plays an important role in vision.
Theβ subunit of the βγ complex of transducin is Specific phosphodiesterases hydrolyze cGMP to GMP.
aseven-bladed (cid:2) propeller (Fig.11-7C). It is composed The cGMP phosphodiesterases of the rod and cone
of seven GH–WD repeat units: –[GH– X – WD] – cells of the retina are activated by the G protein trans-
n 4– 8
where GH = Gly – His, WD = Trp – Asp, and X is a ducin, which has been activated by light absorbed by
n
core repeating sequence, usually 32 –42 residues in the visual pigments.194 The resulting decrease in the
length. This motif is also found in at least 40 other cGMP concentration is thought to cause the closing of
eukaryotic proteins.188,237–240 In the βγ complex (Fig. cation channels and thereby to initiate a nerve impulse
11-7B) the γ subunit assumes an elongated, largely (see Chapter 23). Cyclic nucleotide forms of the
α-helical structure. It is often anchored at its C terminus pyrimidine nucleotides are present only in very small
by a farnesyl or geranylgeranyl chain, while Gα may amounts in cells.
be myristoylated or palmitoylated.195,230,243
The three-dimensional structure of the GDP com-
plex of the intact transducin heterotrimer195 also shows 5. Bacterial Chemoreceptors
a tight interaction between α and β subunits. The
major interaction is probably disrupted by replacement Bacteria are attracted to foods with the aid of
of the bound GDP by GTP and the conformational chemoreceptors that bind certain amino acids such as
change that occurs around the γ - phospho group. This aspartate. The receptors send signals to the mechanisms
explains the dissociation of the α subunit from βγ upon that ensure that the bacterium is swimming toward
activation. An entirely similar picture has been obtained the food113,259, 259a (more details are given in Chapter
for the action of the inhibitory G protein, G , for which 19). The aspartate and serine chemoreceptors found in
i2
structures of the α subunit and of the αβγ heterotrimer membranes of E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium are
(Fig. 11-7,B,C) have been determined.188,233,234,242 The among the most carefully studied of all receptors. Like
structures resemble those of transducin, but differ in the seven-helix receptors, they have an extracellular
details. sensory domain to which the signaling molecule,
aspartate or serine, binds, and a transmembrane helical
bundle. In these receptors the transmembrane part
4. Guanylate Cyclase (Guanylyl Cyclase), consists of four helical segments coming from the two
Nitric Oxide, and the Sensing of Light subunits of the dimeric protein. For the aspartate
receptor there is a high-resolution X-ray structure for
Formation of the less abundant cyclic guanosine the cytoplasmic domain260,261 including the bound
monophosphate (cGMP) is catalyzed by guanylate aspartate262 as is shown in Fig. 11-8A,B.260,263 The
cyclases found in both soluble and particulate frac- structures of the receptors for aspartate, serine, and
tions of tissue homogenates.244– 247 However, its sig- many other signaling molecules are evidently very
nificance in metabolism is only now becoming well similar. The structure of the cytosolic domain of the
understood. There are cGMP-dependent protein serine receptor has been determined and a model for
kinases,247 but, until recently cGMP could not be the complete receptor has been proposed.259a The
regarded as a second messenger for any mammalian molecular mass of the 188-residue extracellular domain
hormone. Now we know that cGMP has several is ~18 kDa, while that of the larger cytoplasmic do-
essential functions. It mediates the effects of the atrial mains is ~36 kDa. The latter includes a linker region
natriuretic factor, a peptide hormone causing dilation as well as a long four-helical bundle domain which
of blood vessels (Box 23-D),245,248– 250 and also of a pep- can be divided into a methylation domain and a sig-
tide calledguanylin, which is formed in the intestinal naling domain as shown in (Fig. 11-8C).

--- Page 565 ---

562 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
A C
~8.0 nm
~4.0 nm
380 nm
26 nm
B
R 73
R 69
2.5 nm
R 64
Figure 11-8 (A) Stereoscopic view of the sensory domain of the dimer with modeled transmembrane region. Each monomer
contains a four α-helix bundle with two helices continuing through the membrane. From Scott et al.260 (B) Stereoscopic image
of aspartate in the major binding site of the receptor. The atomic model of aspartate (green) has been fitted into the observed
difference electron density map. From Yeh et al.262 (C) Model of an intact E. coli serine chemoreceptor. Left. Ribbon drawing
viewed perpendicular to the molecular twofold axis. Methylation sites are represented by the dark balls by the cytoplasmic
domain. The bound serine is drawn as a partially hidden green ball at the upper left in the extracellular domain. Right.
Diagram of the receptor. The presumed membrane bilayer is represented by the gray band. Positions of some residues are
marked on the left side. On the right, the numbers of residues in various peptide segments are indicated. From Kim et al.259a
Courtesy of Sung-Hou Kim.
What happens chemically when aspartate binds the transmembrane helices of the two subunits.264a
into a deep pocket in the center of the sensory domain? Binding of aspartate to the receptor, and the associated
What kind of signal can be passed from the aspartate alterations in the receptor·CheA·CheW complex, causes
to the “signaling domain”? Several possibilities were a strong decrease in the catalytic activity of CheA.
discussed by Kim,264 who suggested that the binding In its active form CheA undergoes autophos-
of aspartate causes the rotation of the sensory domain phorylation, that is, the phosphorylation of a histidine
of one subunit relative to that of the other and that this imidazole group in one of its subunits by the protein
rotation is transmitted through the membrane to the kinase active site of an adjacent subunit. The phospho
signaling domain. The signaling domain of the receptor group is then transferred from phospho-CheA to
forms a complex with a multimeric protein histidine another protein, CheY. Phospho-CheY interacts with
kinase called CheA (chemotaxis protein A) together the flagellar motor proteins (Chapter 19) periodically
with an auxiliary protein CheW. A more likely possi- causing a reversal of direction of the bacterial flagella.
bility is that some kind of “piston” action occurs between As a result the bacteria tumble and then usually move

--- Page 566 ---

E. Calcium, Inositol Polyphosphates, and Diacylglycerols 563
in a new direction. If the attractant molecule aspartate There are two major α adrenergic receptor sub-
is present on the receptor the signal is weakened and types.151,269 Activation of the α receptors, which are
2
the bacteria continue to swim in the same direction– present in various tissues including blood platelets,
toward food. Phospho-CheY is spontaneously hydro- causes inhibition of adenylate cyclase. This inhibition
lyzed to remove the phospho group, but the dephos- is evidently mediated by the G protein considered in
i
phorylation is promoted by an additional protein CheZ. Section D,3. The nucleotide sequences of cloned α
2
At least two other auxiliary proteins also function in receptor genes and other properties suggest close
this control system. CheR is a methyltransferase structural similarity to the β receptors.270–273 Subtle
that methylates the glutamate side chain carboxylates differences in hydrogen bonding to the serine side
in the methylation domain of the coiled coil region and chains shown in Fig. 11-6C may distinguish α from
2
CheBis a methylesterase that removes the methyl β receptors.273 A characteristic of α receptors is that
2 2
groups. These two proteins control the methylation pertussis toxin (Box 11-A) abolishes the inhibition of
level in the coiled coil region of the receptor (Fig. 11-8A). adenylate cyclase, which they mediate. In contrast,
Increased methylation increases the strength of the the action of α adrenergic receptors is not affected by
1
signal sent from the receptor, perhaps because methyl- pertussis toxin.
ation removes negative carboxylate charges that repell Theα receptors are activated not only by catecho-
1
each other and weaken the structure, interfering with lamines but also by the hormones vasopressin and
signaling.259 See also Fig. 19-3. angiotensin II. Binding of these hormones to α
1
receptors induces a complex response that involves
rapid hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol derivatives
E. Calcium, Inositol Polyphosphates, and and release of Ca2+ into the cytoplasm, and of diacylgly-
Diacylglycerols cerols into the lipid bilayer of the membrane. The response
is mediated by another G protein called G .274,275 When
q
Calcium ions entering cells from the outside or this G protein is activated it induces the hydrolysis of
released from internal stores trigger many biological phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdInsP ),
2
responses (see Box 6-D). Within cells Ca2+ often accu- a normal minor component of the lipid bilayer, by
mulates in mitochondria, in the ER, or in vesicles called phospholipase C (phosphoinositidase C).265,276–281
calciosomes.265 Release of the stored Ca2+ is induced
by hormones or by nerve impulses. For example, Receptor→ G q → phospholipase C →
impulses flow from the nerve endings into the muscle inositol phosphates
fibers and along the invaginations of the plasma mem- + diacylglycerol (DAG) → increased [Ca2+] (11-11)
brane called transverse tubules (Chapter 19). There
they induce release of Ca2+ from the ER. The released The products, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate [abbrevi-
ions activate enzymes266 and induce contraction of the ated InsP or Ins(1,4,5)P ], and diacylglycerol (DAG)
3 3
muscle fibers. In many cells, Ca2+ causes release of are both regarded as second messengers for the catecho-
secreted materials, for example, neurotransmitters in lamines acting on α receptors and for about 20 other
1
the brain.267,268 hormones, neurotransmitters, and growth factors upon
binding to their specific receptors.269,282 In addition to
vasopressin, the gonadotropin-releasing hormones,
1. Alpha Adrenergic Receptors histamine, thrombin (upon binding to platelet surfaces),
and acetylcholine (upon binding to its “muscarinic”
The release of stored Ca2+ is often triggered by α receptors; Chapter 30) all stimulate inositol phosphate
adrenergic receptors.269 Like β adrenergic receptors, release.
theα receptors are activated by adrenaline. Specific
inhibitors distinguish them. For example, the β recep-
tors are inhibited by propranolol, while the α receptors 2. Phosphatidylinositol and the Release of
are blocked by phenoxybenzamine. The synthetic Calcium Ions
agonistphenylephrine activates only α receptors and
no increases in cAMP or in protein kinase activity are The phosphoinositides constitute ~2 – 8% of the
observed. lipid of eukaryotic cell membranes but are metabolized
more rapidly than are other lipids.265,278,279,283–285 A
HO simplified picture of this metabolism is presented in
H
+ Fig. 11-9. Phosphatidylinositol is converted by the
CH2 N H consecutive action of two kinases into phosphatidyli-
C
H
CH3 nositol 4,5-bisphosphate.286,287 The InsP
3
released from
this precursor molecule by receptor-stimulated phos-
OH
pholipase C is thought to mobilize calcium ions by
Phenylephrine

--- Page 567 ---

564 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
opening“gates” of calcium channels in membranes of the phosphoinositols are chelators of Ca2+, the equilibria
the ER or of calciosomes.282,288–289a It diffuses across involved in this control system are complex.307
the peripheral cytoplasm to InsP receptors which are In addition to InsP , several other inositol deriva-
3 3
embedded in the membranes of the ER.282,290 One of tives are released by adrenergic stimulation. Inositol
the several isotypes of InsP receptors is a 2749-residue 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate (InsP ) is formed from
3 4
protein thought to contain a calcium ion channel.290 InsP by action of a soluble kinase.308,309,309a,b A contro-
3
Similar receptors are also found in inner membranes versial suggestion is that InsP may induce opening
4
of the nucleus.291,292 of Ca2+ channels through the outer membrane of the
Several uncertainties have complicated our under- cell310– 312 and may also function to promote storage of
standing of the role of Ca2+ in signaling. What is the Ca2+. It also acts as a transcriptional regulator. Other
source of Ca2+? How much of it enters cells from the possible second messengers are inositol 1,2-cyclic-3,4-
outside and how much is released from internal stores? trisphosphate and related metabolites that arise by the
Where are the internal stores? What other kinds of action of phospholipase C on PtdIns 4-P followed by
ion channels are present and what second messengers additional actions of kinases and phosphatases.278,309,313–315
regulate them? The sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal A different inositol tetrakisphosphate, Ins(3,4,5,6)P ,
4
muscle and also membranes in many other cells contain may control chloride ion channels.316,317 Both inositol
ryanodine receptors as well as InsP receptors.282,293 1,3,4,5,6-pentakisphosphate (InsP ) and inositol hexa-
3 5
Both of these receptors have similar structures and kisphosphate (InsP ) are also found in plants318 and
6
contain Ca2+channels. However, the ryanodine receptors animals.319 InsP serves as an allosteric effector regu-
5
are activated by cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR),294,295 lating hemoglobin in avian erythrocytes (Chapter 7).
which was first discovered as a compound inducing InsP , also known as phytate, is present in large
6
the release of Ca2+ in sea urchin eggs.296 The 2-phospho amounts in cereals and recently has been found to
derivative of cADPR may also have a similar function.297 play a role in regulating the export of mRNA from the
nucleus.319a Additional phospho groups can be added
to InsP to form pyrophosphates320,320a and other com-
OH OH 6
plex polyphosphates.321 Both InsP and InsP can also
H H
NH2
serve as precursors to Ins(1,3,4,5)P
5
and Ins(1
6
,4,5)P by
4 3
O + N hydrolytic dephosphorylation.322
H2C N Following stimulation of a cell the induced meta-
bolism of phosphoinositides decays rapidly. The diacyl-
O N N glycerols are converted into phosphatidic acid and
O CH O resynthesized into phospholipids (Chapter 21). The
P
–O O O H InsP 4 , InsP 3 , and other inositol metabolites are hydro-
P H lyzed by phosphatases.278,309,323–327 Two of these
O O– phosphatases are inhibited by Li+ as indicated in
OH OH
Fig. 11-9. They may represent one site of action of
lithium ions in the brain.324,327,328 Lithium salts are
2'-phospho in 2'-P-CADPR
one of the most important drugs for treatment of
Cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR) bipolar (manic-depressive) illness. By blocking
the release of free inositol, which can be resynthesized
Phospholipase C, which initiates the release of into PtdInsP , Li+ may prevent neuronal receptors
2
phosphatidylinositol derivatives, also requires Ca2+ from becoming too active. However, the basis for the
for activity. It is difficult to determine whether release therapeutic effect of lithium ions remains uncertain.
of Ca2+ is a primary or secondary response. There are The diacylglycerols released by phospholipase C
three isoenzyme types of phospholipase C–β,γ, and diffuse laterally through the bilayer and, together
δ– and several subforms of each with a variety of with the incoming Ca2+, activate protein kinases C.
regulatory mechanisms.298– 300a For example, the γ iso- These kinases also require phosphatidylserine for
enzymes are activated by binding to the tyrosine kinase their activity and phosphorylate serine and threonine
domain of receptors such as that for epidermal growth sidechains in a variety of proteins.329–330b They are
factor (see Fig. 11-13). In contrast, the β forms are stimulated by the released unsaturated diacylglycerols.
often activated by inhibitory G proteins and also by In addition protein kinases C can be activated by
i
G , which is specific for inositol phosphate release. phorbol esters, which are the best known tumor
q
Calcium ions are usually released in distinct pulses promoters (Box 11-D). The diacylglycerol requirement
or“quanta.” The kinetic characteristics of the system favors a function for these protein kinases in membranes.
of receptors, diffusing InsP , calcium buffers, and cal- They also appear to cooperate with calmodulin to
3
cium pumps in the cell membrane, and the membrane activate the Ca2+-dependent contraction of smooth
potential may account for this behavior.174,301– 306 Since muscle.330

--- Page 568 ---

E. Calcium, Inositol Polyphosphates, and Diacylglycerols 565
O
R C O Phosphatidyl-Ins (3,4,5) P 3 Hormone Eicosanoids
1 PTEN
O H CH 2 O 5-Kinase H 2 O
Phosphatidyl-Ins (3,4) P Receptor Arachidonate
C O– 2
R C O P
2
HC O
2 Phosphatidyl-Ins 3-P
Often HO O 3-Kinase G protein Monoacylglycerol
arachidonoyl 3-Kinase
1 OH
Phosphatidyl-Ins 4-P
4 + Resynthesis
HO 5 OH 5-Kinase Phospholipase C of PI
Phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) OH 5-Kinase (phosphoinositidase C)
Phosphatidyl-Ins (4,5) P
2 O
R C O
1
+ Ca2+ O H CH 2
See Fig. 21-5
C
R C O
2
HO CH 2 OH
OP Diacylglycerol
– 1 OH Ca2+
Ins (Free Ins 1-P 4 Protein kinase C
myo-inositol) HO 5 OP + +
OP +
– Receptors and Ca2+
Ins 4-P Ins (1,4) P Ins (1,4,5) P channels in ER and
2 3
in plasma membrane
– Li+ ATP
Ca2+ channels in
Ins (3,4) P Ins (1,3,4) P Ins (1,3,4,5) P +
2 3 4 plasma membrane
–
Ins (1,3,4,6) P Ins (1,3,4,5,6) P (Allosteric effector of hemoglobin in birds)
4 5
InsPP
Pyrophosphate 5
derivatives
InsPP InsP (Phytate; present in large amounts in cereal grains)
6 6
Figure 11-9 Scheme showing synthesis and release of diacylglycerol and inositol phosphates and their regulation of calcium
concentration in response to hormonal stimulation.
Diacylglycerols released by phospholipase C are also indicated in the following structure.298,333
usually contain arachidonic acid in the 2 position. Initially most attention was paid to the water-
Hydrolytic cleavage of this linkage284,331 is a major soluble inositol phosphates that are released from
source of arachidonate for synthesis of eicosanoids phosphoinositides. However, phosphoinositol deriva-
such as the prostaglandins whose functions are tives that retain the diacylglycerol part of the molecule
discussed in Chapter 21. Arachidonate can also be have regulatory functions while remaining in mem-
formed directly by the action of phospholipase A on branes. A phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase phosphoryl-
2
membrane phospholipids332,332a (see the structure on ates the 3-OH of inositol in PtdIns, PtdIns 4-P and
p. 566). It has been suggested that protein G , which PtdIns (4,5)P to give PtdIns 3-P, PtdIns(3,4)P , and
q 2 2
activates the hydrolysis of phosphoinositides, may PtdIns(3,4,5)P , respectively.335– 337d However, they are
2
also regulate phospholipase A directly. Released ideally suited to function as spatially restricted mem-
2
diacylglycerols may not only activate protein kinases brane signals.337a They affect protein kinase C as well
C but also have a direct role in promoting the mem- as the Ser / Thr protein kinase Akt (discussed in Section
brane fusion required in exocytosis and endocytosis.332 F,3),326b and have several functions in vesicular membrane
Other breakdown pathways of phosphatidylinositols transport and in regulation of the cytoskeleton.337e,f

--- Page 569 ---

566 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
Phospholipase A O
1
C
O
H2C
O
H2C
Phospholipase C C C
O O O
H Arachidonoyl group
–O P
Phospholipase A
Phospholipase D 2
HO
O
2 1 6 OH 1 2 . . P P h h o o s s p p h h o o l l i i p p a a s s e e A A 1 → → A Fa r t a t c y h a id ci o d n + at l e y + so l p y h so o p sp h h o a sp ti h d a y t l i i d n y o l s i i n to o l sitol
4 2
(P)HO 5 OH 3. Phospholipase C → Ins 1-P, Ins(1,3)P, Ins(1,4)P, Ins(1,4,5)P + cyclic forms + diacylglycerol
2 2 3
3 4. Phospholipase D → Ins(4,5)P + phosphatidic acid323,334
OH(P) 2
Phosphatidylinositol
Characteristic of many of the phosphoinositide- adrenaline under control of the autonomic nervous
regulated proteins is a proline-rich PH domain (Table system. In muscle, binding of this hormone to the β
7-3) which can transmit regulatory signals to additional receptors on the cell membrane releases cAMP which
proteins in a cascade. Their importance is emphasized activates a protein kinase. The kinase then phosphoryl-
by the finding that a 405-residue phosphatase PTEN ates phosphorylase kinase. At this point the muscles
(named after its gene symbol) which catalyses hydro- are prepared for the rapid breakdown of glycogen.
lytic removal of one phospho group from PtdIns(3,4,5) However, an additional initiating signal is the release
P to form PtdIns(3,4) P , (Fig. 11-9) is a major human of Ca2+ into the cytoplasm in response to impulses to
3 2
tumor suppressor (see Box 11-D).338,338a,b These lipids specific muscles via the motor neurons. Calcium ions
are also important in insulin action (Section G,3). The can also be released in the liver by α adrenergic stimu-
steroid-like fungal metabolite wortmannin is a specific lation. Phosphorylase kinase is activated by the calcium
inhibitor of the 3-kinase.339,339a ions, and in their presence it converts inactive phos-
phorylaseb to the active phosphorylase a. Both protein
kinases and phosphorylase kinase also act on glycogen
H3C O
synthase, phosphorylating it and converting it to an
C O
CH3 inactive form. This turns off the biosynthetic pathway
CH3O at the same time that glycogenolysis (glycogen break-
down) is turned on. Spontaneous reversion of the
CH3
enzymes to their resting states occurs through the action
O of phosphatases that cut off the phospho groups placed
on the protein by the kinases. Also essential are phos-
phodiesterases, which destroy the cAMP, and the cal-
O O
cium ion pump, which reduces the concentration of
O the activating calcium ion to a low level.
Wortmannin Elaborate cascades initiate the clotting of blood
(Chapter 12) and the action of the protective comple-
ment system (Chapter 31). Cascades considered later
F. Regulatory Cascades in the book are involved in controlling transcription
(Fig. 11-13) and in the regulation of mammalian pyru-
The effect of a regulated change in the activity of vate dehydrogenase (Eq. 17-9), 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-
an enzyme is often amplified through a cascade mech- glutaryl-CoA reductase and eicosanoids (Chapter 21),
anism. The first enzyme acts on a second enzyme, the and glutamine synthetase (Chapter 24).
second on a third, etc. The effect is to rapidly create a
large amount of the active form of the last enzyme in
the series. 1. Advantages of Regulatory Cascades
We have already considered regulatory cascades
initiated respectively by the β and α adrenergic recep- Computer simulations as well as studies of experi-
2
tors. The effect of these cascades on glycogen phos- mental models have led to the following conclusions.340,341
phorylase is outlined on the left side of Fig. 11-4. One Even simple cascade mechanisms, such as the one
branch of the cascade sequence begins with release of shown in Fig. 11-10, can provide a more flexible response

--- Page 570 ---

G. Insulin and Related Growth-Regulating Hormones 567
to allosteric effectors (such as e in the figure) than if Kinase (inactive)
1
the effector acted directly on the enzyme rather than Effector e
1
on the protein kinase. The cascade also provides
K
amplification. This is especially true if additional 1
cycles are added. A response can result from the bind- e ·Kinase (active)
1
ing of only a small number of hormone molecules to a
receptor in a cell membrane or from activation of only
ATP ADP
a few molecules of a protease in the initiation of blood
clotting. A striking amplification occurs in visual
responses. Under appropriate conditions a single
quantum of light falling on a receptor cell in the retina
Enzyme Enzyme-P
of an eye can initiate a nerve impulse (Chapter 23).
The latter requires the flow of a large number of Na+
ions across the plasma membrane. It would be hard to
imagine how absorption of one quantum could initiate
P H O
a photochemical reaction leading to that much sodium i 2
transport without intermediate amplification stages.
e ·Phosphatase (active)
Another advantage of cascades is that they may provide 2
ultrasensitive responses. Not only can a response K
2
be sensitive to a higher power than the first of the
Effector e
concentration of a signaling molecule but also the 2
amplification provided by the cascade confers a high Phosphatase (inactive)
sensitivity to the response.342
Cascade systems also provide for response to more
than one allosteric stimulus in a single pathway. Thus, Figure 11-10 A “monocyclic” regulatory cascade involving
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of an enzyme.
as shown in Fig. 11-4, glycogen catabolism can be initiated
After Stadtman and Chock.341
in more than one way. Two pathways are known for
initiation of both blood clotting and activation of the
complement system. Many pathways activate the
MAP kinase pathway shown in Fig. 11-13.
in regulation of enzymes is often small.345 Substrate
cycles are not only an unavoidable consequence of the
2. Substrate Cycles need to regulate enzymes but also provide for improved
sensitivity in metabolic control. Consider Fig. 11-2
Although cascade systems offer advantage to cells, again. If the enzymes are set for conversion of fructose
there is a distinct energy expenditure associated with 1,6-P to glycogen (backwards direction), the flux of
2
the controls.343 As can be seen in Fig. 11-10, in addition materials flowing in the forward direction (glycolysis)
to providing for turning on and turning off the regulated will be efficiently curtailed because any fructose 1,6-P
2
enzyme, the kinase and the phosphatase together formed will be hydrolyzed rapidly by the active phos-
catalyze hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and inorganic phatase. Under these circumstances the flux in the
phosphate. Thus, the regulated enzyme is continually forward direction will be ultrasensitive to the activa-
cycling between active and inactive forms. The relative tion of phosphofructokinase and to the inhibition of
amounts of each are determined by the amounts of the fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase.346,347
effectors e and e , the concentrations of modifying
1 2
enzymes, and the kinetic constants. Such cycles have
sometimes been called “futile cycles” because they G. Insulin and Related Growth-Regulating
seemingly waste ATP. This is particularly true of cycles Hormones
that involve major metabolites, sometimes called
substrate cycles. An example is the conversion of Since its isolation in 1921, insulin has been the
fructose 6-P to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate by phospho- object of an enormous amount of experimentation
fructokinase and hydrolysis of the bisphosphate back aimed at clarifying its mode of action. It is produced
to fructose 6-P by a phosphatase (Fig. 11-2). However, by the β cells of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans
the cycles are not futile because the hydrolysis of the and released into the bloodstream in response to ele-
ATP provides the energy required to maintain the vated glucose levels. The absence of insulin or of a
concentrations of modified (phosphorylated) enzyme normal response to insulin results in the condition
or enzymes at steady-state levels that are required for ofdiabetes mellitus, which is the most prevalent
efficient catalysis.341,344 The energy utilized in this way human metabolic disorder (see Box 17-G).348

--- Page 571 ---

568 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
Insulin or insulin-like material is also produced in their cloned genes have been studied intensively. The
ciliated protozoa, vertebrate and invertebrate animals, receptors are α β disulfide crosslinked oligomers
2 2
fungi, green plants,349,350 and even in E. coli.351 composed of pairs of identical 120 - to 135-kDa α sub-
units and 95-kDa β subunits. An α and a β subunit are
cut from a single precursor chain. The human insulin
1. Metabolic Effects of Insulin receptor precursor exists as two isoforms, A and B,
which arise as a result of a difference in splicing of the
Insulin has many effects on metabolism.348,352,353 mRNA.358 Twenty-one introns are removed by splicing
(Some of these are listed in Table 17-3). They can be to form the mRNA for the 1355-residue B precursor.348,358a
summarized by saying that: (1) In most tissues insulin The mRNA for the A form lacks a 36-nucleotide segment
stimulates synthesis of proteins, glycogen, and lipids. (exon 11) that is discarded during splicing. The α chains
(2) It affects the permeability of membranes, promoting come from the N-terminal part of the precursor and
the uptake and utilization of glucose and amino acids theβ chains from the C-terminal part. The receptor
and of various ions from the blood. (3) It promotes sequence is numbered as in the longer B form precursor.
both synthesis of glycogen and the breakdown of (However, many authors number the chains of the
glucose by glycolysis. At the same time, it inhibits A form receptor as in its precursor, 12 less than the
synthesis of glucose from amino acids by the gluco- numbers given here for residues 719 or higher359).
neogenesis pathway. The effects are not uniformly The B form receptor has 731-residue α chains while
the same in all tissues. Some can be observed within the A form has 719-residue α chains as a result of the
a few minutes after administration, presumably as a missing sequence from exon 11 (see Fig. 11-11A). Four
result of regulation of enzymes. Effects on mRNA residues (732–735 in the B form) are cut out and dis-
metabolism, protein synthesis, and cell growth are carded, leaving 620-residue β chains for both isoforms.
seen at later times. The chains become linked by three or more disulfide
The uptake of glucose by brain, liver, kidneys, crossbridges.360
erythrocytes, and the islets of Langerhans is unaffected The two α subunits, which contain the insulin
by insulin. However, in muscle and adipose tissues binding sites, are apparently present entirely on the
insulin stimulates glucose uptake. Part of this effect outer surface of the plasma membrane. The β subunits
results from insulin-induced translocation of molecules pass through the membrane with their C termini in the
of the 509-residue glucose transport protein GLUT4 cytoplasm.361–363 Both α and β subunits are glycoproteins.
(Chapter 8) from the cytosol into the plasma membrane Study of the amino acid sequences suggests that only
where it can function.354– 356a Insulin apparently also one 23-residue segment (residues 930 – 952 of the B iso-
increases the rate of synthesis of the transporters. form) of hydrophobic amino acid residues in each β
Insulin stimulates the phosphorylation of serine subunit is likely to exist as an α helix that spans the
side chains of many proteins, including ATP citratelyase, membrane. This raises several questions. How can a
acetyl-CoA carboxylase, and ribosomal subunit S6. signal be sent from the cell surface into the cytoplasm
At the same time it stimulates the dephosphorylation through a single pair of α helices? Are there additional
of other proteins, including acetyl-CoA carboxylase, parts of the receptor that span the bilayer of the mem-
glycogen synthase in skeletal muscle (Fig. 11-4),49 brane? To make it easier to visualize these questions
pyruvate dehydrogenase, and hormone-sensitive lipase refer to Fig. 11-11B, which is a more realistic, although
in adipose tissue. Yet another effect of insulin is to alter fanciful, drawing than that in Fig.11-11A. Electron
the amounts of specific messenger RNA molecules. For microscopy and crystallography are now providing
example, the transcription of the gene for phosphoenol- the first direct images of the receptor.363a, b, c
pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK; Eq. 13-46) a key enzyme One possible way in which a signal could be sent
in gluconeogenesis, is inhibited by insulin within through the membrane is for binding of insulin to
seconds after binding. The hexokinase isoenzyme promote aggregation of two or more receptors.364 If
calledglucokinase phosphorylates glucose to glucose- insulin induces the receptors to stick together on the
6-P in liver and in pancreatic β cells. Its synthesis in outside of the cell, the parts protruding into the cyto-
liver is induced by insulin. (However, in the β cells plasm would also tend to aggregate. This could induce
the synthesis of glucokinase is induced by glucose.) a response. A second possibility is that a conforma-
tional change in the α subunits pulls or pushes on the
β subunit allowing the latter to be exposed less or more
2. Insulin Receptors on the cytoplasmic side. This difference might be
sufficient to cause a conformational change in the
All of the effects of insulin appear to result from cytoplasmic domain of the subunit. A third possibility
its binding to insulin receptors, of which ~102 to 105 involves activation by a twisting mechanism as proposed
are present in the plasma membranes of most animal for the aspartate receptor (Fig. 11-8).
cells. First isolated in 1972,357 insulin receptors and A large part of the cytoplasmic domain of the insulin

--- Page 572 ---

G. Insulin and Related Growth-Regulating Hormones 569
A N N B Insulin
α α 1
Phe 34 L L
1 1
L1
Leu 87
L L
119 2 2
155 S S Cysteine S S Cysteine
rich rich
S S S S
Cysteine-rich
domain
α α
S S β S S
312
L2
428
N N
β 736 β
S S S S
717 Asp
Exon 11 707
C 731 C
Plasma 930 β
membrane 952 β
Tyr 972
Arg-Lys-Arg Tyrosine
kinase
981
1003 GXGXXG C C
ATP binding
Ser 1090
Tyrosine
Cytosol kinase
domain
Tyr 1162, 1158, 1163
Figure 11-11 Schematic drawings of the insulin receptor.
1282 (A) Typical textbook drawing. The bars represent the extended
peptide chains with positions of domain boundaries and chain
Tyr 1328, 1334
ends mapped (left side). Locations of some residues of special
1355
C C interest are marked on the right side. (B) A fanciful but more
realistic picture of the receptor. See Fabry et al.367
receptor consists of a tyrosine-specific protein kinase the two domains labeled L1 and L2 in Fig. 11-11.368
whose three-dimensional structure is depicted in Fig. Among essential residues is Phe 39 (marked).369 Insulin
11-12.365,365a Not only can it phosphorylate – OH groups contains three disulfide linkages (Fig. 7-16) and might
on tyrosine side chains of other proteins362 but also it undergo a thiol–disulfide exchange reaction (Eq. 11-7)
catalyzes ATP-dependent autophosphorylation of with SH groups present in a cytoplasmic cysteine-rich
several residues in the C-terminal region. The most domain of the α subunit of the receptor or with an external
readily phosphorylated residue is Tyr 1158.366 Some thiol compound.369a,b Such an exchange may also be
diabetic individuals have receptors with impaired essential for activation of the receptor.370
tyrosine kinase activity.362
Using directed mutation of the cloned receptor
gene, Lys 1018 in the ATP-binding part of the tyrosine 3. A Second Messenger for Insulin?
kinase domain was replaced by alanine. This caused a
loss both of kinase activity and of biologic response to The known regulatory effects of insulin (Table 17-3)
insulin.362 Thus, both the tyrosine kinase activity and often involve phosphorylation of serine or threonine
autophosphorylation appear essential. If so, aggrega- side chains on specific proteins. The tyrosine kinase of
tion of two or more receptors may increase the extent the activated insulin receptors does not catalyze such
of autophosphorylation and initiate a response. phosphorylation. Therefore, it seems likely that one
Studies of many mutant proteins indicate that or more second messengers or mediator substances
insulin binds to the α chains of the receptor between are needed. Much effort has gone into searching for

--- Page 573 ---

570 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
A B
Figure 11-12 (A) Stereoscopic view of an α-carbon trace of the insulin receptor kinase domain. Every tenth residue is marked
with a filled circle and every twentieth residue is labeled. (B) Locations of missense mutations in noninsulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus patients mapped onto the receptor kinase structure. The mutations are R993Q, G1008V, A1048D, R1164Q,
R1174Q, P1178L, W1193L, and W1200S. Here, R993Q is the mutant in which arginine 993 is replaced with glutamine, etc.
From Hubbard et al.365
substrates for the tyrosine kinase,353,362,371,372 whose phosphorylated tyrosine kinase domain of the insulin
activity on external protein substrates reaches a maxi- receptor.382 Furthermore, the receptor tyrosine kinase
mum after receptor tyrosines 1158, 1162, and 1163 have may catalyze direct phosphorylation of some proteins,
been autophosphorylated. Phosphorylation of such e.g. a cytoplasmic loop of the β adrenergic receptor
2
insulin receptor substrates (IRSs) as well as of (Fig. 11-6), without intervention of an adapter.383
some smaller “adapter” proteins is thought to initiate Phosphorylated IRS-1 activates a second signaling
a series of complex cascades that serve to pass the pathway by interacting with an 85-kDa SH2-containing
insulin signal on to a variety of sites of action within protein that is a subunit of phophatidylinositol 3-
a cell.373– 376 The large 185-kDA insulin receptor kinase.384– 386 This activates the 110-kDa catalytic
substrate-1(IRS-1), which is present in most cells, subunit of the 3-kinase, which catalyzes formation of
is phosphorylated on several tyrosines, usually within phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate as well as PtdIns
the sequences YXXM or YMXM. Phosphotyrosine (3,4)P and PtdIns (3,4,5)P .387,387a These compounds,
2 3
within such sequences is known to be a ligand for the which remain within membranes, activate other
recognition domain SH2, which is present in many branches of the signaling cascade, some of which
proteins. Binding of SH2 domains of other proteins to may converge with those of the MAP kinase cascade.
IRS-1 allows the insulin signal to be passed to several However, there appears to be specific activation of a
different proteins in the branched signaling pathways. ribosomal Ser/Thr kinase that, among other activities,
Other insulin receptor substrates include IRS-2,376a,b phosphorylates ribosomal protein S6, a component of
protein Gab-1376c, and the smaller protein called Shc, the small ribosomal subunit.388 It also phosphorylates
which occurs as 46-, 52-, and 66-kDa isoforms and is some isoforms of protein kinase C and other enzymes.
discussed further on p. 568.376,377 Shc is an adapter PtdIns 3-kinase may also activate 6-phosphofructo-2-
protein which forms a complex that triggers the activa- kinase (Fig. 11-2, step d).384,388
tion of the G protein Ras and the MAP kinase cascade One of the most important effects of insulin is to
shown in Fig. 11-13.377,378 This pathway (see Section increase glucose uptake by cells.373,389 The mechanism
H,2) is thought to mediate the mitogenic (growth pro- is thought to depend upon the transporter protein
moting) effects of insulin and also to promote phospho- GLUT4, which is stored within the membranes of
rylation of serine and threonine side chains of many small cytoplasmic vesicles. Binding of insulin to its
proteins in the cytoplasm, the cytoskeleton, ribosomes, receptors induces movement of these vesicles to the
membranes, and the nucleus.379,380 One serine kinase plasma membrane where fusion with the plasma
specifically phosphorylates the insulin receptor on membrane makes the GLUT4 molecules available for
serine 1078.381 glucose transport.390 Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
In addition to IRS-1, IRS-2, and Shc, there are also plays an important role. The PtdIns(3,4)P and
2
additional adapter proteins that interact with the PtdIns(3,4,5)P generated by this enzyme (Fig. 11-9)
3

--- Page 574 ---

H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell Cycle 571
remain in the membrane and provide sites to which
1. Oncogenes and Proto-oncogenes
various proteins, e.g., those containing PH domains
(Chapter 7) may bind. Among the proteins “recruited”
Studies of cancer-causing cellular oncogenes and
to the inner membrane surface in this way is a Ser/Thr
proto-oncogenes (c-onc) identified in the human
protein kinase known as PKB/Akt. The Akt abbre-
genome408–411 have contributed greatly to our under-
viation refers to its relationship to a particular viral
standing of the action of growth factors. Proto-onco-
oncogene.390a– 390e and the phosphatidyl-inositol deriv-
genes are segments of DNA that code for proteins that
atives generated by the 3-kinase may have a direct
have a normal function but which may become “acti-
effect upon the exocytosis of the GLUT-4 containing
vated” by a mutation or by chromosomal rearrange-
vesicles as may Gq-coupled receptors.391
ment to become cancer-causing oncogenes (Box 11-D).
Although insulin unquestionably stimulates phos-
Oncogenes were discovered first in oncogenic (cancer-
phorylation of many proteins, the major metabolic effect
causing) retroviruses,412 where they are designated
appears to result from dephosphorylation by phosphatases
v-onc. The v-onc genes are usually very similar but
of phosphorylated forms of several enzymes.379,392
not identical to the corresponding c-onc genes and are
These include glycogen synthase and pyruvate
thought to have arisen from them. The v-onc genes are
dehydrogenase, which are both activated by dephos-
often incomplete or have become fused to other genes
phorylation, and glycogen phosphorylase393 and
by genetic recombination. Considerable excitement
hormone-sensitivelipase, which are deactivated by
has attended the discovery that many solid human
dephosphorylation. These changes result in increased
tumors contain activated oncogenes,413 several of which
synthesis and storage of both glycogen and triacyglyc-
are listed in Table 11-3.
erols. Insulin also stimulates a membrane-bound cAMP
In 1983 it was found that the oncogene sis, which is
phosphodiesterase causing a reduction in cAMP con-
carried by the simian sarcoma virus, has a 104-residue
centrations.394
sequence nearly identical to that of human PDGF.404,414
Insulin injected into the human body has a half-
The PDGF receptor has a large extracellular domain
life of only 5 –10 minutes. Much of the hormone is
consisting of five immunoglobulin-like domains. Like
destroyed by hydrolytic cleavage of the peptide chain
the insulin receptor, it has tyrosine kinase activity which
by a non-lysosomal protease.395– 397 The receptors
resides in a C-terminal cytoplasmic domain.406,407,415
together with the hormone are taken into cells by endo-
This suggests that the malignant transformation of
cytosis from clathrin-coated pits and both may be
cells by the viral v-sis gene leads to an excessive pro-
degraded in the lysosomes.396,398 Some signaling may
duction of normal PDGF and, consequently, to exces-
arise from insulin receptors in endosomes.399 Some of
sive growth. The sequences related to v-sis are often
the hormone enters the nucleus, perhaps still bound
found in human tumors and are located on chromo-
to the receptors,400 and may have a direct effect upon
some 22.416 Rearrangements by which part of this
gene transcription. Some receptors are recycled to the
chromosome is moved to another location are well
cell surface.398 This latter process, together with that
known and sometimes lead to conversion of the proto-
of new receptor synthesis, controls the number of
oncogene to an active cancer-inducing oncogene.
receptors on the surface and, in turn, the sensitivity of
The avian v-erbB oncogene and oncogene neu417-419
the cell to insulin. This is only one mechanism used for
both have sequences homologous to that of the gene
desensitization or downregulation of receptor sensi-
for the receptor for the 53-residue epidermal growth
tivity and numbers, something that happens normally
factor EGF.420–423a The corresponding cellular c-erbB
for any hormone when its concentration is high.401,402
is the gene for the EGF receptor, a large 170-kDa 1186-
residue protein. It also resembles the insulin receptor
in having an N-terminal domain outside the cell, a
H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell
single hydrophobic helix that spans the membrane,
Cycle
and a cytoplasmic domain with tyrosine-specific pro-
tein kinase activity.403,419,424,425 It differs from the
Insulin is just one of a large number of proteins
insulin receptor in being a single peptide chain. How-
that are secreted by cells and which influence the
ever, when EGF binds, the receptor dimerizes and the
growth of nearby cells.403– 405 For example, blood
protein kinase is activated.426 It phosphorylates its
platelets, which aggregate at the site of an injury to
own Tyr 1173 near the C terminus, as well as tyrosines
a blood vessel, contain granules (α granules) which,
in the lipocortins, 36- to 38-kDa calcium-binding proteins
when the platelet is “activated” (see Box 8-A) release
located on the cytosolic face of plasma membranes.427
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), a 28- to 31-
The activated receptor also stimulates phospholipase
kDa glycosylated peptide which stimulates growth and
C with a resultant increase in concentrations of inositol
tissue repair in the injured region.406,407 There are many
trisphosphate and Ca2+ (see Fig. 11-13).428 The active
other protein growth factors, a few of which are con-
oncogene v-erbB encodes a major fragment of the EGF
sidered here. Others are discussed in Chapters 30–32.
receptor. However, most of the N-terminal domain

--- Page 575 ---

572 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
TABLE 11-3
A Few Oncogenes That Have Interested Biochemists
Oncogene
Symbol Source Properties
v-sis Simian sarcoma virus Gene product is closely related to the B-chain of platelet-derived
growth factor
v-erbB Avian erythroblastosis virus Gene product is shortened version of the EGF receptor, a
tyrosine kinase
neu (Her-2) Rat neuroblastomas Homologous to EGF receptor; has tyrosine
A similar gene is found in kinase activity; may control
human breast cancers and phosphotidylinositol 3-kinase
adenocarcinomas
v-src Rous avian sarcoma virus Gene product is another tyrosine-specific
protein kinase
abl Chronic myelogenous leukemia Similar to src; characteristic chromosomal
translocations yield cancer
ras,has, Human bladder, colon, Homology with G and G regulatory
s i
v-H-ras lung carcinomas proteins; several human proto-oncogenes
v-K-ras exist; a single mutation in H-ras may lead
N-ras to cancer
bas,kis Murine sarcoma viruses
v-myc Burkitt’s lymphoma, Nuclear location for gene product; which
mouse plasmacytomas, forms complex with protein Jun
avian retrovirus MC29
mos Burkitt’s lymphoma,
mouse plasmacytomas
v-fos Osteosarcoma virus (mouse) Nuclear location for gene product, which forms complex with
protein Jun
v-jun Protein product is subunit of transcription factor AP-1
bcl1 Cyclin D1
including the EGF binding site is missing and the C- myristoyl anchor to the inner, cytoplasmic surfaces
terminal end has been shortened. The tyrosine kinase of membranes.429–431 They may be activated by inter-
domain is intact but Tyr 1173 is missing. action with an occupied surface receptor. It has been
The rat neu oncogene (also called erbB-2 and HER-2), difficult to understand the functioning of the normal
which apparently is derived from the gene for another Src protein. However, inactivation of c-src in mice
growth factor receptor, differs from normal neu by a caused the serious bone disease osteopetrosis in which
single nucleotide. This change causes valine to be the osteoclasts fail to function properly in resorbing
substituted for glutamic acid at position 664 in the the bone matrix, thereby allowing excessive accumula-
membrane-spanning domain of the 185-kDa protein.418 tion of calcium phosphate.432,433 A c-src deficiency also
This evidently gives an overactive and perhaps uncon- decreases formation of the bone adhesion protein
trolled tyrosine-specific protein kinase. The c-erbA osteopontin, an RGD protein.434 There is actually a
proto-oncogene appears to be the nuclear receptor for family of src proteins, some of which have important
the thyroid hromone triiodothyronine (Chapter 25). functions in lymphocytes.435–438 The gene for one of
The Rous sarcoma virus oncogene v-src and a these is mutated in the β cell disorder
family of related oncogenes are derived from protein agammaglobulinemia.437
tyrosine kinases that are attached with the aid of a Another oncogene derived from a tyrosine kinase

--- Page 576 ---

H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell Cycle 573
BOX 11-D CANCER
Although cancer occurs in about 200 clinically of tobacco appears to be responsible for about 30% of
distinct types, most cancers can be classified into four all human tumors.c,j Diet also affects the likelihood of
categories. In leukemias, which account for 3% of the developing cancer. For example, diets containing less
~700,000 cases of cancer diagnosed per year in the animal fat and more fruits and vegetables are associated
United States, an abnormal number of leukocytes are with lower levels of colon cancer.c,k Many carcinogenic
produced by the bone marrow. Lymphomas, such as compounds are naturally present in foods. Genetic
Hodgkin’s disease and Burkitt’s lymphoma, arise from factors help to determine susceptibility to cancerb,l and
lymphocytes. They account for ~5% of human cancers. characteristic chromosomal aberrations are usually
In these diseases malignant cells are produced in the associated with cancer.m– o The incidence of cancer
spleen and lymph nodes and sometimes aggregate in increases markedly with age.
lymphoid tissues. Sarcomas, solid tumors of bone or A common feature of all the agents that induce
other connective tissue, contribute ~2% to the total of cancer is the production of mutations and cancer
human cancers, while carcinomas, cancers of epithelial probably always involves some alteration in the cell’s
tissue, account for 85%. Carcinomas may develop from DNA. The long lag between exposure to carcinogenic
either the external or the internal epithelia, including materials and development of cancers, often 20 years
the glands, lungs, and nerves.a– d More than one-third or more, suggested that more than one mutation or
of all cancers in the United States are nonmelanoma chromosomal rearrangement is required for produc-
carcinomas of the skin;e for these the mortality rate is tion of a cancer. Recent evidence confirms that several
low. Lung, colorectal, breast, and prostate tumors mutations are required.b,p Relevant to this conclusion
account for 55% of cancer deaths.c Carcinomas pre- is the fact that carcinogenic compounds can be applied
dominate in humans, but lymphomas, leukemias, to the skin in amounts sufficient to cause a number
and sarcomas are much more prevalent in laboratory of mutations in the epithelial cells but insufficient to
animals and fowl. actually induce cancer. Then, even many years later,
An important characteristic of cancer cells is their irritant compounds known as cancer promoters can
uncontrolled proliferation. They don’t respond to the be applied and cancer will develop promptly. The
normal signals from adjacent cells that indicate that promoters apparently induce cell proliferation which
cell division should stop. Cancer cells also differ leads to more errors in DNA replication, converting
dramatically from those present in warts and other an initially mutated cell to a cancerous cell. The most
benign tumors and in psoriasis. These conditions also studied promoters are the phorbol esters, which are
result in excessive proliferation of cells and partial known to activate the protein kinase C isoenzymes
derangement of normal regulatory processes. (Section E,2). Any factors that increase rates of cell
A second characteristic of cancer cells is that they division such as some hormones, excess calories, or
usually appear less differentiated than the tissues from chronic inflammation cause increased cancer.c Cell
which they arise and are more like embryonic cells. divisions are accompanied by errors in replication of
Many cancers produce ectopic proteins, proteins DNA and sometimes by translocation or deletion of
inappropriate to the tissue involved and often identical parts of chromosomes. Chronic infection by bacteria,
to proteins synthesized by embryonic or fetal cells. A viruses, or other organisms may cause cancer as a
well-known example is (cid:3)-fetoprotein, a 72-kDa result of continuing inflammation. Other cancers arise
glycoprotein normally present in serum in almost from integration of viral DNA into the host’s DNA.
undetectable amounts but present in large amounts when Virally induced cancers are often epidemic among
some types of cancer are present.f A third property of poultry and rodents. When infected with cancer-
cancers is the tendency toward metastasis, the detach- causing viruses from these animals, cells in culture
ment of cells from the cancer and their development in often become transformed. Whereas normal cells
distant parts of the body.g– i tend to respond to contact inhibition and grow as a
Cancer cells don’t grow any faster than normal cells monolayer, transformed cells continue to divide after
but they continue to divide when normal cells would the monolayer is complete. In laboratory studies,
not. For this reason, a cancer can grow rapidly and its transformation of cells is often taken as the equivalent
demands for nutrients can literally starve the host. to an early step in cancer production in an animal.
Cancer tends to weaken the immune system, making Studies of transformation led to the identification and
the host more susceptible to infections. In addition, characterization of several viral oncogenes which
cancers often interfere directly with the functioning of cause the transformation. These are designated by
various organs and may cause death in this way. abbreviations such as v-src (the oncogene of Rous
What initiates a cancer? We know that cancers can sarcoma virus, which induces cancer in chickens) and
arise from only one or a very small number of cells and v-sis (the oncogene of simian sarcoma virus, which
that cancer can be induced by carcinogenic chemical causes cancers in monkeys). Some other oncogenes are
compounds, by certain viruses, and by radiation. Use described in the main text. Naturally occurring gene

--- Page 577 ---

574 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
BOX 11-D CANCER (continued)
sequences closely homologous to those of the viral to S-phase checkpoint in the cell cycle. If the DNA has
oncogenes have been found in many solid human tumors. too many defects the cycle is stopped in the G stage
1
Study of oncogenes has shown that they are related to and and the cell may be killed by the process known as
derived from proto-oncogenes, normal cellular genes apoptosis.gg– jj Protein p53 has been called the
that are involved in control of growth and differentiation. “guardian of the genome.” The mechanisms by which
Oncogenes are often “amplified” in tumor cells it functions are complex and poorly understood. It
so that their copy number is greater than that of the may act with the assistance of Rb and many other
corresponding genes in normal cells. For example an proteins. Mutations in DNA and their repair are dis-
oncogene related to the viral oncogene neu is amplified cussed in Chapter 27 and the cell cycle is discussed in
in many human breast and ovarian cancersq and onco- this chapter and further in Chapters 26 and 32.
genesrc in many colon cancers.r Mutated ras genes Many other cancer susceptibility genes also encode
have been found in over one-third of human colorectal suppressors. Mutation in genes BRACA1kk and BRACA2ll
cancers.s Amplified oncogenes ras,myc, and myb have are responsible for early onset ovarian and breast
been observed in other cancers.t Oncogenes are often cancer. Gene DPC4 may be a suppressor of pancreatic
overexpressed or are responsible for over-expression cancer.mm The gene ptc (patched), first studied as a
of other genes. One idea that developed from these developmental gene in Drosophila, may encode a sup-
observations is that cancer cells may secrete new or pressor of basal cell carcinoma, the commonest form
mutated growth factors that stimulate their own recep- of human skin cancer.nn Gene p16(also called CDKN2)
tors (autocrine stimulation) in a way that promotes may be a major suppressor that is mutated in many
uncontrolled growth.u cancers including the dangerous skin melanoma.oo
Cancer develops in stages and in many cases defec- Mutations in the NF gene, which may be a cytoskeletal
tive proto-oncogenes appear before truly malignant cells protein, are associated with neurofibromatosis,pp a
appear. The latter must result from additional mutations relatively common hereditary disease causing tumors
that often involve loss of parts of chromosomes. A major of the nervous system. The tumors are usually not
breakthrough in our understanding of cancer and how malignant but are numerous and disfiguring. Several
it is induced by loss of genes has come from studies of cancer susceptibility genes are associated with faulty
some rare cancers that are inherited in a Medelian fashion. mismatch repair of DNA. Among these is the APC
One of these is retinoblastoma, an intraocular tumor gene, whose malfunction is associated with human
which affects 1 child in 20,000. Homozygotes always familial adenomatous polyposis which causes
develop the disease between the ages of 1 and 5. The thousands of benign tumors in the lining of the large
hereditary defect has been traced to the absence of a intestine and often colorectal cancer.qq,rr,ss In the much
functional retinoblastoma gene RB1, which is found in more common nonpolyposis colon cancer a complex
band q14 of chromosome 13.v Additional mutational pattern of instability in several genes is associated with
events are required to induce cancer. The RB1 gene DNA repair,tt a topic dealt with further in Chapter 27.
was the first tumor-suppressor gene (anti-oncogene) TheATM gene defective in ataxia telangiectasia
identified. These suppressor genes encode proteins (Chapter 27) may encode a phosphatidylinositol kinase
that inhibit growth.w– z The retinoblastoma gene that is in some way involved in repair of DNA.ss,uu,vv
encodes a 105-kDa DNA-binding phosphoprotein A transcription factor gene nm23 may be a suppressor
(Rb-P).aa– bb The Rb protein is phosphorylated and gene for metastasisww and the cell–cell adhesion
dephosphorylated in a cyclic fashion that is synchro- moleculeE-cadherin may suppress tumor invasion in
nized with the cell replication cycle (Fig. 11-15). It some kinds of breast cancer.xxTheVHL (van Hippel-
forms a complex with a transcription factor E2F that Lindau cancer syndrome) suppressor protein is defec-
functions in transcription of the adenovirus genes and tive in the majority of kidney cancers. It normally
is also involved in control of the cell replication cycle.cc binds to the elongin complex, a DNA-binding com-
Deletion of the Rb gene from mice leads to death of plex that functions in control of transcription.zz
embryos homozygous for the mutation.dd In addition to treatment by surgery there are
Study of other rare hereditary cancers has led to numerous chemical approaches to combating cancer.xy
the location of 20 or more additional probable tumor- They usually exploit the tendency of cancers to grow
suppressor genes. One of these, p53, is inactive in over continuously. For example, a toxic analog of a metabo-
50% of all human cancers and over 90% of sqamous lite needed for growth, such as methotrexate (Chapter
cell carcinomas of the skin.ee In small-cell lung cancers 16) and 5-fluorouridine (Box 28-C) may be taken up
and osteosarcoma both RB and p53 are inactive.z Protein more rapidly by tumor cells than by normal cells. A
p53is a stronger tumor suppressor than protein Rb. variety of DNA-binding compounds are useful in chemo-
Results of a variety of experiments have suggested therapy (Box 5-B). Alkylating agents such as the nitrogen
that p53, a DNA-binding protein of known structure,ff mustards (Eq. 5-20) and certain antibiotic compounds
plays a key role in checking DNA for damage at the G are also used widely, as are intercalating compounds
1

--- Page 578 ---

H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell Cycle 575
BOX 11-D (continued)
such as adriamycin (14-hydroxydaunomycin; Fig. 5-22) t Yokota, J., Tsunetsugu-Yokota, Y., Battifora, H., Le Fevre, C.,
and cisplatin (Box 5-B). A disadvantage to most present- and Cline, M. J. (1986) Science231, 261–265
u Sporn, M. B., and Roberts, A. B. (1985) Nature (London)313,
day chemotherapy is that normal proliferation of cells,
745–747
especially of glandular tissues, intestinal epithelium,
v Weinberg, R. A. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 199–202
hair, etc., is severely damaged. A possibility for circum- w Stanbridge, E. J. (1990) Science247, 12–13
venting this problem is to put normal growth “on hold” x Weinberg, R. A. (1991) Science254, 1138–1146
temporarily while cancer growth is being inhibited. y Knudson, A. G. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 10914–
Some inhibitors of topoisomerase I (see Chapter 27) 10921
z Yokota, J., and Sugimura, T. (1993) FASEB J.7, 920–925
have low toxicity and could be useful. Another thera-
aa Wiman, K. G. (1993) FASEB J.7, 841–845
peutic approach is based on the fact that one function bb Cobrinik, D., Dowdy, S. F., Hinds, P. W., Mittnacht, S., and
of the immune system is to destroy cancerous or pre- Weinberg, R. A. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 312–315
cancerous cells. The immune system tends to weaken cc Nevins, J. R. (1992) Science258, 424–429
with age, which may be one reason that the incidence dd Jacks, T., Fazeli, A., Schmitt, E. M., Bronson, R. T., Goodell, M.
A., and Weinberg, R. A. (1992) Nature (London)359, 295–300
of cancers rises rapidly in older age Are there ways of
ee Ziegler, A., Jonason, A. S., Leffell, D. J., Simon, J. A., Sharma,
stimulating the immune system into increased activity
H. W., Kimmelman, J., Remington, L., Jacks, T., and Brash, D.
against cancer cells? Another approach is to find ways E. (1994) Nature (London)372, 773–776
of increasing the activity of tumor-suppressor genes. ff Cho, Y., Gorina, S., Jeffrey, P. D., and Pavletich, N. P. (1994)
Can drugs be developed to prevent cancer? Such Science265, 346–355
“chemoprevention”yz may be appropriate for persons gg Marx, J. (1993) Science262, 1644–1645
hh Enoch, T., and Norbury, C. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20,
carrying genes that make them highly susceptible to
426–430
cancer. The antiestrogenic drug tamoxifen (Chapter ii Kaufmann, W. K., and Paules, R. S. (1996) FASEB J.10,
22) is currently being tested on women with a high risk 238–247
for breast cancer. Use of oral contraceptives appears to jj Hartwell, L. H., and Kastan, M. B. (1994) Science266, 1821–1828
have cut the risk of endometrial cancer substantially.yy kk Futreal, P. A., and 26 other authors (1994) Science266, 120–122
ll Wooster, R., and 30 other authors (1994) Science265, 2088–2090
Newer approaches to contraception may help prevent
mmHahn, S. A., Schutte, M., Hoque, A. T. M. S., Moskaluk, C. A.,
breast cancer and chemoprevention may also be possi-
da Costa, L. T., Rozenblum, E., Weinstein, C. L., Fischer, A.,
ble for prostate cancer.yy Yeo, C. J., Hruban, R. H., and Kern, S. (1996) Science271,
350–353
nn Pennisi, E. (1996) Science272, 1583–1584
a Cairns, J. (1978) Cancer: Science and Society, Freeman, San
oo Marx, J. (1994) Science265, 1364–1365
Francisco, California
pp Rouleau, G. A., and 20 other authors (1993) Nature (London)
b Cavenee, W. K., and White, R. L. (1995) Sci. Am.272(Mar),
363, 515–521
72–79
qq Peltomäki, P., Aaltonen, L. A., Sistonen, P., Pylkkänen, L.,
c Ames, B. N., Gold, L. S., and Willett, W. C. (1995) Proc. Natl.
Mecklin, J.-P., Järvinen, H., Green, J. S., Jass, J. R., Weber, J. L.,
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 5258–5265
Leach, F. S., Petersen, G. M., Hamilton, S. R., de la Chapelle,A.,
d Ruddon, R. W. (1987) Cancer Biology, 2nd ed., Oxford Univ.
and Vogelstein, B. (1993) Science 260, 810–819
Press, London
rr Huang, J., Papadopoulos, N., McKinley, A. J., Farrington, S.
e Preston, D. S., and Stern, R. S. (1992) N. Engl. J. Med.327,
M., Curtis, L. J., Wyllie, A. H., Zheng, S., Willson, J. K. V.,
1649–1662
Markowitz, S. D., Morin, P., Kinzler, K. W., Vogelstein, B., and
f Zhang, D., Hoyt, P. R., and Papaconstantinou, J. (1990) J. Biol.
Dunlop, M. G. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 9049–
Chem.265, 3382–3391
9054
g Packard, B. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 490–491
ss Kolodner, R. D. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 397–401
h Feldman, M., and Eisenbach, L. (1988) Sci. Am.259(Nov), 60–85
tt Papadopoulos, N., and 19 other authors (1994) Science18,
i Marx, J. (1993) Science259, 626–629
1625–1629
j zur Hausen, H. (1991) Science254, 1167–1173
uu Keith, C. T., and Schreiber, S. L. (1995) Science270, 50–51
k Willett, W. (1989) Nature (London)338, 389–394
vv Sanchez, Y., Desany, B. A., Jones, W. J., Liu, Q., Wang, B., and
l Dragani, T. A., Canzian, F., and Pierotti, M. A. (1996) FASEB J.
Elledge, S. J. (1996) Science271, 357–360
10, 865–870
wwMarx, J. (1993) Science261, 428–429
m Solomon, E., Borrow, J., and Goddard, A. D. (1991) Science254,
xx Berx, G., Cleton-Jansen, A.-M., Nollet, F., de Leeuw, W. J. F.,
1153–1160
van de Vijver, M. J., Cornelisse, C., and van Roy, F. (1995)
n Nowell, P. C. (1994) FASEB J.8, 408–413
EMBO J.14, 6107–6115
o Pennisi, E. (1996) Science272, 649
xy Hoffman, E. J. (1999) Cancer and the Search for Selective
p Marx, J. (1989) Science246, 1386–1388
q Slamon, D. J., Godolphin, W., Jones, L. A., Holt, J. A., Wong, S. Biochemical Inhibitors, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
G., Keith, D. E., Levin, W. J., Stuart, S. G., Udove, J., Ullrich, A., yy Henderson, B. E., Ross, R. K., and Pike, M. C. (1993) Science
and Press, M. F. (1989) Science244, 707–712 259, 633–638
r Cartwright, C. A., Meisler, A. I., and Eckhart, W. (1990) Proc. yz Young, R. C. (2000) Nature (London)408, 141
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.87, 558–562 zz Stebbins, C. E., Kaelin, W. G., Jr., and Pavletich, N. P. (1999)
s Bos, J. L., Fearon, E. R., Hamilton, S. R., Verlaan-de Vries, M., Science284, 455–461
van Boom, J. H., van der Eb, A. J., and Vogelstein, B. (1987)
Nature (London)327, 293–297

--- Page 579 ---

576 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
gene is the Abelson murine leukemia virus v-abl.438a location has brought the c-myc gene into the locus of
In the mouse the c-abl gene is split into at least ten the immunoglobulin heavy chains on chromosome 14.
exons. However, v-abl contains all of these as a correctly There its transcription may be subject to different
spliced sequence suggesting that v-abl was derived controls than in its original location.445,446 During the
from a c-abl messenger RNA. Part of one exon of the translocation process the c-myc gene is often broken
cellular gene is missing in v-abl and there is at least one within the first intron. Thus, the activated gene lacks
base substitution mutation as well. Human c-abl is the first exon and is placed after a new controlling
located on the long arm q of chromosome 9. This arm sequence that may drastically alter its transcription
has long been known to be translocated to chromosome rate. Viral myc genes are found in at least one human
22 (the “Philadelphia translocation”) in patients with virus, cytomegalovirus, which has been associated
chronic myelogenous leukemia. There the c-abl gene with carcinomas.
is fused with another gene.439 The human c-sis gene
is also located in the region of chromosome 22 that is Transcription factors. The proto-oncogenes
translocated to chromosome 9 in the same patients. c-myc447–451a, c-myb,452–454 c-fos, c-jun andc-ets455 all
A group of human pituitary tumors have been encode nuclear proteins involved in regulation of
shown to contain an oncogene that is apparently a transcription. The 39 kDa protein Jun, which is encoded
mutated gene for the stimulatory protein G.440 This by c-jun, is a major component of the transcriptional
s
is the protein that activates adenylate cyclase in response activator called AP-1.456–459 It binds to palindromic
to hormonal activation. The oncogenic mutations inhibit enhancer sites (Chapter 28) in DNA promoters to
the GTPase activity that normally turns off this activa- increase the transcription rate for a group of genes.
tion. These tumors secrete growth hormone which Jun is actually a multigene family whose encoded
binds to receptors on the tumor cells activating the proteins bind to DNA as complexes formed with the
defective G proteins and causing excessive synthesis 62 kDa phosphoprotein Fos, the product of the c-fos
s
of cAMP. This in turn promotes growth of the tumor. gene.460 The heterodimeric Fos/Jun complex is held
together, at least in part, by interactions between leucine
The ras oncogenes. Activatedras-oncogenes side chains lying along a pair of parallel α-helices in a
have been found in at least 25% of all human tumors. “leucine zipper” (Fig. 5-36; Fig. 2-21).461,462
The proto-oncogenes, which are designated c-H-ras, Regulation of the synthesis of Jun is complex, but
c-K-ras, and c-N-ras, are found on the short arms of growth factors such as Neu, EGF,463 and PDGF stimu-
chromosomes 11, 12, and 1, respectively. A single base late transcription of c-jun in cultured cells. Messenger
substitution (G → T) at position 35 of any of the genes, RNA for synthesis of Fos appears within a few minutes
resulting in a Ras protein containing valine instead of of stimulation of PDGF receptors.464,465 This is one of
glycine at position 12 of the 21 kDa protein product the earliest known nuclear reactions to a mitogenic
(usually designated p21) produces an active oncogene. stimulus and suggested that a Ras p21 protein is
Substitutions at position 13 or at positions 59 and 61, involved in stimulating transcription of c-fos in the
which are adjacent to Gly 12 in the three-dimensional signaling pathway from PDGF.466 Synthesis of Fos is
structure, can also activate the oncogenes.441 From the also induced by a variety of other stimuli.456 Upon
drawing in Fig. 11-7A the locations of glycines 12 and translocation into the nucleus Fos combines with pre-
13 and of residues 59/61 are seen to be close to the β existing Jun to form AP-1, which binds to sites on
phospho group of bound GTP. Proteins encoded by DNA and induces the transcription of a large number
activatedras oncogenes are less active in catalyzing of proteins (Chapter 28). Deletion of the c-fosgene in
GTP hydrolysis than are the corresponding normal mice leads to defects in developing bone, teeth, and
proteins. In addition, the GTPase-activating protein blood cells,467 while excessive synthesis of Fos has
(GAP) that binds to normal ras proteins and stimulates been associated with the human bone disease fibrous
their GTPase activity does not affect the mutant onco- dysplasia.468
genic proteins.
A single-base alteration is capable of activating a
ras gene with respect to cell transformation. However, 2. The MAP Kinase Cascade
initiation of a malignant tumor requires the additional
presence of at least a second activated oncogene such Insulin, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF),
asmyc442,443 or fos444 or previous transformation of a epidermal growth factor (EGF), and many other pro-
fibroblast into a nonmalignant but “immortalized” teins have mitogenic activity, that is, they induce
form by treatment with carcinogens. The c-myc gene, cells to transcribe genes, to grow, and to divide. How
which is found in active form in plasmacytomas (tumors is this accomplished? Study of such oncogenes as src
of B lymphocytes) of mice as well as in the human andras suggested that the proteins that they encode
Burkitt’s lymphoma, is normally located on human also participate in the process, as do transcription
chromosome 8. In most Burkitt’s lymphomas a trans- factors, including those encoded by the proto-oncogenes

--- Page 580 ---

H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell Cycle 577
Table 11-4
A Few Abbreviations Used in Discussions of Cell Signaling
AP-1 A major transcriptional activator PKC, PKCα, β, γ Protein kinase C,α, β, γ subforms
protein PKR dsRNA-activated protein kinase
βARK Beta adrenergic receptor kinase PLA Phospholipase A
EGF Epidermal growth factor PLC Phospholipase C
EGFR Epidermal growth factor receptor PP2A Protein phosphatase, type 2A
ERK-1, ERK-2 Extracellular signal-regulated protein PTK Protein tyrosine kinase
kinases (proline-directed protein PTP (PTPase, Protein tyrosine phosphatases
kinases) PTP 1B, etc.)
Fos Protein encoded by proto-oncogene fos pY Phosphotyrosine residue
(Table 11-3) Raf-1 A cytoplasmic serine/threonine
Grb2 Adapter protein containing one SH2 protein kinase; also called MAP
and two SH3 domains kinase kinase kinase (MAP3K)
IGF-1 Insulin-like growth factor 1 Ras A monomeric G protein encoded by
InsRTK Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase theproto-oncogene ras
InsP or IP Inositol (1,3,5)-trisphosphate RSK Ribosomal protein S6 kinase
3 3
Jun Protein encoded by proto-oncogene RTK Receptor tyrosine kinase
jun,an AP-1 gene RTK-P Phosphorylated receptor tyrosine
MAPK Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
(also designated ERK) SH2, SH3 Src homology domains 2 and 3
MAPKK A kinase acting on MAPK Sos “son of sevenless,” a GDP – GTP
MEK-1,MEK-2 Mitogen-activated ERK-activating exchange factor named for a
kinases; dual function Ser/Thr and similarity to the protein encoded
Tyr protein kinases; also called by the Drosophila sevenless gene
MAP kinase kinases Src Protein tyrosine kinase encoded by
c-myc A cellular proto-oncogene oncogenesrc (Table 11-3); contains
PDGF Platelet-derived growth factor recognition domains SH2 and SH3
PtdIns (or PI) Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase V2R Type 2 vasopressin receptor
3-kinase Shc A proline-rich adapter protein
PKA (cAPK) cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase containing SH2 and PH domains
myc,fos, and jun. The Src and Ras proteins are an- other major event is the binding of a variety of different
chored on the inner surfaces of cytoplasmic mem- protein molecules containing recognition domains to the
branes. Although the exact functional relationships phosphotyrosyl groups of the activated receptors.471 The
of all of the components, one to another, has not been major recognition motif is the SH2 domain. See Figs.
completely established, a general picture, usually 7-30 and 11-14.472– 475 Proteins containing SH2 domains
described as the mitogen-activated protein kinase can bind to the phosphotyrosyl groups of the activated
(MAP kinase) cascade, has emerged.69,380,469-470b receptors and while bound become phosphorylated by
This is sketched in simplified form in Fig. 11-13. The the receptor tyrosine kinase action and/or be activated
many amplification steps provide for ultrasensitive allosterically.
responses.342 Other proteins interact with the receptors indirectly
The binding of a hormone or growth factor (a through adapter molecules which have no catalytic
ligand) to a dimeric receptor activates the protein activity. Two well-known adapter proteins are Grb2476
kinase domain of the receptor which phosphorylates andShc.477,478 The 25-kDa protein Grb2 consists entirely
a number of tyrosine hydroxyl groups of the receptor of recognition domains, one SH2 and two SH3 domains
itself. This autophosphorylation is followed by a (Fig. 11-14). The larger Shc, which is found in all mam-
variety of events, which include phosphorylation of malian tissues, contains a 200-residue phosphotyrosyl-
tyrosine side chains of various other proteins.426 An- binding PH domain (Chapter 7) at the N terminus, a

--- Page 581 ---

578 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
collagen-like domain that binds to Grb2 and an SH2 The scheme in Fig. 11-13 is complex, but in reality
domain at the C terminus.376,377,477 it is much more complex than is shown. Each protein
Adapter Grb2 binds to a phosphotyrosine side chain kinase (receptor kinase, Raf-1, MEK, and MAPK) will
of an activated receptor, such as that for EGF, and phosphorylate not only the proteins indicated in this
simultaneously binds to the GDP-GTP exchange protein scheme but also any others that meet the specificity
calledSos (Table 11-4). This signals Sos to activate the requirements of the kinases. Thus, there will be
membrane-bound Ras protein by converting it into the branches diverging from the pathways shown.486a,b,c
GTP form. The second adapter Shc may also participate There are isoenzymes that provide further divergence
in formation of the receptor kinase - Grb2–Sos com- and interaction.487 Not only do pathways diverge but
plex,479 perhaps permitting formation of a more robust also others converge. Thus, binding of many different
complex that may receive signals from more than one ligands to their receptors activates the same MAPK
kind of receptor. Functions of other members of the cascade. For example, seven-helix G protein-coupled
Grb adapter family are being discovered.479a receptors release their βγ subunits which may also
Activated Ras binds to and activates the cytoplasmic activate Ras as indicated on the right edge of Fig. 11-13A.
serine/threonine protein kinase called Raf-1.380,480,481 At the same time the α subunits of the heterotrimer
This kinase becomes transiently activated within 2 – 3 G proteins can affect not only adenylate cyclase but
min of the binding of a mitogen to a receptor. Raf-1 also phospholipases C which can, in some cases, also
initiates a cascade of other protein kinases by acting on activate the MAP kinase pathway.488,489 Sphingosine
the dual-function Ser/Thr and tyrosine protein kinases 1-phosphate may be released from membrane spingo-
called MEK-1 and MEK-2. The phosphorylated, active lipids and activate the same cascade.490 However,
MEK proteins phosphorylate the mitogen-activated hormones do not all affect cells in the same way. In
protein kinases MAPK which act on a variety of other view of all the converging pathways, how is this possi-
proteins. Two of the best known MAPK proteins are ble? Part of the answer lies in the proximity or spatial
designatedERK-1 and ERK-2. These are proline- separation of components of the pathway. The kinases
directed kinases which phosphorylate serines and exist in complexes with other signaling proteins and
threonines that are neighbors to prolines, e.g. in the may phosphorylate them, sending a signal back, as
sequence PLS/TP.380 The activated ERKs are able to well as forward via other protein substrates. There
phosphorylate a large number of different proteins are also unknown kinetic considerations. Hormones,
including nuclear proteins that control the transcription neurotransmitters, and calcium ions are often released
of such protein transcription factors as AP-1 and Myc. in pulses. The signaling system must integrate effects
A protein known as the serum response factor binds of all the stimuli that arise from different parts of the
to nucleotide sequences CC(A/T) GC in the DNA to cell, at different times, and from differing receptors.
6
locate initiation sites for transcription. Other proteins At the same time all of the phosphorylated proteins
that have been phosphorylated by the MAP kinase are acted upon by phosphatases that may either acti-
cascade then induce transcription.482 The induction of vate or deactivate the proteins and by proteases that
c-fos mRNA is one of the earliest identified responses process newly formed peptides and modify or destroy
to growth factors.375,456,483 Protein Jun, whose synthesis mature proteins. The various modifying enzymes act
is induced independently by almost all growth factors, on cytosolic proteins, proteins of membranes, of the
is usually present in excess. cytoskeleton, and of the nucleus. The regulatory
The Fos/Jun complex is transcription factor AP-1, processes that we discuss in such minute detail involve
which induces transcription of many genes needed the very substance of living cytoplasm which is ever-
for cell growth. However, transcription of specific changing and responding to its surroundings. The
genes often depends upon additional nucleotide flow of energy, provided by synthesis of ATP and by
sequences. For example, the sequence CGGAAA is the use of ATP by kinases, phosphatases, and the
present in an insulin response element found in the protein synthetic machinery, goes along with the flow
promoter sequences of genes encoding such proteins of information and drives the signaling network.
as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, glyceraldehyde Evolution has shaped this system to allow it to respond
phosphate dehydrogenase, and prolactin–proteins appropriately for every species.
whose synthesis is induced by insulin.484
The MAPK cascade also has direct effects upon
protein synthesis, i.e., on the translation of mRNA 3. The Cell Cycle and Control of Growth
messages. For example, insulin stimulates phospho-
rylation of proteins that regulate a translation initia- When a cell divides it is of utmost importance that
tion factor, a protein called eIF-4E (see Chapter 29). the DNA be replicated reliably. This requires that the
Phosphorylation of inhibitory proteins allows them dividing cell be large enough and contain enough
to dissociate from the initiation factor so that protein biosynthetic precursor materials to complete the elabo-
synthesis can proceed.485,486 rate process of DNA synthesis and of mitosis. The cell

--- Page 582 ---

H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell Cycle 579
A B
Basic pattern
Ligand 7-Helix
Hormone
receptor
Receptor Stimulus
Plasma
membrane
Ras GDP Pi
A re c c t e i p v t a o te r d P Y Y Y P P Sos GAP G q or G i
tyrosine P Y Y P SH SH 3
k (R in T a K s ) e P P Y Y Y Y P 2 SH 3 Grb2 Ras GTP H 2 O α In e i v ti e a n ti t n s g
SH P q
2
Phospho- P βγ
lipase Cγ
Shc
Y
Protein Phospholipase
PtdIns (4,5) P Kinase C Cβ
2
DAG +
Ins (1,4,5) P
3
Raf-1,2 MAPKKK
Other signals
Ca2+
+ MEK-1,2-P MEK-1,2 (MAPKK) MAPKK
ERK-P ERK-1,2 (MAPK) MAPK
Endoplasmic
reticulum
RSK
c-jun
c-fos
c-myc Nucleus Substrates
Genes for
transcription factors
Figure 11-13 (A) A simplified version of the mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) signaling cascade. At left is shown a hormone
receptor, e.g., that for the epidermal growth factor (EGF). The receptor tyrosine kinase undergoes autophosphorylation on
numerous tyrosines. The resulting phosphotyrosyl (Y-P) groups bind to SH2 domains of adapters such as Grb2 and Shc.
Two pathways from the activated receptor are shown. At the left is activation of phospholipase Cγ and formation, at a
membrane-bound site, of inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol (DAG). The main pathway, in the center, activates Ras
with the aid of the G protein Sos. Activated Ras, in turn, activates Raf and successive components of the MAPK cascade. At
the right a seven-helix receptor activates both phospholipase Cβ and Ras via interaction with a βγ subunit. (B) A generalized
scheme for the MAP kinase pathway. See Seger and Krebs.380
replication cycle (or simply cell cycle) is commonly gapG separates the synthetic S-phase and the M-phase.
2
shown as a circle in which the time from one cell division The total time required for one cycle varies with condi-
to the next, in a rapidly growing organism or tissue, is tions. It may be as short as 8–60 min in an early embryo
represented by the circumference. The time required but is usually two hours or more. A slowly growing
for DNA synthesis is the S-phaseand the time required cell may pause before the G phase in a nongrowing
1
for mitosis the mitotic or M-phase (Fig. 11-15). After G phase.491,492
0
metaphase there is a gap in time denoted G . A second What controls the cell replication cycle? Signals
1

--- Page 583 ---

580 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
from growth factors can stimulate a cell to leave G
0
and enter G . However, to go further the cell depends
1
upon a large number of proteins of which two types are
prominent. The cyclins are labile 45- to 60-kDa proteins
which are degraded by the ubiquitin system as part of
the cycle. The cyclins associate with a series of protein
Ser/Thr kinases known as cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs). It is the cyclin–CDK complexes that signal
the start of the next step in the cycle.493– 495
The number of different cyclins and CDK enzymes
needed varies with the organism, often being greater
for more complex species. As a rule, there are at least
two types of cyclins. The G orstart cyclins initiate
1
the passage through the start (G checkpoint) into the
1
S-phase, while mitotic cyclins initiate the passage
from the S-phase into the M-phase. Both vertebrates
andDrosophila utilize at least four different types of
cyclin (A, B, D, and E) and also four or more CDKs
(CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, and CDK6).492 A somewhat
different set of these proteins are found in yeast.
Control of cell growth is directly related to the cell
cycle. Mitogenic signals from growth factors act to
initiate progression through G , apparently by stimu-
1
lating transcription of D-type cyclins.496 They may
Figure 11-14 Ribbon drawing of the three-dimensional
structure of adapter protein Grb2. The two SH3 domains at affect other steps as well. Oncogenic signals can arise
the N and C termini are labeled, as is the central SH2 domain. from such oncogenes as ras and abl.497,498 As pointed
Produced with programs MolScript and Raster3D. From out in Box 11-D, the tumor-suppressor protein Rb
Maignanet al.476 Courtesy of Arnaud Ducruix. becomes phosphorylated in synchrony with the cell
Metaphase (spindle assembly) checkpoint
G 2 (DNA damage) checkpoint Mitosis, M
G
Cyclin 1
p53
degradation
Growth
Cyclin D
factors
G
+– (G 1 cyclin)
2 Rb-EF2 etc.
Mitotic cyclin B CDK4 or 6
+
+ CDK1
CDK-cyclin D complex
+– p53
Apoptosis
Cyclin E + CDK2 Phosphorylation
of Rb protein
Figure 11-15 The cell cycle, D Cyclin A
N
w
o
g
f
r
h
o
t
i
i
w
c
m
h
t
e
h
d
f
a
e
o
n
p
r
d
i
e
c
a
t
d
s
c
i
h
v
th
i
s
s
e
t
i
a
o
r
g
e
n
l
e
.
a
o
t
A
i
f
v
f
c
t
e
e
e
l
r
l
e
l
ngths A syn
thesis,S deg
C
r
y
a
c
d
l
a
in
tion
Start 1 (G damage
1
mitosis (M) the cell grows during checkpoint or
the G (gap) period. At the G restriction point)
1 1
checkpoint the cell prepares to EF2 Rb-P
n
divide, with DNA synthesis etc.
occurring during the S-phase.
After a second gap (G) mitosis +
2
takes place to complete the cycle. Transcription

--- Page 584 ---

H. Growth Factors, Oncogenes, and the Cell Cycle 581
cycle. This seems to be an essential process for passage proteolysis of the cyclin and progression to the next
through the G “checkpoint.” The checkpoints in the stage of the cycle.
1
cycle should be viewed not as points but as essential The powerful cancer suppressor, p53, which is also
interlocking processes that must be accomplished described in Box 11-D, in some way senses DNA dam-
before transcription of genes essential for the next step age. It prevents passage through the G checkpoint
1
in the cycle can take place.499 A possibility is that the and also through the G checkpoint if the DNA has not
2
cyclin-dependent kinase in the cyclin D·CDK4 (or been adequately repaired.496,497 Protein p53, whose
CDK6) complex phosphorylates the Rb protein which three-dimensional structure is known,500,501 binds to
in its unphosphorylated state forms a complex with DNA and also induces transcription of genes that
transcriptional regulators of the E2F family. Phospho- cause arrest of the cell cycle. It may also induce cell
rylation of Rb allows this complex to dissociate and death (apoptosis), a process that may also require the
permits E2F to induce transcription of genes encoding protein product of protooncogene c-myc.502-505 A
essential proteins for the next step in the cycle.499a,b,c variety of protein kinases and phosphatases act on p53
Each CDK may also phosphorylate its associated and influence its activity.506
cyclin, a modification that may be essential to the
References
1. Krebs, H. A. (1957) Endeavour16, 125–132 27. Mehta, P. K., Hale, T. I., and Christen, P. (1989) 46a. Choe, J.-Y., Fromm, H. J., and Honzatko, R. B.
2. Newsholme, E. A., and Start, C. (1973) Eur. J. Biochem.186, 249–253 (2000)Biochemistry39, 8565–8574
Regulation in Metabolism, Wiley, New York 28. Kamitori, S., Okamoto, A., Hirotsu, K., 47. Graves, D. J., Martin, B. L., and Wang, J. H.
3. Heinrich, R., Rapoport, S. M., and Rapoport, Higuchi, T., Kuramitsu, S., Kagamiyama, H., (1994)Co– and Post – Translational Modification
T. A. (1977) Prog. Biophys. and Mol. Biol.32, Matsuura, Y., and Katsube, Y. (1990) of Proteins, Oxford Univ. Press, New York
1–82 J. Biochem.108, 175–184 47a. Skamnaki, V. T., Owen, D. J., Noble, M. E. M.,
4. Martin, B. R. (1987) Metabolic Regulation, 29. Hogrefe, H. H., Griffith, J. P., Rossman, M. G., Lowe, E. D., Lowe, G., Oikonomakos, N. G.,
Blackwell Scientific Publ., Oxford and Goldberg, E. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, and Johnson, L. N. (1999) Biochemistry38,
5. Chance, B., and Williams, G. R. (1955) J. Biol. 13155–13162 14718–14730
Chem.217, 477–488 30. Purich, D. L., and Fromm, H. J. (1972) Curr. 48. Johnson, L. N. (1992) FASEB J.6, 2274–2282
6. Heinrich, R., and Rapoport, T. A. (1974) Eur. J. Top. Cell. Regul.6, 131–167 48a. Cheng, A., Fitzgerald, T. J., Bhatnagar, D.,
Biochem.42, 89–95; 97–105 31. Huijing, F. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, N132– Roskoski, R., Jr., and Carlson, G. M. (1988) J.
7. Mendes, P. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 361– N134 Biol. Chem.263, 5534–5542
363 31a. Aleshin, A. E., Kirby, C., Liu, X., Bourenkov, 49. Dent, P., Lavoinne, A., Nakielny, S., Caudwell,
8. Wright, B. E. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, G. P., Bartunik, H. D., Fromm, H. J., and F. B., Watt, P., and Cohen, P. (1990) Nature
164–165 Honzatko, R. B. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.296, 1001– (London)348, 302–308
9. Savageau, M. A. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 1015 49a. Brady, M. J., Bourbonais, F. J., and Saltiel, A.
219–220 32. Purich, D. L., Fromm, H. J., and Rudolph, F. R. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 14063–14066
10. Voit, E. O., and Savageau, M. A. (1987) R. (1973) Adv. Enzymol.39, 249–326 50. Krebs, E. G., and Fischer, E. H. (1956) Biochim.
Biochemistry26, 6869–6880 33. Breitbar, R. E., Andreadis, A., and Nadal - Biophys. Acta. 20, 150–157
11. Hlavacek, W. S., and Savageau, M. A. (1996) J. Ginard, B. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 467– 51. Edelman, A. M., Blumenthal, D. K., and Krebs,
Mol. Biol.255, 121–139 495 E. G. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 567–613
12. Voit, E. O. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 221 34. Joh, K., Arai, Y., Mukai, T., and Hori, K. (1986) 52. Allen, J. F. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 12–17
13. Kacser, H., and Burns, J. A. (1979) Biochem. J. Mol. Biol.190, 401–410 53. Hershey, J. W. B. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264,
Soc. Trans.7, 1149–1166 35. Haldane, J. B. S. (1930) Enzymes, Longmans, 20823–20826
14. Crabtree, B., and Newsholme, E. A. (1987) Green, New York 54. Kennelly, P. J., and Krebs, E. G. (1991) J. Biol.
Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 4–12 36. Hayashi, S.-i, Murakami, Y., and Matsufuji, S. Chem.266, 15555–15558
15. Kholodenko, B. N., and Westerhoff, H. V. (1996)Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 27–30 55. Hanks, S. K., and Hunter, T. (1995) FASEB J.9,
(1995)Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 52–54 37. Li, X., Stebbins, B., Hoffman, L., Pratt, G., 576–596
16. Fell, D. (1997) Understanding the Control of Rechsteiner, M., and Coffino, P. (1996) J. Biol. 56. Woodgett, J. R., ed. (1994) Protein Kinases, IRL
Metabolism, Portland Press, London Chem.271, 4441–4446 Press, Oxford
17. Quant, P. A. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 38. Sprang, S. R., Acharya, K. R., Goldsmith, E. J., 57. Hunter, T. (1994) Sem. Cell Biol.5, 367–376
26–30 Stuart, D. I., Varvill, K., Fletterick, R. J., 58. Kemp, B. E., Parker, M. W., Hu, S., Tiganis, T.,
18. Salter, M., Knowles, R. G., and Pogson, C. I. Madsen, N. B., and Johnson, L. N. (1988) and House, C. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19,
(1994) in Essays in Biochemistry, Vol. 28 Nature (London)336, 215–221 440–444
(Tipton, K. F., ed), Portland Press, London 39. Cohen, P. (1983) Control of Enzyme Activity, 59. Imazu, M., Stricklund, W. G., Chrisman, T. D.,
19. Schulze, E.-D. (1994) Flux Control in Biological 2nd ed., Chapman and Hall, London and Exton, J. H. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259,
Systems, Academic Press, San Diego, 40. Kantrowitz, E. R., and Lipscomb, W. N. (1990) 1813–1821
California Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 53–59 60. He, X., Saint-Jeannet, J.-P., Woodgett, J. R.,
20. Kacser, H., and Burns, J. A. (1973) Symp. Soc. 41. Zhou, B.-B., and Schachman, H. K. (1993) Varmus, H. E., and David, I. B. (1995) Nature
Exp. BiolXXVII, 65–104 Protein Sci.2, 103–112 (London)374, 617–622
21. Stark, G. R., and Wahl, G. M. (1984) Ann. Rev. 42. Xi, X. G., De Staercke, C., Van Vliet, F., 61. Hartl, F. T., and Roskoski, R., Jr. (1983) J. Biol.
Biochem.53, 447–491 Triniolles, F., Jacobs, A., Stas, P. P., Ladjimi, M. Chem.258, 3950–3955
22. Wilkinson, J. H. (1970) Isoenzymes, 2nd ed., M., Simon, V., Cunin, R., and Hervé, G. (1994) 62. Zheng, J., Knighton, D. R., Xuong, N.-H.,
Lippincott, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania J. Mol. Biol.242, 139–149 Taylor, S. S., Sowadski, J. M., and Eyck, L. F. T.
23. Markert, C. L., ed. (1975) Isozymes, Vol. 4, 43. Uyeda, K., Furuya, E., and Sherry, A. D. (1993)Protein Sci.2, 1559–1573
Academic Press, New York (1981)J. Biol. Chem.256, 8679–8684 63. Beebe, S. J., Reimann, E. M., and Schlender, K.
24. Christen, P., and Metzler, D. E., eds. (1985) 44. Hers, H., Hue, L., and Schaftingen, E. (1982) K. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 1415–1422
Transaminases, Wiley, New York Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 329–331 64. Taylor, S. S., Knighton, D. R., Zheng, J.,
25. Salerno, C., Giartosio, A., and Fasella, P. 45. Lively, M. O., El-Maghrabi, M. R., Pilkis, J., Sowadski, J. M., Gibbs, C. S., and Zoller, M. J.
(1986) in Vitamin B Pyridoxal Phosphate, Vol. D’Angelo, G., Colosia, A. D., Ciavola, J.-A., (1993)Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 84–89
6
1b (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and Avramovic, Fraser, B. A., and Pilkis, S. J. (1988) J. Biol. 65. Narayana, N., Cox, S., Shaltiel, S., Taylor, S. S.,
O., eds), Wiley, New York Chem.263, 839–849 and Xuong, N.-h. (1997) Biochemistry36,
26. McPhalen, C. A., Vincent, M. G., and Jansonius, 46. Kitamura, K., and Uyeda, K. (1988) J. Biol. 4438–4448
J. N. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.225, 495–517 Chem.263, 9027–9033

--- Page 585 ---

582 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
References
66. Su, Y., Dostmann, W. R. G., Herberg, F. W., 97. Barford, D., Flint, A. J., and Tonks, N. K. 126. Sakakibara, Y., Takami, Y., Zwieb, C., Nakayama,
Durick, K., Xuong, N.-h, Eyck, L. T., Taylor, S. (1994)Science263, 1397–1403 T., Suiko, M., Nakajima, H., and Liu, M.-C.
S., and Varughese, K. I. (1995) Science269, 98. Stone, R. L., and Dixon, J. E. (1994) J. Biol. (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 30470–30478
807–813 Chem.269, 31323–31326 127. Rosenquist, G. L., and Nicholas, H. B., Jr.
67. Lincoln, T. M., Thompson, M., and Cornwell, 99. Chen, W., Wilborn, M., and Rudolph, J. (2000) (1993)Protein Sci.2, 215–222
T. L. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 17632–17637 Biochemistry39, 10781–10789 128. Sundaram, K. S., and Lev, M. (1992) J. Biol.
68. Weber, I. T., Shabb, J. B., and Corbin, J. D. 100. Kissinger, C. R., Parge, H. E., Knighton, D. R., Chem.267, 24041–24044
(1989)Biochemistry28, 6122–6127 Lewis, C. T., Pelletier, L. A., Tempczyk, A., 129. Hooper, L. V., Manzella, S. M., and Baenziger,
69. Fry, M. J., Panayotou, G., Booker, G. W., and Kalish, V. J., Tucker, K. D., Showalter, R. E., J. U. (1996) FASEB J.10, 1137–1146
Waterfield, M. D. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 1785– Moomaw, E. W., Gastinel, L. N., Habuka, N., 130. Terwilliger, T. C., and Koshland, D. E., Jr.
1797 Chen, X., Maldonado, F., Barker, J. E., (1984)J. Biol. Chem.259, 7719–7725
70. Xu, R.-M., Carmel, G., Sweet, R. M., Kuret, J., Bacquet, R., and Villafranca, J. E. (1995) 131. Favre, B., Zolnierowicz, S., Turowski, P., and
and Cheng, X. (1995) EMBO J.14, 1015–1023 Nature (London)378, 641–644 Hemmings, B. A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269,
71. Allende, J. E., and Allende, C. C. (1995) FASEB 101. LaPorte, D. C., and Chung, T. (1985) J. Biol. 16311–16317
J.9, 313–323 Chem.260, 15291–15297 132. Edmondson, D. G., and Roth, S. Y. (1996)
72. Seldin, D. C., and Leder, P. (1995) Science267, 102. Pilkis, S. J., Claus, T. H., Kurland, I. J., and FASEB J.10, 1173–1182
894–897 Lange, A. J. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, 799– 133. Kuo, M.-H., Brownell, J. E., Sobel, R. E.,
72a. Niefind, K., Guerra, B., Pinna, L. A., Issinger, 835 Ranalli, T. A., Cook, R. G., Edmondson, D. G.,
O.-G., and Schomburg, D. (1998) EMBO J.17, 103. Istvan, E. S., Hasemann, C. A., Kurumbail, R. Roth, S. Y., and Allis, C. D. (1996) Nature
2451–2462 G., Uyeda, K., and Deisenhofer, J. (1995) (London)383, 269–272
73. Chan, K.- F., and Graves, D. J. (1984) in Protein Sci.4, 2439–2441 134. Brandes, H. K., Larimer, F. W., and Hartman,
Calcium and Cell Function, Vol. 5 (Cheung, W. 104. Vertommen, D., Bertrand, L., Sontag, B., Di F. C. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 3333–3335
Y., ed), pp. 1–32, Academic Press, New York Pietro, A., Louckx, M. P., Vidal, H., Hue, L., 135. Brandes, H. K., Hartman, F. C., Lu, T. -Y. S.,
74. Heilmeyer, L. M. G., Jr. (1991) Biochim. and Rider, M. H. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, and Larimer, F. W. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
Biophys. Acta.1094, 168–174 17875–17880 6490–6496
75. Norcum, M. T., Wilkinson, D. A., Carlson, M. 105. Abe, Y., Minami, Y., Li, Y., Nguyen, C., and 136. Swerdlow, R. D., Green, C. L., Setlow, B., and
C., Hainfeld, J. F., and Carlson, G. M. (1994) J. Uyeda, K. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2553–2559 Setlow, D. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 6835–6837
Mol. Biol.241, 94–102 106. Ogushi, S., Lawson, J. W. R., Dobson, G. P., 137. Hentze, M. W., Rouault, T. A., Harford, J. B.,
76. Kee, S. M., and Graves, D. J. (1987) J. Biol. Veech, R. L., and Uyeda, K. (1990) J. Biol. and Klausner, R. D. (1989) Science244, 357–359
Chem.262, 9448–9453 Chem.265, 10943–10949 138. Wadsworth, W. G., and Riddle, D. L. (1988)
77. Paudel, H. K., and Carlson, G. M. (1987) J. 107. Nimmo, H. G. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 8435–8438
Biol. Chem.262, 11912–11915 475–478 139. Boron, W. F. (1984) Nature (London)312, 312
78. Cheng, A., Fitzgerald, T. J., Bhatnagar, D., 108. Dean, A. M., and Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1993) 140. Siffert, W., and Akkerman, J. W. N. (1988)
Roskoski, R., Jr., and Carlson, G. M. (1988) J. Biochemistry32, 9302–9309 Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 148–151
Biol. Chem.263, 5534–5542 109. Dean, A. M., and Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1990) 141. Reinertsen, K. V., Tonnessen, T. I., Jacobsen, J.,
79. Owen, D. J., Papageorgiou, A. C., Garman, E. Science249, 1044–1046 Sandvig, K., and Olsnes, S. (1988) J. Biol.
F., Noble, M. E. M., and Johnson, L. N. (1995) 110. Saier, M. H., Jr., Wu, L.-F., and Reizer, J. (1990) Chem.263, 11117–11125
J. Mol. Biol.246, 374–381 Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 391–395 142. Schramm, V. L. (1982) Trends Biochem. Sci.7,
80. Ohmstede, C.-A., Bland, M. M., Merrill, B. M., 110a.Song, H. K., Lee, J. Y., Lee, M. G., Moon, J., 369–371
and Sahyoun, N. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Min, K., Yang, J. K., and Suh, S. W. (1999) J. 143. Srere, P. A. (1987)Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 89–124
U.S.A.88, 5784–5788 Mol. Biol.293, 753–761 144. Srivastava, D. K., and Bernhard, S. A. (1987)
81. Hanson, P. I., and Schulman, H. (1992) Ann. 111. Swanson, R. V., Alex, L. A., and Simon, M. I. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.16, 175–204
Rev. Biochem.61, 559–601 (1994)Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 485–490 145. Ovádi, J. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 486–490
82. Harper, J. F., Sussman, M. R., Schaller, G. E., 112. Saier, M. H., Jr. (1989) Microbiol. Rev.53, 109–120 146. Kaprelyants, A. S. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.
Putnam-Evans, C., Charbonneau, H., and 113. Stock, J. B., Stock, A. M., and Mottonen, J. M. 13, 43–46
Harmon, A. C. (1991) Science252, 951–954 (1990)Nature (London)344, 395–400 146a.Miles, E. W., Rhee, S., and Davies, D. R. (1999)
83. Ullrich, A., Bell, J. R., Chen, E. Y., Herrera, R., 114. Boon, P., Chock, P. B., Rhee, S. G., and J. Biol. Chem.274, 12193–12196
Petruzzelli, L. M., Dull, T. J., Gray, A., Stadtman, E. R. (1980) Ann. Rev. Biochem.49, 146b.Serre, V., Guy, H., Penverne, B., Lux, M.,
Coussens, L., Liao, Y.-C., Tsubokawa, M., 813–843 Rotgeri, A., Evans, D., and Hervé, G. (1999) J.
Mason, A., Seeburg, P. H., Grunfield, C., 115. Mura, U., Chock, P. B., and Stadtman, E. R. Biol. Chem.274, 23794–23801
Roden, O. M., and Ramachandran, J. (1985) (1981)J. Biol. Chem.256, 13022–13029 146c.Geck, M. K., and Kirsch, J. F. (1999)
Nature (London)313, 756–761 116. Almassy, R. J., Janson, C. A., Hamlin, R., Biochemistry38, 8032–8037
84. Wang, J. Y. J. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, Xuong, N.-H., and Eisenberg, D. (1986) Nature 146d.Dell’Acqua, M. L., and Scott, J. D. (1997) J.
373–376 (London)323, 304–309 Biol. Chem.272, 12881–12884
85. Clark, E. A., Shattil, S. J., and Brugge, J. S. 117. Garcia, E., and Rhee, S. G. (1983) J. Biol. Chem. 147. Ovádi, J., and Srere, P. A. (1992) Trends
(1994)Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 464–469 258, 2246–2253 Biochem. Sci.17, 445–447
86. Sun, H., and Tonks, N. K. (1994) Trends 118. Moss, J., and Vaughan, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 148. Inagaki, N., Ito, M., Nakano, T., and Inagaki,
Biochem. Sci.19, 480–485 270, 12327–12330 M. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 448–452
87. Ingebritsen, T. S., and Cohen, P. (1983) Science 119. Amor, J. C., Harrison, D. H., Kahn, R. A., and 149. Faux, M. C., and Scott, J. D. (1996) Trends
221, 331–338 Ringe, D. (1994) Nature (London)372, 704–708 Biochem. Sci.21, 312–315
88. Cohen, P. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biochem.58, 453–508 120. Boman, A. L., and Kahn, R. A. (1995) Trends 150. Fraser, C. M. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 9266–9270
89. Goldberg, J., Huang, H., Kwon, Y., Greengard, Biochem. Sci.20, 147–150 151. Strosberg, A. D. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 1198–1209
P., Nairn, A. C., and Kuriyan, J. (1995) Nature 121. Lee, F.-J. S., Stevens, L. A., Hall, L. M., 152. Scheel, A. A., and Pelham, H. R. B. (1996)
(London)376, 745–753 Murtagh, J. J., Jr., Kao, Y. L., Moss, J., and Biochemistry35, 10203–10209
90. Fischer, E. H., Charbonneau, H., and Tonks, Vaughan, M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 21555– 153. Levitzki, A. (1988) Science241, 800–806
N. K. (1991) Science253, 401–406 21560 153a.Stacey, M., Lin, H.-H., Gordon, S., and
91. Yuvaniyama, J., Denu, J. M., Dixon, J. E., and 122. Moss, J., Stanley, S. J., Nightingale, M. S., McKnight, A. J. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25,
Saper, M. A. (1996) Science272, 1328–1331 Murtagh, J. J., Jr., Monaco, L., Mishima, K., 284–289
92. MacKintosh, C., and MacKintosh, R. W. (1994) Chen, H.-C., Williamson, K.-C., and Tsai, S.-C. 153b.Leurs, R., Smit, M. J., Alewijnse, A. E., and
Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 444–448 (1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 10481–10488 Timmerman, H. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.23,
93. Hidaka, H., and Kobayashi, R. (1994) in Essays 123. Guse, A. H., da Silva, C. P., Weber, K., 418–422
in Biochemistry, Vol. 28 (Tipton, K. F., ed), pp. Ashamu, G. A., Potter, B. V. L., and Mayr, G. 153c.Bockaert, J., and Pin, J. P. (1999) EMBO J.18,
73–98, Portland Press, London W. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 23946–23953 1723–1729
94. Cohen, P., Holmes, C. F. B., and Tsukitani, Y. 124. Gaal, J. C., Smith, K. R., and Pearson, C. K. 154. Insel, P. A., and Wasserman, S. I. (1990) FASEB
(1990)Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 98–102 (1987)Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 129–130 J.4, 2732–2736
95. Price, N. E., and Mumby, M. C. (2000) 125. Huttner, W. B. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 155. Turki, J., Lorenz, J. N., Green, S. A., Donnelly,
Biochemistry39, 11312–11318 361–363 E. T., Jacinto, M., and Liggett, S. B. (1996) Proc.
96. Zhang, M., Van Etten, R. L., and Stauffacher, Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 10483–10488
C. V. (1994) Biochemistry33, 11097–11105

--- Page 586 ---

583
References
155a.Rohrer, D. K., Chruscinski, A., Schauble, E. 182. Hepler, J. R., and Gilman, A. G. (1992) Trends 212. Fischer von Mollard, G., Stahl, B., Li, C.,
H., Bernstein, D., and Kobilka, B. K. (1999) J. Biochem. Sci.17, 383–387 Südhof, T. C., and Jahn, R. (1994) Trends
Biol. Chem.274, 16701–16708 183. Levitzki, A. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, Biochem. Sci.19, 164–168
155b.Limbird, L. E., and Vaughan, D. E. (1999) Proc. 298–301 212a.Burridge, K. (1999) Science283, 2028–2029
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 7125–7127 184. Rawls, R. L. (1987) Chem. Eng. News65 212b.Lin, R., Cerione, R. A., and Manor, D. (1999) J.
156. Premont, R. T., Inglese, J., and Lefkowitz, R. J. December 21, 26–39 Biol. Chem.274, 23633–23641
(1995)FASEB J.9, 175–182 185. Wang, N., Yan, K., and Rasenick, M. M. (1990) 212c.Desrosiers, R. R., Gauthier, F., Lanthier, J., and
156a.Pitcher, J. A., Freedman, N. J., and Lefkowitz, J. Biol. Chem.265, 1239–1242 Béliveau, R. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 14949–
R. J. (1998) Ann. Rev. Biochem.67, 653–692 186. Wang, Q., Mullah, B. K., and Robishaw, J. D. 14957
157. Mochly-Rosen, D. (1995) Science268, 247–251 (1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 17365–17371 212d.Schwartz, M. A., and Shattil, S. J. (2000) Trends
158. Benovic, J. L., DeBlasi, A., Stone, W. C., Caron, 187. Mayorga, L. S., Diaz, R., and Stahl, P. D. (1989) Biochem. Sci.25, 388–391
M. G., and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1989) Science246, Science244, 1475–1477 212e.Zhang, B., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z.-x, and Zheng,
235–240 188. Coleman, D. E., and Sprang, S. R. (1996) Y. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 25299–25307
158a.Danner, S., Frank, M., and Lohse, M. J. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 41–44 213. Symons, M. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21,
J. Biol. Chem.273, 3223–3229 189. Ray, K., Kunsch, C., Bonner, L. M., and 178–181
158b.Gabilondo, A. M., Hegler, J., Krasel, C., Robishaw, J. D. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 214. Ando, S., Kaibuchi, K., Sasaki, T., Hiraoka, K.,
Boivin-Jahns, V., Hein, L., and Lohse, M. J. 21765–21771 Nishiyama, T., Mizuno, T., Asada, M., Nunoi,
(1997)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 12285– 190. Brown, A. M. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2175–2179 H., Matsuda, I., Matsuura, Y., Polakis, P.,
12290 191. Chen, J., DeVivo, M., Dingus, J., Harry, A., Li, McCormick, F., and Takai, Y. (1992) J. Biol.
159. Rodbell, M., Birnbaumer, L., Pohl, S. L., and J., Sui, J., Carty, D. J., Blank, J. L., Exton, J. H., Chem.267, 25709–25713
Krans, H. M. J. (1971) J. Biol. Chem.246, 1877– Stoffel, R. H., Inglese, J., Lefkowitz, R. J., 215. Nuoffer, C., and Balch, W. E. (1994) Ann. Rev.
1882 Logothetis, D. E., Hildebrandt, J. D., and Biochem.63, 949–990
160. Unson, C. G., Cypess, A. M., Wu, C.-R., Iyengar, R. (1995) Science268, 1166–1169 216. Rybin, V., Ullrich, O., Rubino, M., Alexandrov,
Goldsmith, P. K., Merrifield, R. B., and 192. Schulz, K., Danner, S., Bauer, P., Schröder, S., K., Simon, I., Seabra, M. C., Goody, R., and
Sakmar, T. P. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. and Lohse, M. J. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, Zerial, M. (1996) Nature (London)383, 266–269
U.S.A.93, 310–315 22546–22551 217. Garrett, M. D., Self, A. J., van Oers, C., and
161. Rosenthal, W., Antaramian, A., Gilbert, S., 193. Yoshida, T., Willardson, B. M., Wilkins, J. F., Hall, A. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 10–13
and Birnbaumer, M. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, Jensen, G. J., Thornton, B. D., and Bitensky, M. 217a.Moss, J., and Vaughan, M. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.
13030–13033 W. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 24050–24057 273, 21431–21434
162. Sharif, M., and Hanley, M. R. (1992) Nature 193a.Whiteway, M., Hougan, L., Dignard, D., Tho- 217b.Hutchinson, J. P., and Eccleston, J. F. (2000)
(London)357, 279–280 mas, D. Y., Bell, L., Saari, G. C., Grant, F. J., Biochemistry39, 11348–11359
163. McFarland, K. C., Sprengel, R., Phillips, H. S., O'Hara, P., and MacKay, V. L. (1989) Cell56, 218. Scheffzek, K., Ahmadian, M. R., and
Köhler, M., Rosemblit, N., Nikolics, K., 467–477 Wittinghofer, A. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.23,
Segaloff, D. L., and Seeburg, P. H. (1989) 194. Noel, J. P., Hamm, H. E., and Sigler, P. B. 257–262
Science245, 494–499 (1993)Nature (London)366, 654–663 218a.Berman, D. M., and Gilman, A. G. (1998) J.
164. Kudo, M., Osuga, Y., Kobilka, B. K., and 195. Lambright, D. G., Sondek, J., Bohm, A., Skiba, Biol. Chem.273, 1269–1272
Hsueh, A. J. W. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, N. P., Hamm, H. E., and Sigler, P. B. (1996) 218b.Coleman, D. E., and Sprang, S. R. (1999) J.
22470–22478 Nature (London)379, 311–319 Biol. Chem.274, 16669–16672
165. Perlman, J. H., Laakkonen, L., Osman, R., and 196. McLaughlin, S. K., McKinnon, P. J., and 219. Schalk, I., Zeng, K., Wu, S.-K., Stura, E. A.,
Gershengorn, M. C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, Margolskee, R. F. (1992) Nature (London)357, Matteson, J., Huang, M., Tandon, A., Wilson,
23383–23386 563–569 I. A., and Balch, W. E. (1996) Nature (London)
166. Conti, M., Iona, S., Cuomo, M., Swinnen, J. V., 197. Hall, A. (1990) Science249, 635–640 381, 42–48
Odeh, J., and Svoboda, M. E. (1995) 198. Valencia, A., Chardin, P., Wittinghofer, A., and 220. Buss, J. E., Mumby, S. M., Casey, P. J., Gilman,
Biochemistry34, 7979–7987 Sander, C. (1991) Biochemistry30, 4637–4648 A. G., and Sefton, B. M. (1987) Proc. Natl.
167. Smith, K. J., Scotland, G., Beattie, J., Trayer, I. 199. Macara, I. G., Lounsbury, K. M., Richards, S. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 7493–7497
P., and Houslay, M. D. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. A., McKiernan, C., and Bar-Sagi, D. (1996) 221. Wedegaertner, P. B., Wilson, P. T., and Bourne,
271, 16703–16711 FASEB J.10, 625–630 H. R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 503–506
168. Sutherland, E. W. (1972) Science177, 401–408 200. Boguski, M. S., and McCormick, F. (1993) 222. Song, J., Hirschman, J., Gunn, K., and Dohlman,
169. Pastan, I. (1972) Sci. Am.227(Aug), 97–105 Nature (London)366, 643–654 H. G. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 20273–20283
170. Lalli, E., and Sassone-Corsi, P. (1994) J. Biol. 200a.Scita, G., Tenca, P., Frittoli, E., Tocchetti, A., 223. Hepler, J. R., Biddlecome, G. H., Kleuss, C.,
Chem.269, 17359 – 17362 Innocenti, M., Giardina, G., and Di Fiore, P. P. Camp, L. A., Hofmann, S. L., Ross, E. M., and
171. Bolwell, G. P. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, (2000)EMBO J.19, 2393–2398 Gilman, A. G. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 496–504
492–495 201. Jurnak, F. (1985) Science230, 32–36 224. Peseckis, S. M., and Resh, M. D. (1994) J. Biol.
172. Taussig, R., and Gilman, A. G. (1995) J. Biol. 202. Sprinzl, M. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, Chem.269, 30888–30892
Chem.270, 1–4 245–250 225. Giner, J.-L., and Rando, R. R. (1994) Biochemistry
173. Dessauer, C. W., Tesmer, J. J. G., Sprang, S. R., 203. Berchtold, H., Reshetnikova, L., Reiser, C. O. 33, 15116–15123
and Gilman, A. G. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, A., Schirmer, N. K., Sprinzl, M., and Hilgenfeld, 226. Liu, L., Dudler, T., and Gelb, M. H. (1996) J.
25831–25839 R. (1993) Nature (London)365, 126–132 Biol. Chem.271, 23269–23276
174. Cooper, D. M. F., Mons, N., and Karpen, J. W. 204. Kawashima, T., Berthet-Colominas, C., Wulff, 227. Casey, P. J. (1995) Science268, 221–225
(1995)Nature (London)374, 421–424 M., Cusack, S., and Leberman, R. (1996) 228. Maltese, W. A., Sheridan, K. M., Repko, E. M.,
175. Désaubry, L., Shoshani, I., and Johnson, R. A. Nature (London)379, 511–518 and Erdman, R. A. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265,
(1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 14028–14034 205. Jurnak, F. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, 195–198 2148–2155
176. Hurley, J. H. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 7599– 206. Downward, J. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 229. Milligan, G., Parenti, M., and Magee, A. I.
7602 469–472 (1995)Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 181–186
177. Hellevuo, K., Yoshimura, M., Mons, N., 207. Wittinghofer, A., and Pai, E. F. (1991) Trends 230. Duncan, J. A., and Gilman, A. G. (1996) J. Biol.
Hoffman, P. L., Cooper, D. M. F., and Tabakoff, Biochem. Sci.16, 382–387 Chem.271, 23594–23600
B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 11581–11589 208. Schlichting, I., Almo, S. C., Rapp, G., Wilson, 230a.Iiri, T., Backlund, P. S., Jr., Jones, T. L. Z.,
178. Walseth, T. F., Gander, J. E., Eide, S. J., Krick, K., Petratos, K., Lentfer, A., Wittinghofer, A., Wedegaertner, P. B., and Bourne, H. R. (1996)
T. P., and Goldberg, N. D. (1983) J. Biol. Chem. Kabsch, W., Pai, E. F., Petsko, G. A., and Goody, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 14592–14597
258, 1544–1558 R. S. (1990) Nature (London)345, 309–315 230b.Lee, T. W., Seifert, R., Guan, X., and Kobilka,
178a.Chen, Y., Cann, M. J., Litvin, T. N., 209. Kraulis, P. J., Domaille, P. J., Campbell-Burk, B. K. (1999) Biochemistry38, 13801–13809
Lourgenko, V., Sinclair, M. L., Levin, L. R., S. L., Van Aken, T., and Laue, E. D. (1994) 231. Lambright, D. G., Noel, J. P., Hamm, H. E.,
and Buck, J. (2000) Science289, 625–628 Biochemistry33, 3515–3531 and Sigler, P. B. (1994) Nature (London)369,
178b.Kaupp, U. B., and Weyand, I. (2000) Science 210. Bokoch, G. M., and Der, C. J. (1993) FASEB J. 621–628
289, 559–560 7, 750–759 232. Sondek, J., Lambright, D. G., Noel, J. P.,
179. Hamm, H. E. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 669–672 211. Takai, Y., Sasaki, T., Tanaka, K., and Nakanishi, Hamm, H. E., and Sigler, P. B. (1994) Nature
180. Neer, E. J. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 3–14 H. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 227–231 (London)372, 276–279
181. Collins, S., Caron, M. G., and Lefkowitz, R. J.
(1992)Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 37–39

--- Page 587 ---

584 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
References
233. Coleman, D. E., Berghuis, A. M., Lee, E., 262. Yeh, J. I., Biemann, H.-P., Privé, G. G., Pandit, 293. Taylor, C. W., and Marshall, I. C. B. (1992)
Linder, M. E., Gilman, A. G., and Sprang, S. R. J., Koshland, D. E., Jr., and Kim, S.-H. (1996) J. Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 403–407
(1994)Science265, 1405–1412 Mol. Biol.262, 186–201 294. Gu, Q.-M., and Sih, C. J. (1994) J. Am. Chem.
234. Mixon, M. B., Lee, E., Coleman, D. E., 263. Danielson, M. A., Bass, R. B., and Falke, J. J. Soc.116, 7481–7486
Berghuis, A. M., Gilman, A. G., and Sprang, S. (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 32878–32888 295. Berridge, M. J. (1993) Nature (London)365,
R. (1995) Science270, 954–960 264. Kim, S.-H. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 159–165 388–389
235. Kjeldgaard, M., Nyborg, J., and Clark, B. F. C. 264a.Ottemann, K. M., Xiao, W., Shin, Y.-K., and 296. Lee, H. C., Walseth, T. F., Bratt, G. T., Hayes,
(1996)FASEB J.10, 1347–1368 Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1999) Science285, 1751– R. N., and Clapper, D. L. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.
236. Higashijima, T., Graziano, M. P., Suga, H., 1754 264, 1608–1615
Kainosho, M., and Gilman, A. G. (1991) J. Biol. 265. Berridge, M. J., and Irvine, R. F. (1989) Nature 297. Vu, C. Q., Lu, P.-J., Chen, C.-S., and Jacobson,
Chem.266, 3396–3401 (London)341, 197–205 M. K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 4747–4754
237. Sondek, J., Bohm, A., Lambright, D. G., 266. Schulman, H., and Lou, L. L. (1989) Trends 298. Dennis, E. A., Rhee, S. G., Billah, M. M., and
Hamm, H. E., and Sigler, P. B. (1996) Nature Biochem. Sci.14, 62–66 Hannun, Y. A. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2068–2077
(London)379, 369–374 267. Carafoli, E. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 395– 299. Sternweis, P. C., and Smrcka, A. V. (1992)
238. Clapham, D. E. (1996) Nature (London)379, 433 Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 502–506
297–299 268. Rasmussen, H. (1989) Sci. Am.261(Oct), 66–73 300. Rhee, S. G., and Choi, K. D. (1992) J. Biol.
239. Neer, E. J., Schmidt, C. J., Nambudripad, R., 269. Kobilka, B. K., Matsui, H., Kobilka, T. S., Chem.267, 12393–12396
and Smith, T. F. (1994) Nature (London)371, Yang-Feng, T. L., Francke, U., Caron, M. G., 300a.Kim, M. J., Chang, J.-S., Park, S. K., Hwang, J.-
297–300 Lefkowitz, R. J., and Regan, J. W. (1987) I., Ryu, S. H., and Suh, P.-G. (2000) Biochemis-
240. Faber, X. X. (1994) Structure3, 551–559 Science238, 650–656 try39, 8674–8682
241. Pai, E. F., Kabsch, W., Krengel, U., Holmes, K. 270. Cotecchia, S., Kobilka, B. K., Daniel, K. W., 301. Jafri, M. S., and Keizer, J. (1995) Biophys. J.69,
C., John, J., and Wittinghofer, A. (1989) Nature Nolan, R. D., Lapetina, E. Y., Caron, M. G., 2139–2153
(London)341, 209–214 Lefkowitz, R. J., and Regan, J. W. (1990) J. Biol. 302. Combettes, L., Cheek, T. R., and Taylor, C. W.
242. Wall, M. A., Posner, B. A., and Sprang, S. R. Chem.265, 63–69 (1996)EMBO J.15, 2086–2093
(1998)Structure6, 1169–1183 271. Ceresa, B. P., and Limbird, L. E. (1994) J. Biol. 303. van de Put, F. H. M. M., De Pont, J. J. H. H.
243. Wilson, P. T., and Bourne, H. R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.269, 29557–29564 M., and Willems, P. H. G. M. (1994) J. Biol.
Chem.270, 9667–9675 272. Scheer, A., Fanelli, F., Costa, T., De Benedetti, Chem.269, 12438–12443
244. Zhao, Y., Brandish, P. E., DiValentin, M., P. G., and Cotecchia, S. (1996) EMBO J.15, 304. Kukuljan, M., Rojas, E., Catt, K. J., and Stojilkovic,
Schelvis, J. P. M., Babcock, G. T., and Marletta, 3566–3578 S. S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 4860–4865
M. A. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10848–10854 273. Hwa, J., and Perez, D. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 305. Berridge, M. J., and Galione, A. (1988) FASEB
245. Garbers, D. L., and Lowe, D. G. (1994) J. Biol. 271, 6322–6327 J.2, 3074–3082
Chem.269, 30741–30744 274. Boyer, J. L., Waldo, G. L., Evans, T., Northup, 306. Meyer, T., Wensel, T., and Stryer, L. (1990)
246. Subbaraya, I., Ruiz, C. C., Helekar, B. S., Zhao, J. K., Downes, C. P., and Harden, T. K. (1989) Biochemistry29, 32–37
X., Gorczyca, W. A., Pettenati, M. J., Rao, P. J. Biol. Chem.264, 13917–13922 307. Luttrell, B. M. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 1521–
N., Palczewski, K., and Baehr, W. (1994) J. 275. Wu, D., Jiang, H., and Simon, M. I. (1995) J. 1524
Biol. Chem.269, 31080–31089 Biol. Chem.270, 9828–9832 308. Wilson, M. P., and Majerus, P. W. (1996) J. Biol.
247. Lincoln, T. M., and Cornwell, T. L. (1993) 276. Nishizuka, Y. (1995) FASEB J.9, 484 – 496 Chem.271, 11904–11910
FASEB J.7, 328–338 277. Majerus, P. W. (1992) Ann. Rev. Biochem.61, 309. Shears, S. B. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 19879–
248. Houslay, M. D. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 225–250 19886
465–466 278. Majerus, P. W., Conolly, T. M., Bansal, V. S., 309a.Zhu, D.-M., Tekle, E., Huang, C. Y., and Chock,
249. Garbers, D. L. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 9103– Inhorn, R. C., Ross, T. S., and Lips, D. L. P. B. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 6063 – 6066
9106 (1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 3051–3054 309b.Odom, A. R., Stahlberg, A., Wente, S. R., and
250. Lowe, D. G., Chang, M.-S., Hellmiss, R., 279. Rhee, S. G., Suh, P.-G., Ryu, S.-H., and Lee, S. York, J. D. (2000) Science287, 2026–2029
Chen, E., Singh, S., Garbers, D. L., and Y. (1989) Science244, 546–550 310. Ryu, S. H., Lee, S. Y., Lee, K.-Y., and Rhee, S.
Goeddel, D. V. (1989) EMBO J.8, 1377–1384 280. Hough, E., Hansen, L. K., Birknes, B., Jynge, G. (1987) FASEB J.1, 388–393
251. Hamra, F. K., Forte, L. R., Eber, S. L., K., Hansen, S., Hordvik, A., Little, C., 311. Fukuda, M., and Mikoshiba, K. (1996) J. Biol.
Pidhorodeckyj, N. V., Krause, W. J., Freeman, Dodson, E., and Derewenda, Z. (1989) Nature Chem.271, 18838–18842
R. H., Chin, D. T., Tompkins, J. A., Fok, K. F., (London)338, 357–360 312. Bird, G. St. J., and Putney, J. W., Jr. (1996) J.
Smith, C. E., Duffin, K. L., Siegel, N. R., and 281. Essen, L.-O., Perisic, O., Cheung, R., Katan, Biol. Chem.271, 6766–6770
Currie, M. G. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. M., and Williams, R. L. (1996) Nature (London) 313. Dixon, J. F., and Hokin, L. E. (1987) J. Biol.
U.S.A.90, 10464–10468 380, 595–602 Chem.262, 13892–13895
252. Stamler, J. S., Singel, D. J., and Loscalzo, J. 282. Berridge, M. J. (1993) Nature (London)361, 314. Heinz, D. W., Ryan, M., Bullock, T. L., and
(1992)Science258, 1898–1902 315–325 Griffith, O. H. (1995) EMBO J.14, 3855–3863
253. Yuen, P. S. T., Doolittle, L. K., and Garbers, D. 283. Parthasarathy, R., and Eisenberg, F. J. (1986) 315. Ali, N., Craxton, A., and Shears, S. B. (1993) J.
L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 791–793 Biochem. J.235, 313–322 Biol. Chem.268, 6161–6167
254. Stone, J. R., and Marletta, M. A. (1996) 284. Majerus, P. W., Connolly, T. M., Deckmyn, H., 316. Xie, W., Kaetzel, M. A., Bruzik, K. S., Dedman,
Biochemistry35, 1093–1099 Ross, T. S., Bross, T. E., Ishii, H., Bansal, V. S., J. R., Shears, S. B., and Nelson, D. J. (1996) J.
255. Mayer, B., Schrammel, A., Klatt, P., Koesling, and Wilson, D. B. (1986) Science234, 1519–1526 Biol. Chem.271, 14092–14097
D., and Schmidt, K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 285. Houslay, M. D. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 1–2 317. Ismailov, I. I., Fuller, C. M., Berdiev, B. K.,
17355–17360 286. Nickels, J. T., Jr., Buxeda, R. J., and Carman, Shlyonsky, V. G., Benos, D. J., and Barrett, K.
256. Stone, J. R., and Marletta, M. A. (1995) G. M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 11018–11024 E. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93,
Biochemistry34, 16397–16403 287. Boronenkov, I. V., and Anderson, R. A. (1995) 10505–10509
257. Deinum, G., Stone, J. R., Babcock, G. T., and J. Biol. Chem.270, 2881–2884 318. Dasgupta, S., Dasgupta, D., Sen, M., Biswas,
Marletta, M. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 1540– 288. Hughes, A. R., Takemura, H., and Putney, J. S., and Biswas, B. B. (1996) Biochemistry35,
1547 W., Jr. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 10314–10319 4994–5001
258. Verma, A., Hirsch, D. J., Glatt, C. E., Ronnett, 289. Furuichi, T., Yoshikawa, S., Miyawaki, A., 319. Voglmaier, S. M., Bembenek, M. E., Kaplin, A.
G. V., and Snyder, S. H. (1993) Science259, Wada, K., Maeda, N., and Mikoshiba, K. I., Dormán, G., Olszewski, J. D., Prestwich, G.
381–384 (1989)Nature (London)342, 32–38 D., and Snyder, S. H. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad.
259. Stock, J. B., Surette, M. G., McCleary, W. R., 289a.Zimmermann, B., and Walz, B. (1999) EMBO Sci. U.S.A.93, 4305–4310
and Stock, A. M. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, J.18, 3222–3231 319a.Chi, T. H., and Crabtree, G. R. (2000) Science
19753–19756 290. Yoshikawa, F., Morita, M., Monkawa, T., 287, 1937–1939
259a.Kim, K. K., Yokota, H., and Kim, S.-H. (1999) Michikawa, T., Furuichi, T., and Mikoshiba, K. 320. Menniti, F. S., Oliver, K. G., Putney, J. W., Jr.,
Nature (London)400, 787–792 (1996)J. Biol. Chem. 271, 18277–18284 and Shears, S. B. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18,
260. Scott, W. G., Milligan, D. L., Milburn, M. V., 291. Humbert, J.-P., Matter, N., Artault, J.-C., 53–56
Privé, G. G., Yeh, J., Koshland, D. E., Jr., and Köppler, P., and Malviya, A. N. (1996) J. Biol. 320a.Yang, X., Safrany, S. T., and Shears, S. B. (1999)
Kim, S.-H. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.232, 555–573 Chem.271, 478–485 J. Biol. Chem.274, 35434–35440
261. Danielson, M. A., Biemann, H.-P., Koshland, 292. Hennager, D. J., Welsh, M. J., and DeLisle, S.
D. E., Jr., and Falke, J. J. (1994) Biochemistry33, (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 4959–4962
6100–6109

--- Page 588 ---

585
References
321. Stephens, L., Radenberg, T., Thiel.U, Vogel, 338b.Toker, A., and Cantley, L. C. (1997) Nature 365. Hubbard, S. R., Wei, L., Ellis, L., and
G., Khoo, K.-H., Dell, A., Jackson, T. R., (London)387, 673–675 Hendrickson, W. A. (1994) Nature (London)
Hawkins, P. T., and Mayr, G. W. (1993) J. Biol. 339. Ui, M., Okada, T., Hazeki, K., and Hazeki, O. 372, 746–754
Chem.268, 4009–4015 (1995)Trends Biochem. Sci.20, 303–307 365a.Hubbard, S. R. (1997) EMBO J.16, 5572–5581
322. Van Dijken, P., de Haas, J.-R., Craxton, A., 339a.Takasuga, S., Katada, T., Ui, M., and Hazeki, 366. White, M. F., Shoelson, S. E., Keutmann, H.,
Erneux, C., Shears, S. B., and Van Haastert, P. O. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 19545–19550 and Kahn, C. R. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263,
J. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 29724–29731 340. Chock, P. B., Rhee, S. G., and Stadtman, E. R. 2969–2980
323. Bansal, V. S., Caldwell, K. K., and Majerus, P. (1980)Ann. Rev. Biochem.49, 813–843 367. Fabry, M., Schaefer, E., Ellis, L., Kojro, E.,
W. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 1806–1811 341. Stadtman, E. R., and Chock, P. B. (1977) Proc. Fahrenholz, F., and Brandenburg, D. (1992)
324. York, J. D., Ponder, J. W., Chen, Z.-w, Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.74, 2761–2765 J. Biol. Chem.267, 8950–8956
Mathews, F. S., and Majerus, P. W. (1994) 342. Huang, C.-Y. F., and Ferrell, J. E., Jr. (1996) 368. Williams, P. F., Mynarcik, D. C., Yu, G. Q., and
Biochemistry33, 13164–13171 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 10078–10083 Whittaker, J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 3012–3016
325. Norris, F. A., Auethavekiat, V., and Majerus, P. 343. Goldbeter, A., and Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1987) J. 369. Kjeldsen, T., Wiberg, F. C., and Andersen, A.
W. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 16128–16133 Biol. Chem.262, 4460–4471 S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 32942–32946
326. Jefferson, A. B., and Majerus, P. W. (1995) J. 344. Schacter-Noiman, E., Chock, P. B., and 369a.Sparrow, L. G., McKern, N. M., Gorman, J. J.,
Biol. Chem.270, 9370–9377 Stadtman, E. R. (1983) Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Strike, P. M., Robinson, C. P., Bentley, J. D.,
326a.Norris, F. A., Wilson, M. P., Wallis, T. S., London B302, 157–166 and Ward, C. W. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
Galyov, E. E., and Majerus, P. W. (1998) Proc. 345. Schacter, E., Chock, P. B., and Stadtman, E. R. 29460–29467
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 14057–14059 (1984)J. Biol. Chem.259, 12260–12264 369b.Garant, M. J., Kole, S., Maksimova, E. M., and
326b.Munday, A. D., Norris, F. A., Caldwell, K. K., 346. Newsholme, E. A., Challiss, R. A. J., and Crabtree, Bernier, M. (1999) Biochemistry38, 5896–5904
Brown, S., Majerus, P. W., and Mitchell, C. A. B. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 277–280 370. Clark, S., and Harrison, L. C. (1983) J. Biol.
(1999)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 3640– 347. Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci. Chem.258, 11434–11437
3645 12, 225–228 371. Saltiel, A. R. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1034–1040
327. Bone, R., Springer, J. P., and Atack, J. R. (1992) 348. Taylor, S. I. (1995) in The Metabolic and Molecular 372. Carter, W. G., Asamoah, K. A., and Sale, G. J.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 10031–10035 Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 1 (Scriver, (1995)Biochemistry34, 9488–9499
328. Ganzhorn, A. J., Lepage, P., Pelton, P. D., C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., 373. Myers, M. G., Jr., Sun, X. J., and White, M. F.
Strasser, F., Vincendon, P., and Rondeau, J.-M. eds), pp. 843–896, McGraw-Hill, New York (1994)Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 289–293
(1996)Biochemistry35, 10957–10966 349. Müller, G., Rouveyre, N., Crecelius, A., and 374. Yenush, L., Makati, K. J., Smith-Hall, J.,
329. Burgoyne, R. D. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, Bandlow, W. (1998) Biochemistry37, 8683–8695 Ishibashi, O., Myers, M. G. J., and White, M. F.
87–88 350. Smit, A. B., Vreugdenhil, E., Ebberink, R. H. (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 24300–24306
330. Huang, K.-P., Huang, F. L., Nakabayashi, H., M., Geraerts, W. P. M., Klootwijk, J., and 375. Kowalski-Chauvel, A., Pradayrol, L., Vaysse,
and Yoshida, Y. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, Joosse, J. (1988) Nature (London)331, 535–538 N., and Seva, C. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
14839–14845 351. LeRoith, D., Shiloach, J., Roth, J., and Lesniak, 26356–26361
330a.Ron, D., and Kazanietz, M. G. (1999) FASEB J. M. A. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.256, 6533–6536 376. Paz, K., Voliovitch, H., Hadari, Y. R., Roberts,
13, 1658–1676 352. Rosen, O. M. (1987) Science237, 1452–1458 C. T., Jr., LeRoith, D., and Zick, Y. (1996) J.
330b.Ward, N. E., Stewart, J. R., Ionnides, C. G., 353. White, M. F., and Kahn, C. R. (1994) J. Biol. Biol. Chem.271, 6998–7003
and O’Brian, C. A. (2000) Biochemistry39, Chem.269, 1–4 376a.Rother, K. I., Imai, Y., Caruso, M., Beguinot, F.,
10319–10329 354. Barnard, R. J., and Youngren, J. F. (1992) Formisano, P., and Accili, D. (1998) J. Biol.
331. Pessin, M. S., and Raben, D. M. (1989) J. Biol. FASEB J.6, 3238–3244 Chem.273, 17491–17497
Chem.264, 8729–8738 355. Bell, G. I., Burant, C. F., Takeda, J., and Gould, 376b.Clark, S. F., Molero, J.-C., and James, D. E.
332. Exton, J. H. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 1–4 G. W. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 19161–19164 (2000)J. Biol. Chem.275, 3819–3826
332a.Perisic, O., Paterson, H. F., Mosedale, G., 356. Mueckler, M. (1994) Eur. J. Biochem.219, 713– 376c.Lehr, S., Kotzka, J., Herkner, A., Sikmann, A.,
Lara-González, S., and Williams, R. L. (1999) 725 Meyer, H. E., Krone, W., and Müller-Wieland,
J. Biol. Chem.274, 14979–14987 356a.Li, J., Houseknecht, K. L., Stenbit, A. E., Katz, D. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10898–10907
333. Roberts, M. F. (1996) FASEB J.10, 1159–1172 E. B., and Charron, M. J. (2000) FASEB J.14, 377. Ricketts, W. A., Rose, D. W., Shoelson, S., and
334. Liscovitch, M., Chalifa, V., Pertile, P., Chen, 1117–1125 Olefsky, J. M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 26165–
C.-S., and Cantley, L. C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 357. Cuatrecasas, P. (1972) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 26169
269, 21403–21406 U.S.A.69, 1277–1281 378. Okada, S., and Pessin, J. E. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.
335. Stein, R. L., Melandri, F., and Dick, L. (1935) 358. Pashmforoush, M., Yoshimasa, Y., and Steiner, 271, 25533–25538
Biochemistry35, 3899–3908 D. F. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 32639–32648 379. Czech, M. P., Klarlund, J. K., Yagaloff, K. A.,
336. Ward, S. G., Mills, S. J., Liu, C., Westwick, J., 359. Ullrich, A., Bell, J. R., Chen, E. Y., Herrera, R., Bradford, A. P., and Lewis, R. E. (1988) J. Biol.
and Potter, B. V. L. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, Petruzzelli, L. M., Dull, T. J., Gray, A., Chem.263, 11017–11020
12075–12084 Coussens, L., Liao, Y.-C., Tsubokawa, M., 380. Seger, R., and Krebs, E. G. (1995) FASEB J.9,
337. Woscholski, R., Kodaki, T., Palmer, R. H., Mason, A., Seeburg, P. H., Grunfeld, C., 726–735
Waterfield, M. D., and Parker, P. J. (1995) Rosen, O. M., and Ramachandran, J. (1985) 381. Carter, W. G., Sullivan, A. C., Asamoah, K. A.,
Biochemistry34, 11489–11493 Nature (London)313, 756–761 and Sale, G. J. (1996) Biochemistry35, 14340–
337a.Odorizzi, G., Babst, M., and Emr, S. D. (2000) 360. Xu, Q.-Y., Paxton, R. J., and Fujita-Yamaguchi, 14351
Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 229–235 Y. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 18673–18681 382. Kasus-Jacobi, A., Perdereau, D., Auzan, C.,
337b.Walker, E. H., Perisic, O., Ried, C., Stephens, 361. Herrera, R., Petruzzelli, L., Thomas, N., Clauser, E., Van Obberghen, E., Mauvais-
L., and Williams, R. L. (1999) Nature (London) Bramson, H. N., Kaiser, E. T., and Rosen, O. Jarvis, F., Girard, J., and Burnol, A.-F. (1998) J.
402, 313–320 M. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, Biol. Chem.273, 26026–26035
337c.Ching, T.-T., Wang, D.-S., Hsu, A.-L., Lu, P.-J., 7899–7903 383. Baltensperger, K., Karoor, V., Paul, H., Ruoho,
and Chen, C.-S. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 8611– 362. McClain, D. A., Maegawa, H., Lee, J., Dull, T. A., Czech, M. P., and Malbon, C. C. (1996) J.
8617 J., Ullrich, A., and Olefsky, J. M. (1987) J. Biol. Biol. Chem.271, 1061–1064
337d.Bertsch, U., Deschermeier, C., Fanick, W., Chem.262, 14663–14671 384. Hara, K., Yonezawa, K., Sakaue, H., Ando, A.,
Girkontaite, I., Hillemeier, K., Johnen, H., 363. Perlman, R., Bottaro, D. P., White, M. F., and Kotani, K., Kitamura, T., Kitamura, Y., Ueda,
Weglöhner, W., Emmrich, F., and Mayr, G. W. Kahn, C. R. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 8946–8950 H., Stephens, L., Jackson, T. R., Hawkins, P. T.,
(2000)J. Biol. Chem.275, 1557–1564 363a.Rouard, M., Bass, J., Grigorescu, F., Garrett, T. Dhand, R., Clark, A. E., Holman, G. D.,
337e.Jackson, T. R., Kearns, B. G., and Theibert, A. P. J., Ward, C. W., Lipkind, G., Jaffiole, C., Waterfield, M. D., and Kasuga, M. (1994) Proc.
B. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 489–495 Steiner, D. F., and Bell, G. I. (1999) J. Biol. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 7415–7419
337f. Gillooly, D. J., Morrow, I. C., Lindsay, M., Chem.274, 18487–18491 385. Lam, K., Carpenter, C. L., Ruderman, N. B.,
Gould, R., Bryant, N. J., Gaullier, J.-M., Par- 363b.Luo, R. Z.-T., Beniac, D. R., Fernandes, A., Yip, Friel, J. C., and Kelly, K. L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
ton, R. G., and Stenmark, H. (2000) EMBO J. C. C., and Ottensmeyer, F. P. (1999) Science 269, 20648–20652
19, 4577–4588 285, 1077–1080 386. Sutherland, C., O’Brien, R. M., and Granner,
338. Pennisi, E. (1997) Science275, 1876–1878 363c.Woldin, C. N., Hing, F. S., Lee, J., Pilch, P. F., D. K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 15501–15506
338a.Stambolic, V., Suzuki, A., de la Pompa, J. L., and Shipley, G. G. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 387. Domin, J., Dhand, R., and Waterfield, M. D.
Brothers, G. M., Mirtsos, C., Sasaki, T., 34981–34992 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 21614–21621
Ruland, J., Penninger, J. M., Siderovski, D. P., 364. Lemmon, M. A., and Schlessinger, J. (1994) 387a.Kosaki, A., Yamada, K., Suga, J., Otaka, A., and
and Mak, T. W. (1998) Cell95, 29–39 Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 459–563 Kuzuya, H. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 940–944

--- Page 589 ---

586 Chapter 11. The Regulation of Enzymatic Activity and Metabolism
References
388. Lefebvre, V., Méchin, M.-C., Louckx, M. P., 416. Robbins, K. C., Antoniades, H. N., Devare, S. 444. Greenhalgh, D. A., Welty, D. J., Player, A., and
Rider, M. H., and Hue, L. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. G., Hunkapillar, M. W., and Aaronson, S. A. Yuspa, S. H. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
271, 22289–22292 (1983)Nature (London)305, 605–608 87, 643–647
389. Quon, M. J., Butte, A. J., Zarnowski, M. J., 417. Yarden, Y., and Peles, E. (1991) Biochemistry 445. Rabbitts, T. H., Forster, A., Hamlyn, P., and
Sesti, G., Cushman, S. W., and Taylor, S. I. 30, 3543–3550 Baer, R. (1984) Nature (London)309, 592–597
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 27920–27924 418. Peles, E., Lamprecht, R., Ben-Levy, R., Tzahar, 446. Shima, E. A., Le Beau, M. M., McKeithan, T.
390. Kandror, K. V., and Pilch, P. F. (1996) J. Biol. E., and Yarden, Y. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, W., Minowada, J., Showe, L. C., Mak, T. W.,
Chem.271, 21703–21708 12266–12274 Minden, M. D., Rowley, J. D., and Diaz, M. O.
390a.Marte, B. M., and Downward, J. (1997) Trends 419. Carpenter, G., and Cohen, S. (1990) J. Biol. (1986)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 3439–3443
Biochem. Sci.22, 355–358 Chem.265, 7709–7712 447. Cramer, C. J., and Truhlar, D. G. (1993) J. Am.
390b.Hemmings, B. A. (1997) Science275, 628–630 420. Suen, T.-C., and Goss, P. E. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. Chem. Soc.115, 5745–5753
390c.Chan, T. O., Rittenhouse, S. E., and Tsichlis, P. 275, 6600–6607 448. Perrin, C. L., Armstrong, K. B., and Fabian, M.
N. (1999) Ann. Rev. Biochem.68, 965–1014 421. Stover, D. R., Becker, M., Liebetanz, J., and Lydon, A. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 715–722
390d.Aguirre, V., Uchida, T., Yenush, L., Davis, R., N. B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 15591–15597 449. Gabb, H. A., and Harvey, S. C. (1993) J. Am.
and White, M. F. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 422. Kauffmann-Zeh, A., Thomas, G. M. H., Ball, Chem. Soc.115, 4218–4227
9047–9054 A., Prosser, S., Cunningham, E., Cockcroft, S., 450. Plavec, J., Tong, W., and Chattopadhyaya, J.
390e.Nakae, J., Park, B.-C., and Accili, D. (1999) J. and Hsuan, J. J. (1995) Science268, 1188–1190 (1993)J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 9734–9746
Biol. Chem.274, 15982–15985 422a.Jones, J. T., Ballinger, M. D., Pisacane, P. I., 451. Ellervik, U., and Magnusson, G. (1994) J. Am.
391. Kishi, K., Hayashi, H., Wang, L., Kamohara, Lofgren, J. A., Fitzpatrick, V. D., Fairbrother, Chem. Soc.116, 2340–2347
S., Tamaoka, K., Shimizu, T., Ushikubi, F., W. J., Wells, J. A., and Sliwkowski, M. X. 451a.Hermeking, H., Rago, C., Schuhmacher, M.,
Narumiya, S., and Ebina, Y. (1996) J. Biol. (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 11667–11674 Li, Q., Barrett, J. F., Obaya, A. J., O’Connell, B.
Chem.271, 26561–26568 423. Montelione, G. T., Wüthrich, K., and Scheraga, C., Mateyak, M. K., Tam, W., Kohlhuber, F.,
392. Yamauchi, K., Ribon, V., Saltiel, A. R., and Pessin, H. A. (1988) Biochemistry27, 2235–2243 Dang, C. V., Sedivy, J. M., Eick, D., Vogelstein,
J. E. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 17716–17722 424. Schlessinger, J. (1988) Biochemistry27, 3119–3123 B., and Kinzler, K. W. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad.
393. Zhang, J., Hiken, J., Davis, A. E., and 425. Montelione, G. T., Wüthrich, K., and Scheraga, Sci. U.S.A.97, 2229–2234
Lawrence, J. C., Jr. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, H. A. (1988) Biochemistry27, 2235–2243 452. Eden, A., Simchen, G., and Benvenisty, N.
17513–17523 426. Chantry, A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 3068–3073 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 20242–20245
394. Robinson, F. W., Smith, C. J., Flanagan, J. E., 427. Karasik, A., Pepinsky, R. B., Shoelson, S. E., 453. Postel, E. H., Berberich, S. J., Flint, S. J., and
Shibata, H., and Kono, T. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. and Kahn, C. R. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, Ferrone, C. A. (1993) Science261, 478–480
264, 16458–16464 11862–11867 454. Ying, G.-G., Proost, P., van Damme, J.,
395. Najjar, S. M., Choice, C. V., Soni, P., Whitman, 428. Kauffmann-Zeh, A., Klinger, R., Endemann, Bruschi, M., Introna, M., and Golay, J. (2000) J.
C. M., and Poy, M. N. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, G., Waterfield, M. D., Wetzker, R., and Hsuan, Biol. Chem.275, 4152–4158
12923–12928 J. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 31243–31251 455. Macleod, K., Leprince, D., and Stehelin, D.
396. Haft, C. R., Klausner, R. D., and Taylor, S. I. 429. Kaplan, K. B., Bibbins, K. B., Swedlow, J. R., (1992)Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 251–256
(1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 26286–26294 Arnaud, M., Morgan, D. O., and Varmus, H. 456. Karin, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 16483–16486
397. Safavi, A., Miller, B. C., Cottam, L., and Hersh, E. (1994) EMBO J.13, 4745–4756 457. Turner, R., and Tjian, R. (1989) Science243,
L. B. (1996) Biochemistry35, 14318–14325 429a.Williams, J. C., Weijland, A., Gonfloni, S., 1689–1694
398. Kublaoui, B., Lee, J., and Pilch, P. F. (1995) J. Thompson, A., Courtneidge, S. A., Superti- 458. Vogt, P. K., and Bos, T. J. (1989) Trends
Biol. Chem.270, 59–65 Furga, G., and Wierenga, R. K. (1997) J. Mol. Biochem. Sci.14, 172–175
399. Bevan, A. P., Burgess, J. W., Drake, P. G., Biol.274, 757–775 459. Neuberg, M., Schuermann, M., Hunter, J. B.,
Shaver, A., Bergeron, J. J. M., and Posner, B. I. 430. Okada, M., and Nakagawa, H. (1989) J. Biol. and Müller, R. (1989) Nature (London)338,
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 10784–10791 Chem.264, 20886–20893 589–590
400. Podlecki, D. A., Smith, R. M., Kao, M., Tsai, P., 431. Buss, J. E., and Sefton, B. M. (1985) Journal of 460. Treisman, R. (1995) EMBO J.14, 4905–4913
Huecksteadt, T., Brandenburg, D., Lasher, R. Virology 53, 7–12 461. Abel, T., and Maniatis, T. (1989) Nature
S., Jarett, L., and Olefsky, J. M. (1987) J. Biol. 432. Soriano, P., Montgomery, C., Geske, R., and (London)341, 24–25
Chem.262, 3362–3368 Bradley, A. (1991) Cell64, 693–702 462. Glover, J. N. M., and Harrison, S. C. (1995)
401. Cherniack, A. D., Klarlund, J. K., Conway, B. 433. Lowe, C., Yoneda, T., Boyce, B. F., Chen, H., Nature (London)373, 257–261
R., and Czech, M. P. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, Mundy, G. R., and Soriano, P. (1993) Proc. 463. Quantin, B., and Breathnach, R. (1988) Nature
1485–1488 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 4485–4489 (London)334, 538–539
402. Unoue, G., Cheatham, B., and Kahn, C. R. 434. Tezuka, K.-i, Denhardt, D. T., Rodan, G. A., 464. Greenberg, M. E., and Ziff, E. B. (1984) Nature
(1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 28206–28211 and Harada, S.-i. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, (London)311, 433–438
403. Yarden, Y., and Ullrich, A. (1988) Biochemistry 22713–22717 465. Müller, R., Bravo, R., Burckhardt, J., and Curran,
27, 3113–3119 435. Bolen, J. B., and Veillette, A. (1989) Trends T. (1984) Nature (London)312, 716–720
404. James, R. (1984) Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 259–292 Biochem. Sci.14, 404–407 466. Fukumoto, Y., Kaibuchi, K., Oku, N., Hori, Y.,
405. Nilsen-Hamilton, M., ed. (1994) Growth 436. Mustelin, T., and Burn, P. (1993) Trends and Takai, Y. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 774–780
Factors and Signal Transduction in Development, Biochem. Sci.18, 215–220 467. Wang, Z.-Q., Ovitt, C., Grigoriadis, A. E.,
Wiley-Liss, New York 437. Vetrie, D., Vorechovsky, I., Sideras, P., Möhle-Steinlein, U., Rüther, U., and Wagner,
406. Claesson-Welsh, L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, Holland, J., Davies, A., Flinter, F., E. F. (1992) Nature (London)360, 741–745
32023–32026 Hammarström, L., Kinnon, C., Levinsky, R., 468. Candeliere, G. A., Glorieux, F. H.,
407. Williams, L. T. (1989) Science243, 1564–1570 Bobrow, M., Smith, C. I. E., and Bentley, D. R. Prud’homme, J., and St.-Arnaud, R. (1995) N.
408. Hesketh, R. (1995) The Oncogene Facts Book, (1993)Nature (London)361, 226–233 Engl. J. Med.332, 1546–1551
Academic Press, San Diego, California 438. Hatakeyama, M., Kono, T., Kobayashi, N., 469. Egan, S. E., and Weinberg, R. A. (1993) Nature
409. Hunter, T. (1984) Sci. Am.251(Aug), 70–79 Kawahara, A., Levin, S. D., Perlmutter, R. M., (London)365, 781–783
410. Marx, J. (1994) Science266, 1942–1944 and Taniguchi, T. (1991) Science252, 1523–1528 470. Davis, R. J. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19, 470–
411. Cooper, G. M., ed. (1990) Oncogenes, Jones & 438a.Zou, X., and Calame, K. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 473
Bartlett, Boston, Massachusetts 274, 18141–18144 470a.Gutkind, J. S. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 1839–1842
412. Bishop, J. M. (1996) FASEB J.10, 362–364 439. Daley, G. Q., Van Etten, R. A., and Baltimore, 470b.Whitmarsh, A. J., and Davis, R. J. (1998)
413. Weinberg, R. A. (1983) Sci. Am.249(Nov), D. (1990) Science247, 824–830 Trends Biochem. Sci.23, 481–485
126–142 440. Landis, C. A., Masters, S. B., Spada, A., Pace, 471. Pawson, T. (1995) Nature (London)373, 573–580
414. Hickman, C. P. (1973) Biology of the Inverte- A. M., Bourne, H. R., and Vallar, L. (1989) 472. Daly, R. J., Sanderson, G. M., Janes, P. W., and
brates, Mosby, St. Louis, Missouri Nature (London)340, 692–696 Sutherland, R. L. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
415. Yarden, Y., Escobedo, J. A., Kuang, W. J., 441. Barbacid, M. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 12502–12510
Yang-Feng, T. L., Daniel, T. O., Tremble, P. M., 779–827 473. Feller, S. M., Ren, R., Hanafusa, H., and
Chen, E. Y., Ando, M. E., Harkins, R. N., 442. Kato, G. J., and Dang, C. V. (1992) FASEB J.6, Baltimore, D. (1994) Trends Biochem. Sci.19,
Francke, V., Fried, V. A., Ullrich, A., and 3065–3072 453–458
Williams, L. T. (1986) Nature (London)323, 443. Marcu, K. B., Bossone, S. A., and Patel, A. J. 474. Pei, D., Lorenz, U., Klingmüller, U., Neel, B.
226–232 (1992)Ann. Rev. Biochem.61, 809–860 G., and Walsh, C. T. (1994) Biochemistry33,
15483–15493

--- Page 590 ---

587
References
475. Ladbury, J. E., Hensmann, M., Panayotou, G., 485. Pause, A., Belsham, G. J., Gingras, A.-C., 495. Tyson, J. J., Novak, B., Odell, G. M., Chen, K.,
and Campbell, I. D. (1996) Biochemistry35, Donzé, O., Lin, T.-A., Lawrence, J. C., Jr., and and Thron, C. D. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21,
11062–11069 Sonenberg, N. (1994) Nature (London)371, 89–96
476. Maignan, S., Guilloteau, J.-P., Fromage, N., 762–767 496. Sherr, C. J. (1996) Science274, 1672–1677
Arnoux, B., Becquart, J., and Ducruix, A. 486. Proud, C. G. (1994) Nature (London)371, 747– 497. Hartwell, L. H., and Kastan, M. B. (1994)
(1995)Science268, 291–293 748 Science266, 1821–1828
477. Mikol, V., Baumann, G., Zurini, M. G. M., and 486a.Wartmann, M., Hofer, P., Turowski, P., Saltiel, 498. Hennig, M., Jansonius, J. N., Terwisscha van
Hommel, U. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.254, 86–95 A. R., and Hynes, N. E. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. Scheltinga, A. C., Dijkstra, B. W., and
478. Zhou, M.-M., Ravichandran, K. S., Olejniczak, 272, 3915–3923 Schlesier, B. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.254, 237–246
E. T., Petros, A. M., Meadows, R. P., Sattler, 486b.Weng, G., Bhalla, U. S., and Lyengar, R. (1999) 499. Elledge, S. J. (1996) Science274, 1664–1672
M., Harlan, J. E., Wade, W. S., Burakoff, S. J., Science284, 92–96 499a.Chin, L., Pomerantz, J., and DePinho, R. A.
and Fesik, S. W. (1995) Nature (London)378, 486c.Petosa, C., Masters, S. C., Bankston, L. A., (1998)Trends Biochem. Sci.23, 291–296
584–592 Pohl, J., Wang, B., Fu, H., and Liddington, R. 499b.Nead, M. A., Baglia, L. A., Antinore, M. J.,
479. Bonfini, L., Migliaccio, E., Pelicci, G., C. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 16305–16310 Ludlow, J. W., and McCance, D. J. (1998)
Lanfrancone, L., and Pelicci, P. G. (1996) 487. Cobb, M. H., and Goldsmith, E. J. (1995) J. EMBO J.17, 2342–2352
Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 257–261 Biol. Chem.270, 14843–14846 499c.Bakiri, L., Lallemand, D., Bossy-Wetzel, E.,
479a.Nantel, A., Mohammad-Ali, K., Sherk, J., 488. Inglese, J., Koch, W. J., Touhara, K., and and Yaniv, M. (2000) EMBO J.19, 2056–2068
Posner, B. I., and Thomas, D. Y. (1998) J. Biol. Lefkowitz, R. J. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 500. Kussie, P. H., Gorina, S., Marechal, V.,
Chem.273, 10475–10484 151–156 Elenbaas, B., Moreau, J., Levine, A. J., and
480. Burgering, B. M. T., and Bos, J. L. (1995) Trends 489. van Biesen, T., Hawes, B. E., Raymond, J. R., Pavletich, N. P. (1996) Science274, 948–953
Biochem. Sci.20, 18–22 Luttrell, L. M., Koch, W. J., and Lefkowitz, R. 501. Gorina, S., and Pavletich, N. P. (1996) Science
481. Pumiglia, K. M., LeVine, H., Haske, T., Habib, J. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 1266–1269 274, 1001–1005
T., Jove, R., and Decker, S. J. (1995) J. Biol. 490. Wu, J., Spiegel, S., and Sturgill, T. W. (1995) J. 502. Galaktionov, K., Chen, X., and Beach, D.
Chem.270, 14251–14254 Biol. Chem.270, 11484–11488 (1996)Nature (London)382, 511–517
482. Thompson, M. J., Roe, M. W., Malik, R. K., 491. Nurse, P. (2000) Science289, 1711–1716 503. Agarwal, M. L., Taylor, W. R., Chernov, M. V.,
and Blackshear, P. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 492. Edgar, B. A., and Lehner, C. F. (1996) Science Chernova, O. B., and Stark, G. R. (1998) J. Biol.
21127–21135 274, 1646–1652 Chem.273, 1–4
483. Jhun, B. H., Haruta, T., Meinkoth, J. L., 493. Kirschner, M. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 504. Carr, A. M. (2000) Science287, 1765–1766
Leitner, J. W., Draznin, B., Saltiel, A. R., Pang, 281–285 505. Hirao, A., Kong, Y.-Y., Matsuoka, S., Wake-
L., Sasaoka, T., and Olefsky, J. M. (1995) 494. Horne, M. C., Goolsby, G. L., Donaldson, K. ham, A., Ruland, J., Yoshida, H., Liu, D.,
Biochemistry34, 7996–8004 L., Tran, D., Neubauer, M., and Wahl, A. F. Elledge, S. J., and Mak, T. W. (2000) Science
484. Jacob, K. K., Ouyang, L., and Stanley, F. M. (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 6050–6061 287, 1824–1827
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 27773–27779 506. Gatti, A., Li, H.-H., Traugh, J. A., and Liu, X.
(2000)Biochemistry39, 9837–9842
Study Questions
1. Illustrated is a generalized metabolic pathway in Clarket al. (1973) Biochem. J.134, 589 – 597 found
which capital letters indicate major metabolites in maximal rates of catalytic activity for both enzymes
the pathway, small letters indicate cofactors and to be about 44 µ mol / min / g of fresh tissue. In
numbers indicate enzymes catalyzing the reac- flying bees glycolysis occurred at a rate of about 20
tions. µ mol / min / g of tissue with no substrate cycling.
In resting bees at 27°C no cycling was detected, but
A 1 B 2 C 3 D 4 E 5 F at 5°C substrate cycling occurred at the rate of 10.4
m n o p µ mol / min / g while glycolysis had slowed to 5.8 µ
mol / min / g. If the cycling provides heat to warm
List and describe four different ways in which the the insect, estimate how long it would take to reach
pathway might be regulated, referring to the 30°C if a cold (5°C) bee could carry out cycling at
specific enzymes, reactants, and cofactors indi- the maximum rate of 40 µ mol / min / g and if no
cated in the diagram. NOTE: Do not just refer to heat were lost to the surroundings.
four different reactions as possible sites of regula-
tion, but give four different general methods for 4. a) Compare the reaction cycle of a small GTPase
regulation. (G protein) that is regulated by the actions of
aGTPase-activating protein (GAP) and a
2. Describe the role of β-fructose-2,6-bisphosphate in guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)
the control of the further breakdown and resynthe- with that of a G protein linked to a receptor.
sis of glucose 1-phosphate. b) Some G proteins have been described as “timed
switches” and others as “triggered switches.”
3. It has been proposed that the substrate cycle In what ways might these two groups differ?
involving phosphofructokinase and fructose See Kjeldgaard et al. (1996) FASEB J.10, 1347–
bisphosphatase is used by bumblebees to warm 1368.
their flight muscles to 30°C before flight begins.

--- Page 591 ---

588 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
View of a modified bovine fibrinogen molecule. The 45-nm-long disulfide-
linked dimer is composed of three nonidentical polypeptide chains. The N
termini of the six chains from the two halves come together in the center in
a small globular “disulfide knot.” The C termini form globular domains at
the ends. The 340-kDa molecule has been treated with a lysine-specific
protease which has removed portions of two chains to give the ~ 285-kDa
molecule whose crystal structure is shown. Arrows point to attached
oligosaccharides. From Brown et al. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97,
85 – 90. Courtesy of Carolyn Cohen.
Contents
589 A. Factors Affecting Rates of a Displacement Reaction 658 E. The Adenylate Kinase Fold, the P Loop, and ATPases
590 B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded and GTPases
Carbon Atoms 659 F. Displacements on Sulfur Atoms
590 1. Inversion as a Criterion of Mechanism 660 G. Multiple Displacement Reactions and the Coupling
591 2. Transmethylation of ATP Cleavage to Endergonic Processes
592 3. Kinetic Isotope Effects 660 1. Transfer of Phospho, Pyrophospho, and Adenylyl
593 4. Glycosyltransferases Groups from ATP
593 Inversion or retention? 660 2. Acyl Phosphates
595 Double-displacement mechanisms 661 3. General Mechanism of Formation of Thioesters,
598 Carbocationic intermediates Esters, and Amides
599 5. Lysozymes and Chitinases 662 4. Coenzyme A Transferases
599 Catalytic side chain groups
600 Kinetic isotope effect for lysozyme 663 References
601 Does lysozyme distort its substrate? 674 Study Questions
601 Help from a neighboring group
602 6. Cellulases and Other β-Glycosidases Boxes
604 7. Glycogen Phosphorylase 594 Box 12-A Carboxymethylation of Proteins
605 8. Starch-Hydrolyzing Enzymes 596 Box 12-B Arsenic
608 C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 622 Box 12-C Synthetic Protease Inhibitors
609 1. The Serine Proteases 630 Box 12-D Molecular Mousetraps
609 Serine as a nucleophile 636 Box 12-E Insecticides
610 Acyl-enzyme intermediates 658 Box 12-F The Toxicity of Aluminum
611 Three-dimensional structures
613 The catalytic cycle Tables
614 The catalytic triad 603 Table 12-1 Acidic and Basic Catalytic Groups in
614 The “oxyanion hole” a Few Glycosyltransferases
616 Stereoelectronic considerations
616 pH dependence
616 Substrate specificity
618 2. The Cysteine Proteases (Thiol Proteases)
620 3. N-Terminal Nucleophile Hydrolases and
Related Enzymes
621 4. The Aspartic Proteases
625 5. Metalloproteases
627 6. ATP-Dependent Proteases
628 7. The Many Functions of Proteases
629 8. Protease Inhibitors of Animals and Plants
631 9. Coagulation of Blood
634 10.Esterases and Lipases
637 11.Other Acyltransferases
637 D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom
638 1. Questions about Mechanisms
638 Geometric complexities
639 Metaphosphate ions
639 Coping with negative charges
639 2. Magnetic Resonance Studies
642 3. Stereochemistry
645 4. Phosphatases
647 5. Ribonucleases
649 6. Ribonuclease P, Ribozymes, and Peptidyl
Transferase
652 7. Deoxyribonucleases
653 8. Mutases
654 9. Molecular Properties of Kinases
657 10. Nucleotidyl Transferases

--- Page 592 ---

589
12
Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
The majority of enzymes that are apt to be men-
A. Factors Affecting Rates of a Displacement
tioned in any discussion of metabolism catalyze nucleo-
Reaction
philic displacement reactions (Type 1, Table 10-1). These
include most of the reactions by which the energy of
In Chapter 9, the displacement of an iodide ion
ATP cleavage is harnessed and by which polymers are
from methyl iodide by a hydroxide ion (Eq. 9-76) was
assembled from monomers. They include reactions
considered. Can we similarly displace a methyl group
by which pieces, large or small, are transferred onto
from ethane, CH – CH , to break the C – C bond and
or off of polymers as well as the reactions by which 3 3
form CH OH? The answer is no. Ethane is perfectly
polymers are cleaved into pieces.1–3d 3
stable in sodium hydroxide and is not cleaved by a
In these reactions a nucleophilic group (a base),
simple displacement process within our bodies. Like-
designated B– in Table 10-1, approaches an electrophilic
wise, long hydrocarbon chains such as those in the
center, often an electron-deficient carbon or phosphorus
fatty acids cannot be broken by a corresponding process
atom. It forms a bond with this atom, at the same time
during metabolism of fatty acids. Not every structure
displacing some other atom, usually O, N, S, or C. The
will allow a nucleophilic displacement reaction to
displaced atom leaves with its bonding electron pair
occur and not every anion or neutral base can act to
and with whatever other chemical group is attached,
displace another group.
the entire unit being called the leaving group. This is
At least four factors affect the likelihood of a displace-
designated YH in Table 10-1. Simultaneous or subse-
ment reaction:1– 3d
quent donation of a proton from an acidic group of the
(1)The position of the equilibrium in the overall reaction.
enzyme, or from water, to the O, N, or S atom of the
An example is provided by the hydrolases that catalyze
leaving group is usually required to complete the
cleavage of amide, ester, and phosphodiester linkages
reaction. The entering base B, which may or may not
using water as the entering nucleophile. Because
carry a negative charge, must often be generated by
enzymes usually act in an environment of high water
enzyme-catalyzed removal of a proton from the conju-
content, the equilibrium almost always favors hydro-
gate acid BH. If BH is water, the enzyme is a hydrolase;
lysis rather than the reverse reactions of synthesis.
otherwise, it is called a transferase.
However, in a nonaqueous solvent the same enzyme
For purposes of classifying the reactions of metab-
will catalyze synthetic reactions.
olism, in this book the nucleophilic displacements are
(2)The reactivity of the entering nucleophile. Nucleo-
grouped into four subtypes (Table 10-1). These are
philic reactivity or nucleophilicity is partly deter-
displacements on (A) a saturated carbon atom, often
mined by basicity. Compounds that are strong bases
from a methyl group or a glycosyl group; (B) a carbonyl
tend to react more rapidly in nonenzymatic displace-
group of an ester, thioester, or amide; (C) a phospho
ment reactions than do weaker bases; the hydroxyl ion,
group; or (D) a sulfur atom. In addition, many enzymes
HO–, is a better nucleophile than – COO –. However,
employ in sequence a displacement on a carbon atom
enzymes usually act optimally near a neutral pH.
followed by a second displacement on a phosphorus
Under these conditions the – COO – group may be
atom (or vice versa).

--- Page 593 ---

590 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
more reactive than strongly basic groups such as – NH is catalyzed by the haloacid dehalogenases of soil
2
or HO – because at pH 7 the latter groups will be almost pseudomonads (Eq. 12-1).6– 8 Even the poor leaving
completely protonated and the active nucleophile will group F – can be displaced by OH – in the active site of
be present in low concentrations. these enzymes.
A second factor affecting nucleophilic reactivity is
polarizability, which is the ease with which the elec- HO– + F – CH COO– → HO – CH – COO – + F –
2 2
tronic distribution around an atom or within a chemi- (12-1)
cal group can be distorted. A large atomic radius and
the presence of double bonds in a group both tend to
increase polarizability. In most cases, the more highly 1. Inversion as a Criterion of Mechanism
polarizable a group, the more rapidly it will react in a
nucleophilic displacement, apparently because a polar- An interesting result was obtained when a haloacid
izable group is able to form a partial bond at a greater dehalogenase was tested with a substrate containing a
distance than can a nonpolarizable group. Thus, I – is chiral center.6 Reaction of L-2-chloropropionate with
more reactive than Br –, which is more reactive than Cl –. hydroxyl ion gave only D-lactate, a compound with a
Polarizable bases such as imidazole are often much chirality opposite to that of the reactant. A plausible
more reactive than nonpolarizable ones such as – NH . explanation is that the hydroxyl ion attacks the central
2
Sulfur compounds also tend to have a high nucleo- carbon from behind the chlorine atom (Eq. 12-2). The
philic reactivity. In displacement reactions on carbonyl resulting five-bonded transition state (center) loses a
groups (reaction type 1B), the less polarizable “hard” chloride ion to form the product D-lactate in which
nucleophiles are more reactive than polarizable ones inversion of configuration has occurred. Inversion
such as I –. Attempts have been made to relate quanti- always accompanies single displacement reactions in which
tatively nucleophilic reactivity to basicity plus polariz- bond breaking and bond formation occur synchronously, as
ability.1 in Eq. 12-2. This is true for both enzymatic and nonen-
Certain chemical groups, e.g., those in which an zymatic reactions. However, the occurrence of inver-
atom with unpaired electrons is directly bonded to sion does not rule out more complex mechanisms.
the nucleophilic center undergoing reaction, are more Indeed, in this case the displacing group is evidently
reactive than others of similar basicity. This (cid:1) effect not HO – but a carboxylate group from the enzyme.
has been invoked to explain the high reactivity of the
poisons hydroxylamine (NH OH) and cyanide ion4
2
and other puzzling results.1
(3)The chemical nature of the leaving group that is – OOC COO– –
displaced. The chemistry of the leaving group affects
both the rate and the equilibrium position in nucleo- HO – C Cl HO C Cl
H
philic displacements. The leaving group must accom- H3C H CH
3
modate a pair of electrons and often must bear a
l-2-Chloropropionate
negative charge. A methyl group displaced from
ethane or methane as CH – would be an extremely Transition state
3
poor leaving group; the pK of methane as an acid5
a
has been estimated as 47. Iodide ion is a good leaving COO – Cl –
group, but F – is over 104 times poorer.5 In an aqueous
medium, phosphate is a much better leaving group HO C
than OH –, and pyrophosphate and tripolyphosphate CH3
H
are even better. d-Lactate
(4)Special structural features present in the substrate. O
Enzymes are usually constructed so that they recognize
HO in above structures is replaced by Enzyme C
unique features in substrates. As a consequence, they in haloacid dehalogenases
O
have many ways of lowering the energy of the transi-
tion state and increasing the apparent nucleophilic (12-2)
reactivity.
In one of the haloacid dehalogenases, a 232-residue
B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly protein for which the three-dimensional structure is
Bonded Carbon Atoms known,8,9 Asp 10 is in a position to carry out the initial
attack which would give an enzyme-bound intermedi-
The enzymatic counterpart of Eq. 9-76, the dis- ate with an ester linkage:
placement of I – from a saturated carbon atom by HO –,

--- Page 594 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 591
O
2. Transmethylation
–
COO
C
Asp 10 CH2 O C Nucleophilic attack on a methyl group or other
H
OH2 CH3 alkyl group occurs most readily if the carbon is attached
to an atom bearing a positive charge, for example, the
sulfur atom of a sulfonium ion such as that present in
Hydrolytic cleavage, as indicated in the diagram, yields
S-adenosylmethionine(abbreviated AdoMet or SAM).
the product D-lactate.7 Thus, we have a direct displace-
The ensuing transmethylation reaction results in the
ment with inversion followed by an additional hydro-
transfer of the methyl group from the sulfur to the
lytic step. This is an example of covalent catalysis,
attacking nucleophile (Eq. 12-3). Transmethylation is
the enzyme providing a well-oriented reactive group
an important metabolic process by which various
instead of generating a hydroxyl group from a bound
oxygen, nitrogen, and other atoms at precise positions
water molecule.
in proteins, nucleic acids, phospholipids, and other
Relatedhaloalkane dehalogenases as well as
small molecules are methylated.17 The methyl group
epoxide hydrolases and a large superfamily of other
donor is usually S-adenosylmethionine. This com-
enzymes utilize similar mechanisms.10,11,11a In the pound has two chiral centers, one at the α-carbon of
active site of a haloalkane dehalogenase from Xantho-
the amino acid and one at the sulfur atom, with an
bacter (Fig. 12-1) the carboxylate of Asp 124 acts as the
unshared electron pair serving as the fourth group
attacking nucleophile that displaces Cl– from the
around the S atom. In the naturally occurring Ado-
substrate dichloroethane, which is held in a small
Met both centers have the S configuration.18 The
cavity with the aid of two tryptophan indole rings.12– 14
reaction of Eq. 12-3, which is catalyzed by catechol
However, the histidine–aspartate pair and the bound
O-methyltransferase (COMT), inactivates the neuro-
water molecule shown in Fig. 12-1 are essential for the
transmitters adrenaline, dopamine, and related com-
subsequent hydrolysis of the intermediate ester. (see
pounds by methylation. When the substrate contains
also Fig. 12-11).15 The substrate shown in Fig. 12-1 is
a chiral methyl group (– C1H2H3H; see also Chapter 13),
1,2-dichloroethane, a widespread environmental pol-
the inversion of the methyl group expected for a simple
lutant that is not known to occur naturally. An inter-
S 2-like reaction is observed.19
esting question considered by Pries et al.16 is how this N
Structural features similar to those of COMT20 are
dehalogenase has evolved in the years since 1922
found in glycine N-methyltransferase21 and guanidino-
when industrial production of dichloroethane began.
acetate methyltransferase22 from liver, and transferases
that place methyl groups on N-6 of
adenine23– 25a and N-4 of cytosine or
on C-5 of cytosine26 in nucleic acids.27
A stereoscopic view of the active site
of glycine N-methyltransferase is
W175 shown in Fig. 12-2. An acetate ion
N present in the active site in the crystal
has been converted into glycine by
H
computer-assisted modeling. The
Cl Cl
amino group of the bound glycine
is adjacent to the methyl group of
H
AdoMet. A nearby glutamic acid
– N side chain (E15) may have removed
O
a proton from the glycine dipolar
O
ion to create the free – NH group
H 2
O O – H N N O H W125 r a e m qu a i g r n ed es f i o u r m th M e g re 2 a + c i t o i n o n b . i n In d s C t O o M th T e
H N two aromatic hydroxyl groups of
the substrate and helps to hold it
D124 correctly in the active site.28–29a
O
D260
H289 In the case of the more difficult
C-methylation of uracil 54 in transfer
RNA, an – SH group from Cys 324
Figure 12-1 The active site structure of haloalkane dehalogenase from
Xanthobacter autotrophicus with a molecule of bound dichloroethane. See of the methyltransferase adds to the
Prieset al.13 The arrows illustrate the initial nucleophilic displacement. The C-6 position of U54 of the substrate,
D260– H289 pair is essential for the subsequent hydrolysis of the intermedi- which may be any of the E. coli
ate ester formed in the initial step. tRNAs (Eq. 12-4, step a) .30 In the

--- Page 595 ---

592 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
HO of certain proteins regulates motion of bacterial flagella
H (Chapter 19) and other aspects of metabolism31 while
OH
methylation of isomerized aspartyl residues is part of
+
H3N a protein repair process (Box 12-A). Methyl groups are
H
O
H
NH3 + u
so
s
m
ua
e
l
t
l
i
y
m
t
e
ra
s
n
fr
s
o
fe
m
rr e
a
d
f o
f
l
r
i
o
c
m
ac
S
id
-a
d
d
e
e
r
n
i
o
v
s
a
y
ti
l
v
m
e
e
(
t
C
h
h
io
a
n
p
i
t
n
e
e
r
,
1
b
5
u
)
t
Adrenaline COO– or from a cobalt atom of a corrin ring (Chapter 16).
1H :
C S
+
3. Kinetic Isotope Effects
2H Adenine
3H
O
An S –12C bond breaks a little faster than an S –13C
bond in a nucleophilic displacement reaction. This
COMT primary kinetic isotope effect (KIE)3a,3b,31a–d is
H+
OH OH usually discussed first for breakage of a C – H bond.
S-Adenosylmethionine In a linear transition state, in which the C – H bond is
(AdoMet or SAM)
being stretched, then cleaved, the difference between
HO the transition state barrier for a C –1H bond and a C –2H
H
OH
H
NH3 + bond is thought to arise principally from a difference
+ in the energies of the C – H stretching vibration.3a This
H3N COO–
vibrational energy, in the ground state of a molecule
O (the zero-point energy) is equal to 1/ 2 hν where ν
0 0
S may be observed in the infrared absorption spectrum
CH3
(inactive) Adenine (see Fig. 23-2). For a C –2H bond, with a stretching
O vibration at a wave number of ~ 2900 cm–1, the zero
point energy is about + 17.4 kJ mol–1. For a C –2H bond,
with a stretching wave number of ~ 2200 cm–1, it is
about + 17.4 kJ mol–1. This difference is a result of the
OH OH
difference in mass of 1H (1.67 x 10–24 g) and 2H (2.34 x
S-Adenosylhomocysteine
10–24 g). The isotope effect arises because the vibration
(12-3)
occurs along the axis of the bond being broken, and
the vibrational energy is converted into translational
adduct carbon atom C-5 acquires substantial nucleo- motion along the reaction coordinate, in effect lower-
philic character which permits the transfer of the ing the transition state barrier by ∆G0‡. The difference
methyl group in step b. The adduct breaks up (step c) in this effect between 1H and 2H (∆∆G0‡) gives the ratio
and the product is released. of expected rate constants as follows:
Methylation of nucleic acids is considered further
in Chapers 27 and 28. Methylation of carboxyl groups kC–H =e–∆∆G0±
/RT= 7
kC–D
O O– For heavier nuclei, such as C, N, O the kinetic
isotope effect is much smaller.
+
H3C S When13C was introduced into the methyl
HN 5 a HN
AdoMet group of S-adenosylmethionine and its rate
6 H of reaction with catechol O-methyltransfer-
–
O N S-Enzyme O N S-Enzyme ase was compared with that of the normal
12C-containing substrate, the expected effect
tRNA tRNA
onV , expressed as a first-order rate constant,
max
b was seen: k /k = 1.09 ± 0.05. This effect is
12 13
small but it can be measured reliably and
establishes that the methyl transfer step rather
O O
CH3 than substrate binding, product release, or a
H 5 CH3 conformational change in the protein is rate
HN c HN limiting.32
H Substitution of 1H by 2H in the CH
3
O N
S-Enzyme
O N m5U group has a larger effect. This secondary
kinetic isotope effect (or α-deuterium
tRNA tRNA (12-4)

--- Page 596 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 593
Fig. 12-2 S-Adenosylmethionine
(AdoMet, solid bonds) bound in
the active site of glycine N-methyl-
transferase together with an acetate
ion bound in the glycine site. Gly-
cine was built by attaching an
amino group (open bond) to the
acetate (solid bonds). Possible
polar interactions (O – O and O – N
< 0.31 nm and O – S < 0.4 nm) are
indicated by dotted lines. Tyrosine
residues located at the inner surface
of the active site are also shown.
From Fu et al.21
effect) arises because of small differences in the vibra- glycosylhydrolases that act on polysaccharides:
tional energies of the methyl group resulting from the Endoglycanases cut at random locations within the
differences in mass of 1H and 2H. It often leads to a chains of sugar units, while exoglycanases cut only
more rapid reaction for the 1H-containing substrates. at one end or another, usually at the nonreducing
In a model nonenzymatic displacement reaction of a end. Inverting enzymes invert the configuration at
similar type32 the ratio of rate constants was k /k = the anomeric carbon atom which they attack, while
1.17± 0.02. However, for COMT an inverse α- 1 d H eu 2 te H ri- retaining enzymes do not. Although simple glyco-
um effect was seen: k / k = 0.83 ± 0.05. Theo- sides undergo acid-catalyzed hydrolysis readily, un-
(C 1 H3) (C 2 H3)
retical calculations suggested that such an effect might catalyzed hydrolysis is extremely slow, the estimated
be observed if the enzyme compresses an S 2-like first order rate constant37 at 25°C being about 2 x 10–15
N
transition state, shortening the bonds from the central s–1. Polysaccharides may be the most stable of all
carbon atom to both the oxygen atom of the entering bioploymers.
nucleophile and the sulfur atom of the leaving Glycosyltransferases are numerous. For example,
group.33,34 However, more recent calculations suggest the amino acid sequences for about 500 glucosidases,
that it is difficult to draw such conclusions from sec- which hydrolyze linkages between glucose residues,
ondary isotope effects.35,36 Calculations by Zheng, have been determined and this one group of enzymes
Kahn, and Bruice predict that in the gas phase the two has been classified into over 60 families38,39 and eight
substrates, upon collision, will react with a very low larger groups.40 Many three-dimensional structures
energy barrier.29,29a For this enzyme, as for the haloal- have been reported and numerous studies of the reac-
kane dehalogenase (Fig. 12-1), it has been concluded tion mechanism for both enzymatic and nonenzymatic
that the enzyme excludes water from the active site hydrolysis of glycosides have been conducted. Most
and binds the two substrates very close together and of the experimental results have been carefully verified.
in a correct orientation for reaction. The computations Nevertheless, they serve to illustrate how difficult it is
predicted secondary isotope effects for the enzymatic to understand how enzymes catalyze this simple type
reaction similar to those measured by Hegazi et al.32 of reaction.41
suggesting that the transition states for the enzymatic
reactions closely resemble those for the gas phase. Inversion or retention? Equation 12-5 pictures
the reaction of a glycoside (such as a glucose unit at
4. Glycosyltransferases OH
Y
The polarization of a single C – O bond in an ether HO
O –O
is quantitatively much less than that of the C – S + bond HO H
α
ofS-adenosylmethionine, and simple ethers are not OH HO–R
O
readily cleaved by displacement reactions. However, R OH
glycosides, which contain a carbon atom attached to two BH
oxygen atoms, do undergo displacement reactions which HO O Y
lead to hydrolysis,phosphorolysis, or glycosyl
HO O
exchange. The corresponding enzymes are glycosyl- β
OH
hydrolases, phosphorylases, and glycosyltransferases. H
Two characteristics are commonly used to classify B – (12-5)

--- Page 597 ---

594 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
BOX 12-A CARBOXYMETHYLATION OF PROTEINS
Methylation and demethylation of the O
carboxyl groups of the side chains of specific H+
C
glutamyl residues play a role in bacterial
O H2C NH2 O
chemotaxis (Chapter 19, Section A). How- H
H
ever, similar functions in eukaryotes have C C N C
not been found. There is a specific methyl- N C CH2 N
H H
transferase that methylates C-terminal
O
carboxyl groups on prenylated and some- Asn-Gly in a peptide COO– P ra a c r e t m ial i l z y ed
times palmitoylated peptides.a Another
O H2C
type of carboxylmethyltransferase acts on H
a H
only a small percentage of many proteins C C N CH2
HN N C
and forms labile methyl esters. These 3
H
methyltransferases have a dual specificity,
O
acting on l-isospartyl residues and usually c Asp-Gly peptide
also on d-aspartyl residues. Both of these O
amino acids can arise from deamidation of H2C C H 2 O
asparagine, especially in Asn-Gly sequences H AdoMet
C N f (ond-aspartyl
(Eq. 2-24 and steps a and b of following N CH2 peptides)
scheme).b– g A similar isomerization of H C CH 3 OH
aspartyl residues occurs more slowly. Asn- O
Gly sequences are present in many proteins Cyclic imide e O
and provide weak linkages whose isomer- H2C C
ization is an inevitable aspect of aging.e,h HO
Furthermore, the α proton of the cyclic imide 2 b N H C N H CH2
(green box) is more readily dissociated than d H C O
in a standard peptide, leading to racemiza- AdoMet,
O l-Isoaspartyl/ O
tion (step c). The isoaspartyl and D-aspartyl d-aspartyl protein CH2
residues provide kinks in the peptide chain H2C C methyltransferase
which may interfere with normal function N C N CH2
H H
and turnover.
H
COO–
TheL-isoaspartyl / D-aspartyl methyl- Partially
transferase (step d), which is especially racemized
abundant in the brain,i,j provides for partial
repair of these defects.k– o The methyl esters
of isoaspartyl residues readily undergo
demethylation with a return to a cyclic imide (step e). e Paranandi, M. V., Guzzetta, A. W., Hancock, W. S., and Aswad,
The cyclic imide is opened hydrolytically (step c) in D. W. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 243 – 253
f Donato, A. D., Ciardiello, M. A., de Nigris, M., Piccoli, R.,
part to an isoaspartyl residue, but in part to a normal
Mazzarella, L., and D’Alessio, G. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 4745 –
aspartyl form. The combined action of the carboxyl-
4751
methyltransferase and the demethylation reaction g Tomizawa, H., Yamada, H., Ueda, T., and Imoto, T. (1994)
tends to repair the isomerized linkages. Methylation Biochemistry33, 8770 – 8774
h Man, E. H., Sandhouse, M. E., Burg, J., and Fisher, G. H. (1983)
ofD- aspartyl residues returns them to the cyclic imide
Science220, 1407– 1408
(stepsf,e), allowing them to also return to the normal i Orpiszewski, J., and Aswad, D. W. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
L configuration. Nevertheless, the protein will have 22965– 22968
a different net charge than it did originally and must j Najbauer, J., Orpiszewski, J., and Aswad, D. W. (1996) Biochem-
istry35, 5183 – 5190
be considered a new modified form.
k Johnson, B. A., Murray, E. D. J., Clarke, S., Glass, D. B., and
Aswad, D. W. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 5622 – 5629
a Dai, Q., Choy, E., Chiu, V., Romano, J., Slivka, S. R., Steitz, S. A., l Brennan, T. V., Anderson, J. W., Jia, Z., Waygood, E. B., and
Michaelis, S., and Philips, M. R. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 15030 – Clarke, S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 24586 – 24595
15034 mMudgett, M. B., and Clarke, S. (1993) Biochemistry32, 11100 –
b Geiger, T., and Clarke, S. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 785 – 794 11111
c Tyler-Cross, R., and Schirch, V. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 22549 – n Mudgett, M. B., and Clarke, S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 25605 –
22556 25612
d Brennan, T. V., and Clarke, S. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 331– 338 o Aswad, D. W., ed. (1995) Deamidation and Isoaspartate Formation
in Peptides and Proteins, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida

--- Page 598 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 595
the end of a starch chain) with a nucleophile Y – O – as Four kinds of experiments were used to identify
the displacing group. An enzyme-bound acidic group this double-displacement mechanism.
– BH is shown assisting the process. Inversion of (1) Kinetics. In a double-displacement mechanism
configuration with formation of a product of the β the enzyme shuttles between free enzyme and the inter-
configuration at the anomeric carbon atom would be mediate carrying the substrate fragment (here, the
predicted and is observed for many of these enzymes. glycosyl enzyme). With sucrose phosphorylase the
However, many others do not cause inversion.41,42 maximum velocity varies with the concentrations of
An example is the reaction catalyzed by sucrose sucrose and HPO 2– in the characteristic fashion ex-
4
phosphorylase from Pseudomonas saccharophila: pected for this “ping-pong” mechanism (Eq. 9-47).43
(2) Exchange reactions. In a double-displacement
Sucrose (an α-glucoside of fructose) + mechanism sucrose containing 14C in the fructose por-
inorganic phosphate (P)→ tion of the molecule should react with free enzyme E
i
α-D-glucose 1-phosphate + fructose to form glycosyl enzyme and free radioactive fructose
(12-6) (Eq. 12-8). The 14C-containing groups are designated
here by the asterisks.
Two possible explanations for the lack of inversion
during this reaction are that the enzyme acts by a
d-Glucosyl-fructose* + E glucosyl-E + fructose*
double-displacement reaction or through a stabilized
(Sucrose)
carbocationic intermediate. Let us consider these (12-8)
possibilities in turn.
If a very low molar concentration of enzyme is present,
Double-displacement mechanisms. In a double- and a large excess of nonradioactive fructose is added,
displacement mechanism sucrose phosphorylase would the enzyme will catalyze no net reaction but will
catalyze two consecutive single displacements, each change back and forth repeatedly between the free
with inversion. A nucleophilic group of the enzyme enzyme and glucosyl enzyme. Each time, in the reverse
would react in Eq. 12-7, step a. In step b,a phosphate reaction, it will make use primarily of unlabeled fruc-
would react to regenerate the enzyme with its free tose. The net effect will be catalysis of a sucrose–fructose
nucleophilic group –B–. exchange:
Sucrose* + fructose sucrose + fructose*
–B-Enzyme
(12-9)
OH
O
HOCH2 H O This exchange reaction, as well as other predicted
α exchanges, has been observed.44 Although the exchange
HO
2
HO OH O CH2OH criterion of the mechanism is often applied to enzy-
HO matic processes, the observation of exchange reactions
OH
H+
does not prove the existence of a covalently bound
a intermediate. Furthermore, enzymes using double-
Fructose displacement mechanisms may not always catalyze
the expected exchanges.
HOCH2 O B-Enzyme (3) Arsenolysis. Sucrose phosphorylase also cata-
β lyzes the cleavage of sucrose by arsenate and promotes
HO O H a rapid cleavage (arsenolysis) of glucose 1-phosphate
HO H to free glucose. This reaction is evidently a result of a
–O OH
Gycosyl enzyme displacement by arsenate on a glycosyl enzyme inter-
P
O O– mediate. The resulting unstable glucose 1-arsenate
(see Box 12-B) is hydrolyzed rapidly. Arsenolysis is a
b
general way of trapping reactive enzyme-bound inter-
–B-Enzyme
mediates that normally react with phosphate groups.
O
HOCH2 H Arsenate is one of many substrate analogs that can
α be used to siphon off reactive enzyme-bound inter-
HO OH
OPO3H–
mediates into nonproductive side paths.
HO (4) Identification of glycosyl-enzyme intermediates.
Glucose 6-P (12-7)
Studies with pure enzymes often make it possible to
confirm directly the existence of enzyme-bound inter-
mediates. The intermediates detected are frequently
glycosyl esters of glutamate or aspartate side chain

--- Page 599 ---

596 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
BOX 12-B ARSENIC
Arsenate, AsO 3–, is chemically similar to phos- lipoic acid (Chapter 15), arsenite causes the accumu-
4
phate in size and geometry and in its ability to enter lation of pyruvate and of other 2-oxo acids. Similar
into biochemical reactions. However, arsenate esters chemistry underlies the action of the mustard gas
are far less stable than phosphate esters. If formed Lewisite, which also attacks lipoic acid.de
in the active site of an enzyme, they are quickly Many, perhaps all, organisms have enzyme
hydrolyzed upon dissociation from the enzyme. systems for protection against arsenic compounds.
This fact accounts for some of the toxicity of arsenic
compounds.a
COOH
Arsenate will replace phosphate in all phospho-
rolytic reactions, e.g., in the cleavage of glycogen
by glycogen phosphorylase, of sucrose by sucrose SH SH
phosphorylase, and in the action of purine nucleo- Lipoic acid
side phosphorylase.b Glucose 1-arsenate or ribose- HASO–
2 3
+
1-arsenate is presumably a transient intermediate H
which is hydrolyzed to glucose. The overall process
2H O
2
is called arsenolysis. Another reaction in which COOH
arsenate can replace phosphate is the oxidation of
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate in the presence of P
i S S
to form 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate:
As
O O OH
O
–
P CH2 C P O
– O – O O C O OH I d n ox E i . n c - o a l n i a d r N se A n D at H e - i d s e r p ed en u d c e e n d t t s o y s a t r e s m en .e i – t e g b T y h e a a g r l s u e t n a i r t e e -
H OH This phospho group is normally as well as antimonite and tellurite are pumped out
1,3-Biphosphoglycerate transferred to ADP to form ATP by an ATP-dependent transporter. The genes for
reductase, periplasmic-binding protein, and trans-
The subsequent transfer of the 1-phospho group to porter components are encoded in a conjugative plas-
ADP is an important energy-yielding step in metab- mid.h,i A quite similar system functions in yeast.j
olism (Chapter 12). When arsenate substitutes for Marine algae as well as some higher aquatic
phosphate the acyl arsenate (1-arseno-3-phospho- plants detoxify and excrete arsenate by conversion
glycerate) is hydrolyzed to 3-phosphoglycerate. to various water-soluble organic forms such as
As a consequence, in the presence of arsenate oxida- trimethyarsonium lactic acid (Chapter 8) and the
tion of 3-phosphoglyceraldehyde continues but following ribofuranoside.a
ATP synthesis ceases. Arsenate is said to uncouple
phosphorylation from oxidation. Arsenate can also
CH3 CH3 –
partially replace phosphate in stimulating the respira- CH2 CH2 SO3
tion of mitochondria and is an uncoupler of oxida- +As CH2 O C
– O
tive phosphorylation (Chapter 18). Enzymes that O H OH
normally act on a phosphorylated substrate will
usually catalyze a slow reaction of the correspond-
ing unphosphorylated substrate in the presence of OH OH
arsenate. Apparently, the arsenate ester of the sub- 2-Hydroxy-3-sulfopropyl-5-deoxy-5-
strate forms transiently on the enzyme surface, (dimethylarseno)-ribofuranoside
permitting the reaction to occur.
Arsenic-containing phospholipids are also formed
CHCl (Chapter 8).k
Lewisite Arsenic is present at high levels in some soils
HC
AsCl and contamination of drinking water with arsenic is
2
a major problem is some areas of the world. In West
Arsenite is noted for its tendency to react rapidly Bengal, India, millions of people drink contaminated
with thiol groups,c especially with pairs of adjacent well water. As a result hundreds of thousands have
(vicinal) or closely spaced – SH groupsd as in lipoic developed debilitating nodular keratoses on their
acid. By blocking oxidative enzymes requiring feet.l,m The problem is made worse by the increasing

--- Page 600 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 597
BOX 12-B (continued)
use of fresh water for irrigation and the difficulty of have specific arsenicals been created as drugs. In
removing arsenic contamination. 1905, it was discovered that sodium arsanilate is
Although it is most known for its toxicity, arsenic toxic to trypanosomes. The development by P.
may be an essential nutrient. Data from feeding of Ehrlich of arsenicals for the treatment of syphilis
chicks, goats, rats, and miniature pigs suggest a (in 1909) first focused attention on the possibility of
probable human need for arsenic of ~12 µg / day.n effective chemotherapy against bacterial infections.
Compounds of arsenic have been used in medi-
cine for over 2000 years, but only in the past century a Knowles, F. C., and Benson, A. A. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8,
178–180
b Kline, P. C., and Schramm, V. L. (1995) Biochemistry34, 1153–
O 1162
c Lam, W.-C., Tsao, D. H. H., Maki, A. H., Maegley, K. A., and
H2N As OH
Reich, N. O. (1992) Biochemistry31, 10438–10442
Substitution by
—CH2CONH2 yields O – Na + d Li, J., and Pickart, C. M. (1995) Biochemistry34, 15829–15837
“tryparsamide,” a Sodium arsanilate deOrd, M. G., and Stocken, L. A. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25,
more effective anti- 253–256
trypanosome drug e Silver, S., Nucifora, G., Chu, L., and Misra, T. K. (1989) Trends
Biochem. Sci.14, 76–80
HO As O f Ji, G., Garber, E. A. E., Armes, L. G., Chen, C.-M., Fuchs, J. A.,
and Silver, S. (1994) Biochemistry33, 7294–7299
g Rosen, B. P., Weigel, U., Karkaria, C., and Gangola, P. (1988) J.
Biol. Chem.263, 3067–3070
Two of Ehrlich's H2N
h Gladysheva, T. B., Oden, K. L., and Rosen, B. P. (1994) Biochem-
anti-syphilis drugs
Oxophenarsine istry33, 7288–7293
i Chen, Y., and Rosen, B. P. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 14257–14262
H2N NH2 j Wysocki, R., Bobrowicz, P., and Ulaszewski, S. (1997) J. Biol.
Chem.272, 30061–30066
k Cooney, R. V., Mumma, R. O., and Benson, A. A. (1978) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.75, 4262–4264
HO As As OH 2HCl l Bagla, P., and Kaiser, J. (1996) Science274, 174–175
mSaha, D. P., and Subramanian, K. S. (1996) Science274, 1287–
1288
Salvarsan
n Nielsen, F. H. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2661–2667
carboxyl groups. Such an intermediate, fructofuranosyl- A convenient way to form and identify covalently
enzyme, was identified tentatively for sucrose phospho- linked glucosyl-enzyme intermediates, developed by
rylase and also for a related levan sucrase.45 Recently, Withers and coworkers, employs enzyme-activated
identification of glycosyl-enzyme intermediates has been inhibitors such as 2-deoxy-2-fluoroglycosyl fluorides
accomplished for many other glycosyltransferases. (Eq. 12-10).42,47,48 The 2-F substituent greatly decreases
Among these are human pancreatic and salivary both the rate of formation of a glycosyl-enzyme and its
α-amylases,42,46α-glucosidases, and some cellulases rate of breakdown by hydrolysis or transglycosylation.
and xylanases. This may be in part because these compounds lack the
2– OH group which helps to stabilize, by hydrogen
bonding, the complexes of normal substrates. A second
O
HO
factor is the high electronegativity of – F versus – OH,
CH2
O O C CH2 Protein which leads to significant loss of stability for a transi-
β (Glu or Asp) tion state in which the anomeric carbon atom carries a
HO
CH2OH significant amount of positive charge (see next section).
Having a good leaving group, such as fluorine or 2,4-
OH
dinitrophenyl, the compounds react rapidly to give
Fructofuranosyl - enzyme
stable glucosyl-enzymes which can be characterized.
In the example shown in Eq. 12-10, the mannosyl-
For these hydrolytic enzymes the glycosyl-enzyme enzyme was identified by the chemical shifts and line-
would be attacked by a hydroxyl ion derived from widths of the 19F resonances of the intermediates and
H O, whose deprotonation would presumably be the anomeric configuration was established. More
2
assisted by the conjugate base (—B: in Eq. 12-5) of recently, mass spectrometry has been used.49 For
the catalytic acidic group. example, a maltotriosyl-enzyme intermediate in the

--- Page 601 ---

598 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
action of glycogen-debranching enzyme was identified in the symbols S 1 and S 2 refer to the order or mole-
N N
by separation of an active site peptide by HPLC fol- cularity of the reaction. It is better to speak of S 1-like
N
lowed by mass spectrometry (Chapter 3).50 or S 2-like reactions.
N
The carbocation in Eq. 12-11 is depicted as a
resonance hybrid of two forms. One of these is an
HOH2C oxocarbenium (or oxonium) ion which contains a
HO O double bond between carbon and oxygen.50a This
F F
HO double-bonded structure can be visualized as arising
β
from the original structure by an internal displacement
H or elimination by the unshared electrons on oxygen, as
2-Deoxy-2-F-β-d-mannosyl fluoride indicated by the small arrows. In the oxocarbenium
ion, the ring atoms C-2, C-1, and C-5 and the oxygen
Enzyme Y–
atom are almost coplanar and the ring conformation
F– is described as half-chair or sofa. As pointed out in
Chapter 9, the theory of stereoelectronic control pre-
HOH2C
O dicts that elimination of the group – OR of Eq. 12-11
HO 4
should occur most easily if a lone pair of electrons on
HO H the ring oxygen atom are antiperiplanar to the O – R
α
bond. This is impossible for a β-glycoside with a ring
Y Enzyme
(12-10) in the chair conformation shown in Eq. 12-11. This fact
suggested that enzymes cleaving β-glycosides may
Carbocationic intermediates. In a second mech- preferentially bind substrate with the appropriate
anism of nucleophilic displacement the leaving group sugar ring in a less stable half-chair or flexible boat
departs (often in a protonated form) before the entering conformation prior to bond cleavage (Eq. 12-12).51,52
nucleophile reacts. This would allow an unshared pair of electrons on
oxygen antiperiplanar to the C-1 to O – R bond to par-
ticipate in the elimination reaction as is indicated in
B Enzyme
the following diagrams.
O H
HO
O
R 6 R
O
–
O
Enzyme C O
HO
O H O R
a
6 Half chair
4
–B-Enzyme –B-Enzyme O
2 HO
+ O
O O R b
+ 1 R
C C
H H O
– –
O O
O
Enzyme C Enzyme C
O O Boat
(12-12)
Oxocarbenium ion, a stabilized carbocation
(12-11)
On the other hand, Bennet and Sinnott provided evi-
A carbocation is formed as shown in Eq. 12-11, which dence that an antiperiplanar lone electron pair is not
represents just one-half of the overall displacement needed in acid-catalyzed cleavage of glycosides via a
reaction. In the common terminology of physical carbocationic intermediate.53,54 Theories of stereoelec-
organic chemistry this is an S 1 reaction rather than an tronic control must be applied to enzymes with caution!
N
S 2 reaction of the kind shown in Eqs. 12-3 and 12-5.
N
This terminology is not quite appropriate for enzymes
because the breakdown of ES complexes to product is
usually a zero-order process and the numbers 1 and 2

--- Page 602 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 599
5. Lysozymes and Chitinases
Polysaccharide chains in the
peptidoglycan layer (Fig. 8-29) of
the cell walls of bacteria are attacked
and cleaved by lysozymes,55 en-
zymes that occur in tears and other
body secretions and in large amounts
in egg white. Some bacteria and
fungi, and even viruses, contain
lysozymes.56 Their function is usually
to protect against bacteria, but lyso-
zyme of phage T4 is a component of
the baseplate of the virus tail (Box 7-C).
Its role is to cut a hole in the bacterial
cell wall to permit injection of the
virus’ own DNA. Egg white lyso-
Figure 12-3 Stereoscopic MolScript viewof hen egg white lysozyme com-
zyme, the first enzyme for which a
plexed with a trisaccharide of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) in binding
3
complete three-dimensional struc-
subsites A, B, and C. The side chain of Trp 62 and the trisaccharide above it
ture was determined by X-ray dif- are shown in ball-and-stick form. From Maenaka et al.65 Courtesy of Izumi
fraction,55 is a 129-residue protein. Kumagai.
The active site is in a cleft between a
large domain with a nonpolar core
and a smaller β-sheet domain that
approaches 6. Positively charged basic groups nearby
contains many hydrogen-bonded polar side chains
affect the pK values; hence, the behavior of the en-
(Figs. 12-3, 12-4). Human lysozyme has a similar a
zyme is sensitive to the ionic strength of the medium.63
structure and properties.57– 59 The T4 lysozyme has an
The Asp 52 anion lies only ~ 0.3 nm from the center of
additional C-terminal domain whose function may be
positive charge expected for an oxocarbenium ion
to bind the crosslinking peptide of the E. coli peptido-
intermediate and presumably stabilizes it. Replace-
glycan. Goose lysozyme is similar in part to both hen
ment of Glu 35 by Gln destroys all catalytic activity
lysozyme and T4 lysozyme. All three enzymes, as
and replacement of Asp 52 by Ala or Asn decreases
well as that of our own tears, may have evolved from
activity to ~ 4 – 5% of the original.66– 68 Less than 1%
a common ancestral protein.60 On the other hand,
activity remained for the D52S mutant.69
Streptomyces erythaeus has developed its own lysozyme
Nevertheless, Asp 52 is not absolutely essential for
with a completely different structure.61 An extensive
lysozyme activity. Goose lysozyme lacks this catalytic
series of T4 lysozyme mutants have been studied in
aspartate.70 Matsumura and Kirsch suggested that
efforts to understand protein folding and stability.61– 63
carboxyl groups of glycine residues covalently attached
toN-acetylmuramic acid rings in the natural substrates
Catalytic side chain groups. SixN-acetylgluco-
may participate in catalysis.66 Many mutant forms of
samine (GlcNAc) or N-acetylmuramic acid (MurNAc)
lysozyme have been studied. Of special interest is the
rings of the polysaccharide substrate are able to fit
D52E mutant. In this enzyme the carboxylate of the
precisely into six subsites (designated A to F) in a
longer glutamate side chain reacts with the oxocarbe-
groove between the two structural domains of egg
nium ion intermediate to form a covalent adduct and
white lysozyme (Fig. 12-4). The bond between the
apparently alter the basic mechanism.71 Replacement
fourth and fifth rings (subsites D and E) is then cleaved.
of asparagine 46, which can hydrogen bond to Asp
At the active site, the side chain carboxyl group of Glu
52, also decreases k greatly, suggesting a role in
35 is positioned correctly to serve as the proton donor cat
catalysis.72
BH of Eq. 12-11, while the carboxyl of Asp 52 lies on
The lysozyme-catalyzed reaction is completed by
the opposite side of the groove. Both Glu 35 and Asp
stereospecific addition of a hydroxyl ion to the oxocar-
52 have relatively high pK values for carboxyl (micro-
a benium ion with the original β configuration being
scopic pK ’s are ~ 5.3 and 4.6, respectively, in the fully
a retained in the product. Such stereospecificity for reac-
protonated active site when the ionic strength is ~ 0.2)64
tions of enzyme-bound carbocations is not surprising
as a result of the hydrophobic environment and hydro-
because the enzyme probably assists in generation, on
gen bonding to other groups. If the pH is raised from
the appropriate side of the sugar ring, of the attacking
an initially low value, a proton from Asp 52 usually
hydroxyl ion.
dissociates first and the electrostatic field of the resulting
anion keeps Glu 35 largely protonated until the pH

--- Page 603 ---

600 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Kinetic isotope effect for lysozyme. A secondary OH
kinetic isotope effect is expected because a molecule
with1H in the number 1 position can be converted to HO O
the corresponding oxocarbenium ion somewhat more
easily than the molecule with 2H in the same position
HO OCH3
OH
(Eq. 12-13). For example, in the nonenzymatic acid-
1H or 2H
catalyzed hydrolysis of a methyl- glucoside, a reaction
also believed to proceed through a carbocation inter-
mediate,41,75 the ratio k / k is 1.14 for the α anomer OH
and 1.09 for the β anom 1 H er.53 2 H In the base-catalyzed CH3–O – +
O
hydrolysis of the same compound, which is believed HO
to occur by a double-displacement reaction involving HO 1H or 2H
participation of the neighboring OH group on C-2, the
ratiok / k is 1.03. The corresponding ratio measured
1 H 2 H OH (12-13)
O
O
46
H
N
H O 44 N H O Three β strands
N O
N H 50
A2 O O O N
O O H N H N H O H
H
H N 52 61
N H N H O N
H 3 C O H N H HO 54 O O C – O H O H N 59 C H N O N O H H 6 N 2 O
O C H
H
N H 57 N O 63
H N N
O H
O O O E H H 3 N C H NO O D O H O O O H N O H H
O O
O F H N H O 35 H O O H O O H O H 3 C H N C O H
H O O
O HN O O N O N O H N B O
H H O
34 O H
H + N H ON O 107 H 3 C O H
H N 108
H 3 C H N
N
NH
H H
Helix end
Figure 12-4 Schematic drawing of the active site of egg white lysozyme with substrate in place and about to be cleaved.
Three strands of the small β-sheet domain, which contains an extensive hydrogen bond network, are seen at the top. Notice
that this view into the active site is different from that in Fig. 12-3. A 180° rotation of either figure will make the views more
similar. The three-strand β sheet can be seen (in stereo) at the lower right in Fig. 12-3 and the helix end carrying Glu 35 in the
right center foreground. A segment of a chitin oligosaccharide (green), whose reducing end is to the left, is bound into subsites B
–F. Cleavage occurs between rings D and E as indicated by the heavy arrow which points to the anomeric carbon atom of ring
D. The side chain of Glu 35 is shown protonating the bridge oxygen. Ring D has been distorted into a twist conformation to
facilitate cleavage. A larger domain, which contains one long α helix, is at the bottom of the drawing. The active site lies in
a cleft between the domains. Notice the chain of hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl of residue 107 in the large domain
and the peptide NH of residue 59 in the small domain. Also notice the aromatic side chains which are usually present in
carbohydrase active sites. Drawing is based in part on those of Irving Geis73 and Levitt74 and on a sketch by author from a
three-dimensional model.

--- Page 604 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 601
for the action of lysozyme is 1.11, much closer to that that Glu 35 tended not to hydrogen bond to the exocy-
of the oxocarbenium ion mechanism than to that of the clic bridge oxygen, even though that would be a logi-
double-displacement mechanism. Similar observations cal step in the protonation (by – BH) shown in Eq.
have been made with amylases.76 Kinetic isotope effects 12-11. They suggested that Glu 35 may protonate the
have also been measured for 12C vs 13C in the anomeric ring oxygen.87 The ring could then open to form an
position,16O vs 18O in the leaving group (–OCH ) of exocyclic oxonium ion, which could hydrolyze and
3
the methyl glucosides, and for other locations53 as well cyclize to the final product. The initial elimination could
as for hydrolysis of glucosyl fluorides.77– 79 The results receive stereoelectronic assistance from the anti-
are generally supportive of the oxocarbenium ion periplanar lone pair of electrons on the bridge oxygen.
mechanism for lysozyme. However, as mentioned in This proposal has been criticized.81,88 For example, it is
Section B,3, the interpretation of secondary isotope hard to explain the rapid cleavage of glycosyl fluorides
effects is difficult. Such effects cannot reliably identify by this exocyclic oxonium mechanism.
a carbohydrase mechanism.80,81 As attractive as the arguments for a oxocarbenium
For acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of methyl gluco- mechanism in lysozyme are, is it still possible to explain
sides53 the kinetic isotope effect observed for the oxy- the experimental observations by a double displacement
gen of the leaving group was k /k = 1.024 – 1.026. in which Asp 52 serves as the nucleophile to form a
16O 18O
Observation of similar effects for enzymes supports glycosyl enzyme?38,82,82a Sucrose phosphorylase and
the participation of an acidic group of the protein (Glu other glucosyl transferases, like lysozyme, apparently
35 of lysozyme) in catalysis but does not eliminate the have a carboxylate ion at the active site. In some
possibility of concerted involvement of a nucleophilic enzymes, the carboxylate ion forms a covalent glucosyl
group, e.g., Asp 52 in lysozyme.81,82 enzyme, whereas in lysozyme it apparently only
stabilizes a carbocation. Is there really a difference
Does lysozyme distort its substrate? An early in mechanism? Do glucosyl enzymes form only with
study of models indicated that for six sugar rings of a certain substrates or upon denaturation of the enzymes?
substrate to bind tightly into the active site of lysozyme, Nature hides her secrets well. The difficulty in pinning
the ring in subsite D, which contains the carbon atom down the fine mechanistic details of enzymatic action
on which the displacement occurs, had to be distorted makes it essential to be skeptical, to examine data
from its normal chair conformation into the half-chair critically, and to try to imagine all possible alternatives
conformation.83 This is illustrated in Fig. 12-4. It was – even when things seem to be proven beautifully.
suggested that by binding the substrate chain at six
different sites the enzyme provides leverage to distort Help from a neighboring group. In the 1960s it
the ring in subsite D into a conformation similar to was suggested that the acetamido group of N-acetyl-
that of the transition state. This idea was criticized on glucosamine residues might participate as a nucleo-
the basis that an enzyme would be too flexible to act phile, either stabilizing an oxocarbenium ion or
in this manner.74 Furthermore, the non-hydrolyzed forming an oxazoline intermediate.89– 91 The proposal
trisaccharide MurNAc – GlcNac – MurNAc was shown received little support, as applied to lysozyme, until
to fit into subsites B, C, and D of the active site groove sequences and structures of many larger carbohydras-
without distortion.84 However, it is bound weakly. es were determined. Among these are chitinases,
Can electrical forces acting within the active site enzymes that act on the same substrates as the small
help to distort the substrate and assist in formation lysozymes. One group of plant chitinases have a
of the carbocation intermediate? Levitt and Warshel structure similar to that of egg white lysozyme. The
suggested this possibility and proposed that the neces- 243-residue enzyme from barley seeds apparently has
sary electrostatic force arises from the arrangement of Glu 67 as a proton donor and Glu 89 as a possible
dipoles within the peptide backbone of the protein and stabilizing nucleophile.92 Another group of chitinases
in the amino acid side chains.74 As can be seen from from both plants and bacteria have active sites at ends
Fig. 12-4, the enzyme forms many hydrogen bonds of (αβ) barrels.93– 95 They all have a proton-donating
6
with the substrates. Of special interest is a chain of glutamate in a conserved position but no aspartate that
hydrogen bonds that passes from the backbone carbo- could serve as a nucleophile. Study of complexes with
nyl of Ala 107 through the 2-acetamido group of the substrates and inhibitors with these enzymes has
substrate in subsite C and into the edge of the β sheet provided direct evidence of ring distortion and of the
at the backbone NH of Asn 59. This interaction pro- probable role of the acetamido group as indicated in
vides specificity toward GlcNac-containing substrates. Eq. 12-14.94,95 The distortion is beyond that in a sofa
Perhaps oscillation of charge within such polarizable conformation and allows for maximum stereoelectron-
chains of hydrogen bonds can also help a substrate to ic assistance as well as participation of the acetamido
move toward its transition state structure.85,86 group.
From simulations of lysozyme action by the methods In these relatively large enzymes the substrate
of molecular dynamics, Post and Karplus observed is deeply buried and cannot reach a conformation

--- Page 605 ---

602 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
OH extensive hydrogen-bond network which often includes
+ imidazole groups may influence activity.109,110
HB
O A striking feature of a 411-residue endoglucanase
HO
O from Fusarium was revealed by the binding of a non-
HO
R hydrolyzable thiooligosaccharide substrate analog.
N
H The pyranose ring at the cleavage site was distorted in
O an identical manner to that mentioned in the preceding
section for a chitinase thought to use the substrate’s
H3C
acetamido group as a nucleophile (Eq. 12-14).106 The
OH
distortion observed is beyond that required for a sofa
B conformation and allows for the maximum stereoelec-
O
HO H tronic assistance (Eq. 12-12b). An oxygen atom of the
HO E197 carboxylate, the catalytic nucleophile, occupies a
O
position in the complex that is coincident with that of
O
R the C2 acetamido oxygen in the catalytic site of the
H + N chitinase discussed in the previous section.
Theinvertingβ-glucanases also have two catalytic
CH3
Oxazoline acid base groups but they are ~0 .9 – 1.0 nm apart rather
(12-14) than ~ 0.6 nm for retaining enzymes. This allows space
for a water molecule whose –OH is the nucleophilic
approaching that of the transition state without having reactant (–OY in Eq. 12-5) and in which a carboxylate
a strained ring conformation. These enzymes may use group assists in dissociating the water molecule.98
binding forces exerted on many parts of the substrate (This mechanism is illustrated for glucoamylase in
to stabilize the transition state structure. Fig. 12-7).
Structural features met in some cellulases include
anα,α barrel111 similar to that of glucoamylase (Fig. 2-29)
6. Cellulases and Other (cid:2)-Glycosidases and, in a cellobiohydrolase,101 a 5-nm-long tunnel into
which the cellulose chains must enter. Ten well-defined
Cellulose, the most abundant of all biopolymers, is subsites for glycosyl units are present in the tunnel.101
extremely stable but is attacked by a host of bacterial A feature associated with this tunnel is processive
and fungal β-glycanases.96 Animals do not ordinarily action, movement of the enzyme along the chain with-
produce cellulases but some termites do.97 Cellulase out dissociation,105 a phenomenon observed long ago
structures are varied, being represented by 10 of 57 for amylases (see Section 9) and often observed for
different glycosylhydrolase families.98 Most, like lyso- enzymes acting on nucleic acids.
zyme, retain the β configuration in their products but Another group of (cid:2)-glucanases, found in plants
some invert.98– 100 and their seeds, hydrolyze β-1,3-linked glucans112 and,
Among the cellulases are endoglycanases, which in some cases, also mixed 1,3- and 1,4-linked polysac-
cleave chains at random positions, and exoglycanases charides. A characteristic enzyme is found in barley
(also called cellobiohydrolases) that cleave cellobiose (Table 12-1).113,114 Similar enzymes are produced by
units from ends of chains. Some act on the nonreduc- some bacteria113 and also by molluscs.115
ing ends and some on reducing ends; a mixture of Xylanasesact on the β-1,4-linked xylan, the most
enzymes is most effective.99,101,102 In some bacteria a abundant of the hemicelluloses that constitutes over
whole series of different cellulases, together with a 30% of the dry weight of terrestrial plants.116 They
large (197-kDa) organizing protein, form a cellusome, resemble cellulases and cooperate with cellulases and
a complex with high catalytic activity for crystalline xylosidases117 in digestion of plant cell walls.110,116,118 – 121
cellulose.103– 105 Cellulases usually have tightly packed Galactanase digests the β-1,4-linked component of
catalytic domains which may vary in size from ~ 200 pectins.122
residues98 to over 400.106 In most cases the catalytic The final step in degradation of cellulose is hydro-
domain is connected by a flexible linker to one or more lysis of cellobiose to glucose. This is accomplished
small, globular cellulose-binding domains. These by(cid:2)-glucosidases, enzymes that also hydrolyze
vary in size from 36 to 200 residues and often have a lactose, phosphorylated disaccharides, and cyano-
β-barrel fold.104,107–108a Their function is to hold the genic glycosides.123– 126 Lactose is also cleaved by
enzymes to the cellulose surfaces. They may also (cid:2)-galactosidases.127 The large 1023-residue β-galactosi-
facilitate disruption of the tightly hydrogen bonded dase from E. coli128 is famous in the history of molecular
cellulose structure (Fig. 4-5). As with other carbohy- biology as a component of the lac operon.129– 132 Its
drases, carboxyl groups of amino acid side chains properties are also employed to assist in the cloning of
provide the major catalytic groups (Table 12-1). An genes (Chapter 26).

--- Page 606 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 603
TABLE 12-1
Acidic and Basic Catalytic Groups in a Few Glycosyltransferasesa
Enzyme Number of Inverting? Glycosyl- Nucleophile Electrophile
residues enzyme (–COO–) (proton donor)
identified? * Assisting group
Lysozyme
Human, henb 130 No E35 D53(52)
Bacteriophage T4c No E11 D20
Chitinase
Rubber plantd 273 No E127
Cellulases
E1 endocellulase,
Acidothermuse 521
catalytic domain 358 No E282 E162, D252*
Endoglucanase I
Fusariumf 411 No E197 E202
Endoglucanase Cen A
Cellulomonasg >351 Yes D392 D78
1,3-β-D-Glucanase
Barleyh No E231 E288
Xylanase
B. circulansi No Yes E78 E172
β-Glucosidase
Agrobacteriumj 458 No Yes E358 E170, Y298*
β-Galactosidase
E. colik 1023 No Yes E537 E461, Y503*
α-Amylase
Human and pigl 496 No D197 E233, D300*
Barleym No D179 E204, D289*
Aspergillusn No D206 E230
Cyclodextrin
glucosyltransferase
B. circulanso D229 E257, D328
α-Glucosidase
Saccharomycesp No Yes D214 E233, D300
Glycogen
debranching
enzyme, rabbits No Yes D549
Glucoamylase
Aspergillusq 616 Yes HO, E400 E179
2
β-Amylase
Soybeanr Yes E186 E380
Glucocerebrosidase
Humant E340
a For classification of glycosyl hydrolases into families, see Henrissat, B., j Wang, Q., Trimbur, D., Graham, R., Warren, R. A. J., and Withers, S. G.
Callebaut, I., Fabrega, S., Lehn, P., Mornon, J.-P., and Davies, G. (1995) Proc. (1995)Biochemistry34, 14554–14562
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 7090–7094 k Gebler, J. C., Aebersold, R., and Withers, S. G. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267,
b Matsumura, I., and Kirsch, J. F. (1996) Biochemistry35, 1881–1889; Harata, 11126–11130; Jacobson, R. H., Zhang, X.-J., DuBose, R. F., and Matthews, B.
K., Muraki, M., Hayashi, Y., and Jigami, Y. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 1447–1453 W. (1994) Nature (London)369, 761–766; Richard, J. P., Huber, R. E., Lin, S.,
c Brzozowski, A. M., and Davies, G. J. (1997) Biochemistry36, 10837–10845; Heo, C., and Amyes, T. L. (1996) Biochemistry35, 12377–12386
Hardy, L. W., and Poteete, A. R. (1991) Biochemistry30, 9457–9463 Kuroki, l Brayer, G. D., Luo, Y., and Withers, S. G. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 1730–1742;
R., Weaver, L. H., and Matthews, B. W. (1993) Science262, 2030–2033 Qian, M., Haser, R., Buisson, G., Duée, E., and Payan, F. (1994) Biochemistry
d Tews, I., Terwisscha van Scheltinga, A. C., Perrakis, A., Wilson, K. S., and 33, 6284–6294
Dijkstra, B. W. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 7954–7959 mKadziola, A., Sogaard, M., Svensson, B., and Haser, R. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.
e Sakon, J., Adney, W. S., Himmel, M. E., Thomas, S. R., and Karplus, P. A. (1996) 278, 205–217
Biochemistry35, 10648–10660; Ghidoni, R., Sonnino, S., Tettamanti, G., n Brzozowski, A. M., and Davies, G. J. (1997) Biochemistry36, 10837–10845;
Baumann, N., Reuter, G., and Schauer, R. (1980) J. Biol. Chem.255, 6990–6995 Matsuura, Y., Kusunoki, M., Harada, W., and Kakudo, M. (1984) J. Biochem.
f Sulzenbacher, G., Schülein, M., and Davies, G. J. (1997) Biochemistry36, 95, 697–702
5902–5911; Sulzenbacher, G., Driguez, H., Henrissat, B., Schülein, M., and o Knegtel, R. M. A., Strokopytov, B., Penninga, D., Faber, O. G., Rozeboom, H.
Davies, G. J. (1996) Biochemistry35, 15280–15287; Mackenzie, L. F., Davies, J., Kalk, K. H., Dijkhuizen, L., and Dijkstra, B. W. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
G. J., Schülein, M., and Withers, S. G. (1997) Biochemistry36, 5893–5901 29256–29264
g Damude, H. G., Withers, S. G., Kilburn, D. G., Miller, R. C., Jr., and Warren, p McCarter, J. D., and Withers, S. G. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 6889–6894
R. A. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2220–2224 q Christensen, U., Olsen, K., Stoffer, B. B., and Svensson, B. (1996) Biochemistry
h Chen, L., Garrett, T. P. J., Fincher, G. B., and Hoj, P. B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 35, 15009–15018
270, 8093–8101 r Mikami, B., Degano, M., Hehre, E. J., and Sacchettini, J. C. (1994) Biochemistry
i Wakarchuk, W. W., Campbell, R. L., Sung, W. L., Davoodi, J., and Yaguchi, 33, 7779–7787; Adachi, M., Mikami, B., Katsube, T., and Utsumi, S. (1998) J.
M. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 467–475; Lawson, S. L., Wakarchuk, W. W., and Biol. Chem.273, 19859–19865
Withers, S. G. (1997) Biochemistry36, 2257–2265; Sidhu, G., Withers, S. G., s Braun, C., Lindhorst, T., Madsen, N. B., and Withers, S. G. (1996) Biochemistry
Nguyen, N. T., McIntosh, L. P., Ziser, L., and Brayer, G. D. (1999) Biochemistry 35, 5458–5463
38, 5346–5354 t Withers, S. G., and Aebersold, R. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 361–372

--- Page 607 ---

604 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
OH
7. Glycogen Phosphorylase
O
HO
A large number of different glycosyltransferases
act on the α1,4 linkages of glycogen, starch, and related HO
polysaccharides. Among these, one of the most studied OH
is glycogen phosphorylase. It is not a hydrolase, but it
H+ O R(Glycogen, n glucosyl units)
catalyzes cleavage of α1,4 linkages at the nonreducing
ends of glycogen molecules by displacement with HO R (Glycogen, (n–1) glucosyl units)
inorganic phosphate to give α-D-glucose-1-phosphate. OH
It is a very large enzyme (841 residues in rabbit muscle)
O+
whose structure is shown in Fig. 11-5. Its complex HO
regulatory mechanisms were discussed briefly in HO
Chapter 11. – –
O O O O
Neither partial exchange reactions nor inversion OH P P
of configuration occur when glycogen phosphorylase –O O H –O O Pyridoxal
acts on its substrates. The enzyme apparently does (Schiff base)
Glucose-1-phosphate
nothing until both substrates are present. These are
glycogen + inorganic phosphate or, for the reverse (12-15)
reaction, glycogen (shifted over by one sugar binding
subsite) + glucose-1-phosphate. The active site is in plus phosphite, phosphate, or fluorophosphate does
a deep groove in the enzyme. Evidently, the protein provide up to 20% of full activity.143 X-ray crystallo-
must close and fold around the substrates before it graphy confirmed that these activating anions are
becomes active.133 An oxocarbenium ion mechanism bound into the active site at the approximate position
has also been proposed for this enzyme, partly on of the phosphate group of PLP.139,143a Glycogen phos-
the basis of strong inhibition of phosphorylase by phorylase is being studied by X-ray diffraction tech-
5-gluconolactone,134,135 a compound having a half- niques that allow observation of structural changes in
chair conformation and perhaps acting as a transition as short a time as a few milliseconds (see Chapter 3,
state inhibitor (Chapter 9). This gluconolactone also Section H).144
inhibits many other carbohydrases.123,136 The regulation of glycogen phosphorylase, like
that of many other allosteric proteins, depends upon
the existence of two distinct conformational states,
CH2OH whose structures have been established by crystallo-
HO O graphy.137 It is not immediately evident how they can
O affect the active site. In the R-state the enzyme has a
HO low affinity for both substrates and activators such as
AMP. In the T-state the affinities are much higher. For
OH
example, that of inorganic phosphate is raised by a
CH2OH factor of fifteen.137 As we have already seen (Figs. 11-4,
HO O + 11-5) the relatively inactive phosphorylase b is converted
O – to the active phosphorylase a by phosphorylation of
HO the side chain of serine 14, a structural change which
favors the R-state. In the inactive T-state of phospho-
OH rylaseb, an 18-residue N-terminal segment of the poly-
5-Gluconolactone peptide is not seen by X-ray diffraction, presumably
because it does not assume a fixed conformation but
projects into a solvent channel in the crystal and moves
An unexpected discovery was that glycogen phospho- freely within it. However, in the active R-state of phos-
rylase contains a molecule of the coenzyme pyridoxal phorylasea, in which Ser 14 has been phosphorylated,
5'-phosphate (PLP) bound into the center of the protein the N-terminal segment is rigid. The phospho group
behind the active site134,135,137– 139 with its phosphate on Ser 14 binds to Arg 69 and other arginine, lysine,
group adjacent to the binding site of the phosphate of and histidine side chains from both subunits.137,145
glucose-1-phosphate. It probably serves as a general The phosphorylation of Ser 14 occurs 1.5 nm from the
base catalyst, e.g., assisting the attack of a phosphate active sites. The conformational changes induced by
ion on the oxocarbenium formed by cleavage of the phosphorylation of Ser 14 cause a rotation of about
glycogen chain (Eq. 12-15).137,140– 142 A key observation 10° between subunits, somewhat reminiscent of the
by Graves and associates was that pyridoxal alone does changes accompanying oxygenation of hemoglobin
not activate apo-phosphorylase but that pyridoxal (Fig. 7-25).

--- Page 608 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 605
A
B
Figure 12-5 (A) Stereoscopic view of the structure of the catalytic site of
phosphorylaseb in the inhibited T-state with the inhibitor nojirimycin tetra-
zole bound into the active site. Inorganic phosphate (P) as well as the coen-
i
zyme pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) are also shown. (B) Details of interactions
of the inhibitor, P, and PLP with the protein and with water molecules (small
i
circles). This is a weak-binding state but the P has displaced the negatively
i
charged side chain carboxylate of Asp 283 (visible at the lower right in A).
This carboxylate blocks access to the P site in the free T-state enzyme. Here,
i
the positively charged Arg 569 guanidinium group has swung in to interact
with the P. From Mitchell et al.133 Courtesy of Louise N. Johnson.
i
A related structural change accompanies binding The enzyme is in the weak-binding T-state but inor-
of caffeine, adenosine, or AMP at high concentrations. ganic phosphate (P) is bound below it and next to the
i
These substances inhibit the enzyme by binding at a phosphate group of PLP, as required by the mechanism
site next to the catalytic site (Fig. 11-5), stabilizing the of Eq. 12-15.
T-state and causing a loop of protein to move into the The difference in binding affinities for the T- and
catalytic site and to block it.137 The catalytic site lies R-states lies in a flexible loop of residues 280–288, which
deeply buried in the protein between the two large in the T-state blocks access to the substrate-binding
structural domains (Fig. 11-5). The substrate is held by cleft. The universally conserved Asp 238 behaves as
a network of hydrogen bonds, some of which are a substrate mimic, occupying the P site.137,146,147 In
i
shown in Fig. 12-5, in which the active site contains an the R-state this residue moves, allowing P to enter
i
inhibitory substrate analog nojirimycin tetrazole, and bind (Fig. 12-5).
which is viewed toward the edges of the two rings. Most of the structure of mammalian phosphory-
lases is conserved in species as diverse as E. coli and
the potato.148 However, E. coli maltodextrin phos-
OH
phorylase143a,149– 151 and potato phosphorylases have
N
N N less sophisticated regulatory mechanisms than do the
HO
animal enzymes. Another feature of glycogen phos-
HO N phorylase is a “glycogen storage site” about 2.5 nm
from the active site (Fig. 11-5).152 This provides a
means for the enzyme to hold onto the giant glycogen
OH OH
molecule while “nibbling off” the outside ends of
N
N + N nearby branches.
HO
HO N –
8. Starch-Hydrolyzing Enzymes
Nojirimycin tetrazole OH
Among the hydrolases are the widely distributed
(cid:1)-amylases,endo-glycosidases which hydrolyze

--- Page 609 ---

606 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
starch chains by random attack at points far from by a lysozyme-like mechanism. Endolytic enzymes,
chain ends to form short polysaccharide chains known which cleave biopolymer chains internally, are usually
asdextrins as well as simpler sugars.153 The catalyzed thought to carry out random attack. However, after
reactions proceed with retention of the original α the initial catalytic reaction one of the polysaccharide
configuration. Alpha-amylases are found in fungi, products of porcine pancreatic amylase action often
plants, and animals. One powerful enzyme of this does not leave the enzyme. The polysaccharide simply
class is present in the saliva of most humans and other “slides over” until it fully occupies all of the subsites
isoenzymes are formed by the pancreas.154 They are of the substrate binding site and a second “attack”
encoded by a family of genes, a fact that accounts for occurs. An average of seven catalytic events occur
the existence of some healthy individuals completely each time it forms a complex with amylase.167 Is there
lacking salivary amylase.155 a mechanism by which the enzyme deliberately pro-
Structures are known for human154 and porcine156– 159 motes the “sliding” of the substrate in this multiple
α-amylases as well as for corresponding enzymes from attack or processive mechanism168,169 or does the
barley,160 mealworms,161 fungi, and bacteria.162– 164 The dissociated product simply diffuse a short distance
α-amylase from Aspergillus oryzae (Taka-amylase), while enclosed in a solvent cage? The latter explana-
widely used in laboratory work, was the first for which tion may be adequate for some enzymes. In contrast
a structure was determined.165,166 The α-amylases fold to pancreatic α-amylase a bacterial “maltogenic”
into three domains (Fig. 12-6), with the active site in α-amylase produces principally maltose as a
the center of an (α/β) barrel. All of the α-amylases product.169a,b
8
contain one or more bound Ca2+ ions. Some, including Digestion of starch and glycogen by α-amylases
the human α-amylases, also require a chloride ion. produces a mixture of glucose, oligosaccharides, and
The Cl– is held by a pair of arginine guanidinium dextrins, which in the human body are further degraded
groups154 and interacts with adjacent carboxyl groups, by(cid:1)-glucosidases of the brush border membrane of
inducing pK shifts and allosteric activation.163 the small intestine.154 A lysosomal form of the enzyme
a
The sequences of α-amylases vary widely but a is missing in Pompe’s disease (Box 20-D).170,171 The
conserved cluster of one glutamate and two aspartates α-glucosidases are also members of the α-amylase
is usually present (Table 12-1). family.46,172 For digestion of the branched amylo-
Studies of the action patterns, i.e., the distribution pectin and glycogen a debranching enzyme and
of products formed by α-amylases when acting on a (cid:1)-1,6-glucosidase activity are required. In mammals
variety of α 1,4-linked oligosaccharides, suggested that these activities are found in a single polypeptide chain
the substrate binding region of the porcine pancreatic with separate but adjacent active sites.50,173,174 The
enzyme has five subsites, each binding one glucose debranching enzyme catalyzes transfer of oligosaccha-
residue.153 The α-glucan chain is cleaved between ride chains from α1,6-linked branch positions to new
the residues bound at the second and third subsites locations at ends of chains with α1,4 linkages. A bacte-
(numbered from the reducing end of the substrate) rial oligo-1,6-glucosidase has a catalytic site formed from
Figure 12-6 Drawing
showing the overall
polypeptide chain fold
and relative positioning
of the three structural
domains of human
pancreatic α-amylase.
Also drawn are the
locations of the calcium
and chloride binding
sites. Overlaid is the
placement of a modified
form of the inhibitor
acarbose (p. 607) that
binds in the active site
cleft. MolScript draw-
ing courtesy of G. Sidhu
and G. Brayer.

--- Page 610 ---

B. Nucleophilic Displacements on Singly Bonded Carbon Atoms 607
D199, E255, and D329 similar to that of α-amylases.175 inverting enzyme.
Another member of the α-amylase family has Notice in Fig. 12-7 the abundance of polar groups,
principally a glycosyltransferase activity. Cyclodextrin many of which are charged. Four carboxyl groups,
glucanotransferase forms cyclodextrins (Box 4-A) from D55, E179, E180, and E400, are present in the active
by a transferase reaction in which a 6- to 8- member site region and participate in the hydrogen bonded
oligo-saccharyl group is transferred from a straight network. Active sites of other carbohydrases differ
amylase chain onto a protein side chain (Glu 257) and from that of glucoamylase. However, the presence of
then joins the ends of the oligosaccharide to form the many hydrogen-bonded polar groups, including two or
cyclo-dextrin rings (an overall double-displacement more carboxyl groups, is characteristic. As illustrated
process).176– 177b However, large circular dextrins are in Figs. 9-8 and 9-9, the pH dependence of the maximum
produced initially and are then converted into the velocityv is often determined by these carboxyl
max
smaller cyclodextrins.178 groups. At least one of them must be protonated for
A starch-digesting enzyme of great industrial maximum catalytic activity and if two are protonated
importance is glucoamylase, whose (α,α) -barrel activity may fall again. Under these circumstances a
6
structure is shown in Fig. 2-29. That figure also shows single proton bound to a molecule of enzyme may
the tetrasaccharide inhibitor acarbose in the active spend a fraction of its time on each of several different
site. The ring at the nonreducing end is deeply em- carboxylate, imidazole, or other groups.181 In the case
bedded in the protein and, as shown in Fig. 12-7 for of glucoamylase it was concluded from the X-ray struc-
the related D-gluco-dihydroacarbose, is held by many ture that the catalytic acid group, E179, is probably
hydrogen bonds. This slow enzyme (k ~ 50 s–1 at unprotonated most of the time.181 However, it can still
cat
45°C)179 cuts off a single glucose unit, then releases bind to starch. Then, after a fraction of a second a
proton may be transferred onto the
Glu 179 carboxylate and from there
OH
6 to the bridge oxygen of the substrate,
4 7
HO 5 inducing reaction according to Eq.
2
HO 3 12-16. It may even be necessary to
1
OH CH3
O
have enzyme protonated initially
N on a group other than E179 to allow
H
HO OH small conformational changes to
OH O occur prior to formation of the final
O
activated complex. Such essential
HO OH
OH conformational changes have often
OH
6 O O been invoked for glucoamylase.182
5 d-Gluco-dihydroacarbose
4 7 HO Just as most cellulases have
HO 2 OH H, OH special cellulose-binding domains,
HO 3
1 glucoamylase has a compact C-
OH CH3 O terminal starch-binding domain
A N
H HO OH (residues 509 – 616) similar to the
OH
O
B O
HO OH
OH E400
O
C O
Acarbose
HO
H, OH
OH
D
H H O – O
O
H
itself from the starch before releasing the glucose and O
rebinding to the starch. The catalytic acid has been
O
HO
identified as the carboxyl group of Glu 179. In Fig.
12-7 it is seen, presumably as a carboxylate group, HO
tightly hydrogen bonded to what is doubtless the
O+
bridge–NH +– between rings A and B of the inhibitor O
2
D-gluco-dihydroacarbose. Thus, the complex mimics H H
E179
that of a true substrate protonated on the bridge oxy- –
O
gen, a possible first step in normal catalysis. In accord
with this mechanism (Eq. 12-16), glucoamylase is an
(12-16)
O

--- Page 611 ---

608 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
#Man-S455 #Man-S455
PH-6 PH-6
S119 #T148 #A205 S119 #T148 #A Figure 12-7 Stereoscopic
PH-4 PH-4 view of the inhibitor D-gluco-
dihydroacarbose in its com-
plex with glucoamylase of
Aspergillus. Residues from
symmetry-related molecules
W120 W120
of the enzyme are shown as
dotted lines. Ring A at the
E180 E180 nonreducing end of an amy-
Y311 Y3
E179 E179 lase chain is thought to bind
in a similar way (with ring A
at the bottom in this figure).
W52 W52 Cleavage is between the A
W178 W and B rings E178 acting as a
proton donor to the bridge
Y48 L177 R305 Y48 L177 R oxygen (or NH for the inhibi-
R54 R54 tor). The attacking nucleo-
phile is thought to be a water
Wat500 Wat500
D55 E400 Q W 4 3 0 1 1 7 D55 E400 Q4 W 0 molecule, which is labeled
Wat 500 and is held by the
L415 L415 assisting carboxylate of
E400.180 Courtesy of
W417 L319 W417 L319 Alexander Aleshin.
corresponding domain of cellulases.183 It is connected
C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl
by a glycosylated linker to the 470-residue catalytic
Groups
subunit. Cyclodextrin glucanotransferase also has a
starch-binding domain.184
A second major class of nucleophilic displacement
Beta-amylases, characteristic plant and bacterial
reactions (Type 1B in Table 10-1) involve replacement
enzymes184a, have an exo action, cutting off chain ends
of a group Y attached to a carbonyl carbon:
two sugar units at a time as maltose. The original α
linkage is inverted, the product being β-maltose. The
(α/β) -barrel structure is unlike that of glucoamylase, O O
8
but the spacing of active site carboxyl groups suggests B: – + R C Y + H + R C B + YH
that a water molecule is held and activated as in glu-
(12-17)
coamylase.185,186 The multiple subsite structure of the
active site may permit the substrate amylase to slip
Group Y may be – OR (esters), – SR (thioesters) or – NHR
forward after a maltose product molecule leaves the
(amides or peptides). If B –is a hydroxyl ion formed
site. This may account for the observed processive
from H O, the reaction is hydrolysis. If B – is the
action.186 2
anion of an alcohol, thiol, or amine, the reaction is
Many specialized glycosyl transferases synthesize
transacylation. Transacylation is an essential process
glycogen, starch, cellulose, and other polysaccharides
in biosynthesis of proteins and lipids, but it is the
and add glycosyl groups to glycoproteins and glyco-
digestive enzymes, which catalyze hydrolysis, that
lipids.187,188 Often the glycosyl group is transferred
have been studied most intensively.
from a carrier such as uridine diphosphate (UDP). An
Uncatalyzed hydrolysis of a peptide linkage is
example is glycogen synthase (Fig. 11-4), which trans-
very slow with t at neutral pH and 25°C of ~ 300–600
fers glucosyl groups of UDP-glucose to the 4'– OH 1/2
years.189 Both acids and bases catalyze hydrolysis, but
groups at the nonreducing ends of the bushlike glyco-
enzymes are needed for rapid digestion. The carbonyl
gen molecules. Other similar synthetic reactions are
group C = O is highly polarized, with the resonance
considered in Chapter 20.
form C +– O – contributing substantially to its structure.
An attack by a base will take place readily on the
electrophilic carbon atom. While the reactivity of the
carbonyl group in esters and amides is relatively low

--- Page 612 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 609
because of the resonance stabilization of these groups, These proenzymes are synthesized and “packaged”
the carbon atom still maintains an electrophilic charac- aszymogen granules which travel to the surfaces of
ter and may combine with basic groups. Thus, in the the secretory cells. The contents of the granules are
base-catalyzed hydrolysis of esters a hydroxyl ion secreted into the extracellular medium and are dis-
adds to the carbonyl group to form a transient single- charged via the pancreatic duct into the small intestine.
bonded“tetrahedral” intermediate (Eq. 12-18). Similar At their sites of action, the zymogens are converted
intermediates are believed to form during the action into active enzymes by the cutting out of one or more
of many enzymes. However, for purposes of classifi- pieces from the precursor. This occurs in a cascade-type
cation, we can regard them as simple displacement process triggered by enteropeptidase (historically
reactions on a carbon atom with the understanding enterokinase), another serine protease which is secreted
that there are probably transient single-bonded inter- by the intestinal lining.192a Human enteropeptidase
mediates. consists of a 235-residue catalytic subunit bonded
through a disulfide bridge to a larger 784-residue
– membrane-anchoring subunit.193– 195 It attacks specifi-
O O
callytrypsinogen, converting it to active trypsin.196,197
R C OR' R C OR' Trypsin in turn activates the other zymogens, as is
indicated in Fig. 12-8. Trypsin can also activate its
HO – OH
own zymogen, trypsinogen, in an autocatalytic process.
“Tetrahedral” intermediate
+
H
HOR’ Enteropeptidase (present in intestinal brush
border membrane)
O
R C
Trypsinogen Trypsin
OH (12-18)
Chymotrypsinogen Chymotrypsin
A large number of hydrolytic enzymes, the
Proelastase Elastase
proteases, and peptidases act on peptide linkages of
proteins.190 At present the traditional name protease, Procarboxypeptidases Carboxypeptidases
which implies proteolysis, is most often used. How- A and B A and B
ever, the IUB encourages use of the name proteinase.
Although this seems less specific in meaning, its use
Figure 12-8 Cascade of reactions that activate pancreatic
will probably increase. Some proteases trim newly
proteases. Enteropeptidase, or trypsin, cleaves the proen-
formed peptide chains, others convert proteins from zyme (zymogen) at specific sites.
precursor forms into biologically active molecules, and
others digest proteins. In addition to endopeptidases,
such as trypsin and chymotrypsin, which cleave at
positionswithin a long peptide chain, there are many Chymotrypsinogen consists of a single 245-residue
enzymes that cleave amino acids from the ends of chain. The amino acid residues in chymotrypsin, tryp-
chains. These are usually called peptidases and are sin, and elastase are usually all numbered according to
designatedaminopeptidases if they cleave from the their position in this zymogen. Inactive proenzymes
N terminus and carboxypeptidases if they cleave are formed as precursors to enzymes of many different
from the C terminus. Most of these enzymes can be classes and are activated in a variety of ways. A part
classified into serineproteases, cysteine proteases, of the polypeptide chain of the proenzymes is often
asparticproteases, metalloproteases, or N-terminal folded over the active site, interacting in a nonsub-
nucleophilehydrolases, depending upon the chemical strate-like fashion and blocking the site.197a
nature of the active site. These groups are further
divided into families or “clans.”190 Serine as a nucleophile. An early clue to the
mechanism of action of chymotrypsin came from
investigation of the related acetylcholinesterase.
1. The Serine Proteases This key enzyme of the nervous system is inactivated
irreversibly by powerful phosphorus-containing poisons
The digestive enzymes trypsin,chymotrypsin, that had been developed as insecticides and as war
elastase, and proteinase E are related serine proteases. gases (nerve gases, Box 12-C). Around 1949, the nerve
All three are synthesized in the pancreas which secretes gas diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP) was shown
5– 10 g per day of proteins, mostly the inactive pro- also to inactivate chymotrypsin. When radioactive
enzymes (zymogens) of digestive enzymes.191,192 32P-containing DFP was allowed to react the 32P became

--- Page 613 ---

610 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
covalently attached to the enzyme. When the labeled (proteinase II), neutrophil elastase, and proteinase
enzyme was denatured and subjected to acid hydrolysis III210 are found in granules of neutrophils and mono-
the phosphorus stuck tightly; the radioactive fragment cytes as well as in mast cells.209 Cytoplasmic granules
was identified as O-phosphoserine. It was evident of cytotoxic T cells contain at least seven proteases
that this product could be formed by an attack of the calledgranzymes that can be released to attack target
hydroxyl group of the serine side chain on the phos- cells.211 – 213a
phorus with displacment of the fluoride ion. This is a Many secreted proteins, as well as smaller peptide
nucleophilic displacement on phosphorus, occurring hormones, are acted upon in the endoplasmic reticu-
on an enzyme that normally catalyzes displacement lum by tryptases and other serine proteases. They
on C = O. The DFP molecule acts as a pseudosubstrate often cut between pairs of basic residues such as KK,
which reacts with the enzyme in a manner analogous KR, or RR.214– 216 A substilisin-like protease cleaves
to that of a true substrate but which does not complete adjacent to methionine.217 Other classes of proteases
the reaction sequence normally. (e.g., zinc-dependent carboxypeptidases) also partici-
pate in this processing. Serine carboxypeptidases
are involved in processing human prohormones.218
H3C O Enzyme Among the serine carboxypeptidases of known struc-
32 ture is one from wheat219 and carboxypeptidase Y, a
C O P F
H vacuolar enzyme from yeast.220 Like the pancreatic
H3C
O metallocarboxypeptidases discussed in Section 4, these
32P-containing enzymes remove one amino acid at a time, a property
CH
enzyme that has made carboxypeptidases valuable reagents for
H3C CH3
determination of amino acid sequences. Carboxypep-
Diisopropyfluorophosphate (DFP), also
tidases may also be used for modification of proteins
called diisopropylphosphofluoridate
by removal of one or a few amino acids from the ends.
+ The variety of bacterial serine proteases known
O
H3N H
include the 198-residue (cid:1)-lytic protease ofMyxo-
–
32P O CH2 C COO – b
p
a
r
c
o
t
d
er
u
,2
c
2
e
1
d
a
b
fa
y
m
v
i
a
l
r
y
i o
o
u
f
s
a t
s p
le
e
a
c
s
i
t
e s
8 0
o f
s u
Ba
b
c
t
i
i
l
l
l
i
u
s
s
i
2
n
22
s
– 2
w
25
h
a
i
a
c
s
h
w
ar
e
e
ll
O
HO as by many other organisms,226 and a trypsinlike
O-Phosphoserine enzyme from Streptomyces griseus.227,228 Tripeptidyl
(12-19)
peptidases, subtilisin-like enzymes, cut tripeptides
from the N-termini of proteins.228a,b,c One participates
From study of peptides formed by partial hydroly- in lysosomal protein degradation and the other, an
sis of the 32P-labeled chymotrypsin, the sequence of oligomer of 138 kDa subunits, cuts precursor proteins
amino acids surrounding the reactive serine was estab- to form neuropeptides and other hormones (Chapter
lished and serine 195 was identified as the residue whose 30).
side chain hydroxyl group became phosphorylated.
The same sequence Gly-Asp-Ser-Gly was soon discov- Acyl-enzyme intermediates. Serine proteases
ered around reactive serine residues in trypsin, throm- are probably the most studied of any group of en-
bin, elastase, and in the trypsin-like cocoonase used zymes.229 Early work was focused on the digestive
by silkmoths to escape from their cocoons.198 We enzymes. The pseudosubstrate, p-nitrophenyl acetate,
know now that these are only a few of the enzymes in reacts with chymotrypsin at pH 4 (far below the opti-
a very large family of serine proteases, most of which mum pH for hydrolysis) with rapid release of p-nitro-
have related active site sequences.199,200 Among these phenol and formation of acetyl derivative of the
are thrombin and other enzymes of the blood-clotting enzyme.
cascade (Fig. 12-17), proteases of lysosomes, and se-
creted proteases.
O
Numerous serine proteases, including trypsin-like
enzymes called tryptases201– 204a and chymotrypsin- CH3 C O NO2
like chymases,205– 207 are found within tissues in which
they are stored in granules of mast cells,208 neutro- p-Nitrophenyl acetate
phils, lymphocytes, and cytotoxic T cells.205 Secretory
granules of mast cells present in skin and other tissues
contain high concentrations of tryptase and chymase This acetyl enzyme hydrolyzes very slowly at pH 4
precursors202,206 which may be released as part of an but rapidly at higher pH. These experiments suggest-
inflammatory response. Tryptase may be involved in ed a double displacement mechanism:
asthma and other allergic resposes.201 Cathepsin G209

--- Page 614 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 611
ofp-nitrophenyl acetate with formation of unstable
O HOR’ O
N-acetyl imidazoles as intermediates. Thus, while the
R C R C Acyl
enzyme stable end products of reactions with pseudosubstrates
B – O R’
B were unquestionably derivatives of serine, the possi-
H+
Enzyme Enzyme bility remained that these were side products and that
– OH histidine was involved in transient, rapidly forming,
and reacting intermediates. It remained for the results
of the then newly developed science of X-ray crystal-
–
O B
lography to clarify this question.230
R C
Enzyme
OH Three-dimensional structures. The structures of
(12-20)
chymotrypsin,199,230,231 trypsin,232,233 elastase,234,235
thrombin,236 kallikrein,237,238 and many other enzymes
Although the experiments with DFP suggested are similar, with the basic fold shown in Fig. 12-9.199,228
that the – O – group from Ser 195 might be the base – B – Both Ser 195 and His 57 (or corresponding residues)
in this equation, there was reluctance to accept this are present in the active site (Figs. 12-9, 12-10). From
deduction because of the very weak acidity of the the observed positions of competitive inhibitors occu-
– CH OH group. Furthermore, the pH dependence of pying the active site, the modes of binding depicted in
2
catalysis suggested an imidazole group of a histidine Fig. 12-10A for the chymotrypsin family and in Fig.
side chain as the attacking nucleophile B. Indeed, 12-10B for the subtilisin family have been deduced.
imidazoles catalyze the nonenzymatic hydrolysis Bear in mind that the X-ray diffraction results do not
Figure 12-9 Alpha-carbon diagram
of the three-dimensional structure of 36
pancreatic elastase. A principal struc- 76
tural feature is a pair of β cylinders.
One of these, at the top of the figure, is
viewed end-on, while the other, at the 87 65
bottom of the figure, is viewed from a
side. The prominent interface between –
them is seen in the center. The α-carbon 245
positions of the catalytic triad serine
120
195, histidine 57, and aspartate 102 are
marked. As shown in Fig. 12-10 the
N
catalytic triad is located across the H 42
interface between β cylinders, which 150
may allow for easier conformational O O
alterations during the action of the
enzyme. The four disulfide bridges 57 195 – + 16
and the long C-terminal helix are also
emphasized. The cross-hatched loop 102 201 191
regions are residues present in elastase 214 S
136
but not present in chymotrypsin. The
S
green shaded strand (residues 214 – 216) 228
is a segment that joins residues P and P 97
1 2 220 188
of the substrate to the edge of the lower 182
β cylinder in an extended β structure.
The ion pair formed by aspartate 194
and isoleucine 16 during zymogen
activation is also shown, as are two
peptide carbonyl groups that protrude 168
into the interface area, one forming a
hydrogen bond across the interface.
Modified from a drawing of Sawyer
et al.234 which was in turn based on
the original chymotrypsin drawing of
Annette Snazle.230

--- Page 615 ---

612 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
A
β Cylinder 1 O
C
N
H 40 Figure 12-10 (A) Part of
O Ser 32 the hydrogen-bonding net-
O H work of trypsin and other
43 N
O N N H H N O Gln 30 s tr e y r p in s e in p s r u ot b e s a t s ra es te w (g it r h e e a n b ). ound
S S H O Residues P to P , as defined in
N 57 H H H H 1 3
H 197 O O Fig. 12-14, have been marked.
O O N H O H The view is similar to that in
A 1 s 0 p 2 C O – H N N O H N N P 1 ro 95 O N H N H N H N Gly 1 O 93 O H N 143 F l t i h i n g e e . t s 1 w h 2 o - a 9 v c b e o u m b t e p s e o e n m t i o n e m g b i h a tt y c e k d d g r . r o o g N u e o n n t d - e
Interface H O N 21 H 3 O O P 1 C O + H H O 19 – 2 NH O + b C cy o = l n i O n d d e o d e f r c r 2 h e . a s i i O n d s u n p e e a 2 o s 2 f s 7 i t n h i g n e s t β e hrough
N 3
O 214 O H N O H O H 2 O Ile 16 c b h a a ck in b s o p n a e s o s f e s th t e h r s o u u b g s h tr a th te e and
H
N N P the other through residues
2
H N N H 2 fa 1 c 4 e a b n e d tw 19 ee 5 n a c d r o o m ss a t i h n e s i i n n t t e o r β -
O H
H O cylinder 2. Asp 102, His 57,
N N O H P 3 and Ser 195 of the catalytic
H O N Substrate triad are emphasized. Arrows
O
227 N H 216 indicate probable movement of
electrons from the negative
N
H charge of Asp 102 into the
β Cylinder 2 “oxyanion hole.” After
Metzler.85 Based on papers
of Sawyer et al.234 and Huber
B and Bode.240 (B) Stereoscopic
view showing the model sub-
strateN-succinyl-L-Ala-L-Ala-
L-Pro-L-Phe-p-nitroanilide
bound into the active site of
subtilisin BPN’. Residues of
the catalytic triad (Ser 221,
His 64, Asp 32) and some
others are labeled. Subsites
P ', P , P , P , and P (see Fig.
1 1 2 3 4
12-14) are also labeled. Notice
that site P , which is near the
3
top in this drawing, is at the
bottom in (A). Based on X-ray
data of R. Bott and M. Ultsch
at 0.2 nm resolution. From
Wells and Estell.223
show where the hydrogen atoms are and that these The second nitrogen atom of His 57 is hydrogen
have been added in Fig. 12-10. The imidazole group bonded to the carboxylate group of Asp 102, which is
of His 57 is located next to the side chain –OH group in turn hydrogen bonded to two other groups. Aspar-
of Ser 195 and is able to form an N---H–O hydrogen tate 102 has one of the few carboxylate side chains
bond to it. The obvious conclusion is that His 57 acts that is buried inside the protein. To Blow,230,231,239 the
as a general base catalyst that assists in removing the structure suggested a charge-relay system by which
proton from the –OH of Ser 195, making that hydroxyl negative charges might move synchronously from Asp
group more nucleophilic than it would be otherwise. 102 to the imidazole which could then deprotonate the
This may happen after the –OH group has started to hydroxyl group of Ser 195, allowing the serine oxygen
add to the substrate carbonyl. to add to the substrate carbonyl to form the tetrahedral

--- Page 616 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 613
oroxyanion intermediate, which is depicted in step b Support for this concept is provided by 1H NMR
of Fig. 12-11. The small arrows in Fig. 12-10 also indi- studies which have identified a downfield resonance
cate the movement of charge. Blow suggested that in of the hydrogen-bonded proton in this pair at ~18 ppm
the extreme case a proton might be transferred also in chymotrypsinogen and chymotrypsin at low pH and
from the His 57 imidazole to the Asp 102 carboxylate. at ~ 14.9 – 15.5 ppm at high pH values.246,247 Similar
However, a variety of experiments, including studies resonances are seen in the α-lytic protease,248 in sub-
by15N NMR241,242 and by neutron diffraction,243 sug- tilisin,249 in adducts of serine proteases with boronic
gest that the imidazole does not transfer its proton to acids250,251 or peptidyl trifluoromethyl ketones,252 in
the carboxylate of Asp 102,244,245 unless it does so alkylated derivative of the active site histidine,253 and
transiently, e.g., in a transition state complex. Instead, in molecular complexes that mimic the Asp-His pair
the carboxylate and the imidazolium ions formed by in the active sites of serine proteases.254
protonation of His 57 probably exist as a tight ion pair:
The catalytic cycle. Figure 12-11 depicts the
generally accepted sequence of reactions for a serine
protease. If we consider both the formation and the
subsequent hydrolysis of the acyl-enzyme intermediate
O
with appropriate oxyanion intermediates, there are at
– + least seven distinct steps. As indicated in this figure,
C O H N N H
His 57 not only accepts a proton from the hydroxyl
Free enzyme and substrate
a
His 57 O CH2
O CH2 Ser 195 C
H
N N O H2N R'
Asp 102 C O – H N N H O HN R' O – R C O–
C Acyl-enzyme·product complex
R O H N H 2 O
d
H R’—NH 2
(product)
N Oxyanion hole
O
Michaelis complex CH2
C N N
– H H O
b O
O C O
H R
?
O CH2 Acyl-enzyme·H 2 O complex
C – H +N N H O HN R' c e
O C
R O– H N O CH2
H C + N N H O
– H OH
N O C
–
R O
Oxyanion intermediate
Second oxyanion
Possible
Figure 12-11 Sequence b’ conformational
change f
of chemical reactions
involved in the action of
a serine protease. The O
CH2 O CH2
O H C N N H O
o h x a y s a b n e i e o n n o h m ol i e tt e st d r u in c t t u h r e e C O – H N +N H C N R' O – H OH
right-hand column. The R O – C
R O
imidazole ring may
Second conformation of oxyanion intermediate Product complex
rotate, as indicated by
the green arrow, to g
provide two different
conformations. Free enzyme + R—COOH

--- Page 617 ---

614 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
group of Ser 195 (step b) but probably also functions in Ser 195 of chymotrypsin is probably correct. Some
protonation of the – NH – R’ leaving group (step c). An theoretical calculations have indicated the possibility
unprotonated – NH – R’ would be such a poor leaving of synchronous movement of the two protons in the
group that the oxyanion intermediate would not go on system during step a of the sequence shown in Fig.
to acyl-enzyme. However, donation of a proton to that 12-11, with the proton in the strong hydrogen bond
leaving group from the protonated His 57 (general to Asp 102 moving away from His 57 and toward the
acid catalysis) permits elimination of H N– R’ (step c). midpoint distance of the hydrogen bond. Could the
2
The product of this step is the acyl-enzyme intermedi- presumed high energy of the short hydrogen bond
ate which must be hydrolyzed to complete the cata- be harnessed to lower the transition state energy? A
lytic cycle. This is accomplished through steps d– f of realistic possibility is that the hydrogen bond increases
Fig. 12-11. The product R’– NH is replaced by H O, the polarizability of the catalytic triad, facilitating
2 2
which, in steps paralleling steps band c, is converted movement of the substrate to the transition state.
to an HO – ion that serves as the attacking nucleophile Cassidyet al. suggested that the strong hydrogen bond
to form (in step e) a second oxyanion intermediate may be formed by compression of the triad resulting
which is cleaved to the second product R – COOH. from binding of substrate in the S and S subsites.252
1 2
The water molecule that enters in step d, and which They suggested that this would raise the pK of His 57
a
participates in hydrolysis of the acyl enzyme, has from ~ 7 in the free enzyme to 10 – 12, high enough to
apparently been observed directly by time-resolved enable it to remove the proton from the Ser 195 – OH
Laue crystallography at low temperature.255 group and low enough to allow the protonated form to
be the proton donor to the leaving group (step c, Fig.
The catalytic triad. The significance of the 12-11).
charge-relay effect may not be fully understood but
the importance of the Ser·His·Asp cluster, which has The “oxyanion hole.” A third mechanism by
become known as the catalytic triad, cannot be doubted. which an enzyme can assist in a displacement reaction
It has evolved independently in several subfamilies of on a carbonyl group is through protonation of the
bacterial and plant proteases, a well-known example carbonyl oxygen atom by an acidic group of the en-
of“convergent evolution.” This triad is also found zyme (Eq. 12-21). This will greatly increase the posi-
throughout a broad range of many different kinds of tive charge on the carbon atom making attack by a
enzymes and other proteins. In pancreatic enzymes nucleophile easier and will also stabilize the tetrahedral
the catalytic triad consists of Ser 195·His 57·Asp 102
but in the bacterial subtilisin it consists of Ser 221·His
64·Asp 32 and in a wheat serine carboxypeptidase it H H
is Ser 146·His 397·Asp 338.219 In all three cases the N R’ N R’
R C R C
folding patterns of the polypeptides are entirely differ-
ent but the geometry of the triad is the same. Another O + O
folding pattern is seen in a protease encoded by cyto- H –
HB B
megalovirus, which contains an active site Ser 132·His
63 pair.256,257
H
Investigation of a host of mutant proteins also
N + R’
demonstrates the importance of the catalytic triad. R C
For example, if either the histidine or the serine of the
O
triad of subtilisin was replaced by alanine the catalytic
H
activity decreased by a factor of 2 x 106 and replace- – B
ment of the aspartate of the triad by alanine decreased (12-21)
activity by a factor of 3 x 104.229,258 When Asp 102 of
trypsin is replaced by asparagine the catalytic activity intermediate. Although the carbonyl oxygen is very
falls by four orders of magnitude.259 This may be in weakly basic, it can interact with a suitably oriented
part because the histidine in this mutant is hydrogen acidic group of the enzyme. In many serine proteases
bonded to Asn 102 as the tautomer with a proton on this acidic function is apparently fulfilled by NH
ε
N , the nitrogen that should serve as the catalytic base groups of two amide linkages. In chymotrypsin these
in step b (Fig. 12-11).260 A mutant in which Ser 214 are the backbone NH groups of Ser 195 and Gly 193
(see Fig. 12-10) was replaced with alanine is fully (Figs. 12-10,12-12). No actual transfer of a proton to
active but charged residues in this position interfere the carbonyl oxygen of the substrate is expected.
with catalysis.261 However, the NH groups are positive ends of amide
Does the “low-barrier hydrogen bond” in the dipoles and can interact electrostatically with the
catalytic triad play any special role in catalysis? negative charge that develops on the oxyanion. The fit
Blow’s suggestion of a charge relay from Asp 102 to of substrate into the oxyanion hole between the two

--- Page 618 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 615
NH groups is apparently good only for the tetrahe- (leupeptin; Box 12-C). A natural product from a
drally bonded oxyanion intermediate,262 a structure species of Streptomyces, this aldehyde inhibits trypsin
thought to be close to that of the transition state. The and several other enzymes strongly.266 Adducts of
importance of the oxyanion hole for catalysis has been wheat serine carboxypeptidases with aldehyde inhibi-
supported by theoretical calculations245 and by the tors have also been observed.267 While the carbonyl
study of mutant enzymes.263 In subtilisin, in which a group of the substrate amide linkage that is to be
side chain of asparagine forms part of the oxyanion hole, cleaved apparently can’t form strong hydrogen bonds
replacement of Asn with the isosteric Leu causes k to to the NH groups of the oxyanion hole, that of the
cat
fall by a factor of about 200 while K is unaffected.264 acyl-enzyme intermediate can, as judged by resonance
m
It is also of interest that thiono ester substrates, in Raman spectroscopy.268,269 The strength of the hydro-
which the C = O of an oxygen ester has been replaced gen bonding, as judged by the stretching frequency of
by C = S, bind with normal affinity to chymotrypsin the C = O group, is correlated with the reactivity of the
but are not hydrolyzed at significant rates.265 acyl group.269
The formation of the oxyanion intermediate during Chymotrypsinogen and related proenzymes have
serine protease action is also supported by the existence extremely low catalytic activity even though a major
of tetrahedral forms of enzymes inhibited by substrate- part of the substrate binding site as well as the catalytic
like aldehydes. The – OH group of Ser 195 can add to triad system are already in place. However, the oxy-
the carbonyl group to form hemiacetals. For example, anion hole is created during activation of the proen-
a13C-enriched aldehyde whose carbonyl carbon had a zyme by a subtle conformational change197,262,271 that
chemical shift of 204 ppm gave a 94 ppm resonance as involves the chain segment containing Gly 193 (Fig.
it formed the tetrahedral hemiacetal with one of the 12-12). This is further evidence of the importance of
inhibitory aldehydes, N-acetyl-L-Leu-L-Leu-L-arginal this part of the active site structure.
A B
N
His 40 N Gln 30
H
C O
O
–
HN
Asp 194 CO H H
O
H N C O H N H O C Met 192
Ser 95 C N
O S
His 57 N H O Gly 193 CH3
N
OH
C – O
Trypsinogen
Asp 102 H Ser 214
O
N
Gln 30
N H O H N C O
H H H H
Gly O O
193
B g su r o o b u u s n t p r d a f a t r e o cy m l R C O H H N N C C O C N O 1 H 94 C O – O H H + N H Ile 16
O
H 192
N
S
N
OH Trypsin
O
– CH3
H O Ser 214
Figure 12-12 Formation of the oxyanion hole following cleavage of trypsinogen between Lys 15 and Ile 16. (A) Stereoscopic
view. (B) Schematic representation. The newly created terminal –NH + of Ile 16 forms a hydrogen-bonded ion pair with the
3
carboxylate of Asp 194. This breaks the hydrogen bond between Asp 194 and His 40 in trypsinogen, inducing the peptide
segment 192–194 to shift from an extended conformation to a helical form in which the NH groups of Gly 193 and Ser 195 form
the oxyanion hole. Notice that the positions and interactions of Asp 102, His 57, and Ser 195, the catalytic triad, are very little
changed. From Birktoft et al.270

--- Page 619 ---

616 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Stereoelectronic considerations. The amide Bizzozero and Butler suggested that a rapid inversion
group that is cleaved by a protease is a resonance hybrid of this chiral center on the – NH – R’ group may be
of structures A and B of Fig. 12-13. The unshared pair required prior to protonation and elimination.273
of electrons on the nitrogen atom of structure A and the This would explain their observation that N-alkylated
third unshared pair on the oxygen atoms of structure B peptide linkages of otherwise fast substrates are not
(shaded orbitals) have been drawn in this figure in such cleaved by chymotrypsin. A high-resolution structure
a way that they are anti-periplanar to the entering determination demonstrated that a very slow elastase
serine oxygen. This is required in the transition state substrate that contains N-methylleucine at the cleavage
according to stereoelectronic theory. The newly created site forms a normal ES complex.275 However, inversion
(shaded) electron pair on oxygen is one of those that would be hindered by the N-methyl group. An alter-
hydrogen bonds to an NH group of the oxyanion hole. native in inversion would be a torsional rearrangement
The tetrahedral intermediate has another unshared pair, of the substrate during binding.276 The structure of
which is not hydrogen bonded, and is antiperiplanar to an acyl-enzyme intermediate with elastase has been
the HN-R leaving group. Thus, it appears to be set up determined by crystallographic cryoenzymology. The
for easy elimination. Nevertheless, there is some doubt intermediate was allowed to accumulate at – 26°C,
about the need for adherence to the stereoelectronic after which the temperature was lowered to – 50°C and
“rule” that two antiperiplanar lone pairs are necessary the structure determined. The structure shows the
for elimination. carbonyl group in the oxyanion hole as anticipated.277
There is another complication. The leaving group
– NH – R’ cannot be eliminated from the oxyanion until pH dependence. A plot of k /K for chymo-
cat m
it is protonated, presumably by the imidazolium group trypsin is bell shaped with a maximum around pH 7.8
of His 57. However, the proton on His 57 will be and pK values of 6.8 and 8.8. These represent pK s of
a a
adjacent to the proton that is already on this nitrogen the free enzyme (Eq. 9-57). That of 6.8 has been shown
rather than to the unshared pair of electrons on the to represent His 57. As the pH is lowered from the
same nitrogen atom. A conformational change in optimum the affinity for substrate falls off as His 57
which the tilt of the catalytic imidazole ring is altered becomes protonated. The high pK of 8.8 is thought
a
(stepb’, Fig. 12-11) or in which the ring rotates, may to belong to the N-terminal amino group of Ile 16, a
have to precede the protonation of the leaving group group that is generated during the conversion of the
(stepc, Fig. 12-11).272– 274b This change may be assisted proenzyme to active enzyme.278 The Ile 16 amino
by the presence of positive charge on the protonated group forms an ion pair with Asp 194 (Fig. 12-12B)
imidazole, but it still does not solve the problem. which is next to the serine at the active center. This
salt linkage helps to hold the enzyme in the
required conformation for reaction and its
deprotonation at high pH causes a decrease
+ in substrate affinity.279
H N H N
The value of k is also pH dependent
α O O cat
C Resonance C and falls off at low pH around a pK a value
forms of from 6 – 7 depending upon the substrate.
His 57 A B
H R H R However, no higher pK affects k in the
a cat
Oxyanion experimentally accessible range. These
H O hole results provide the basis for believing that
N N
an unprotonated His 57 is needed in the ES
H N H
N complex for catalysis to occur. Similar
Ser 195
H conclusions have been reached for other
Must be protonated H N
serine proteases.
before elimination α O Tetrahedral
C C intermediate
Substrate specificity. Like most other
O enzymes, proteases display distinct prefer-
ences for certain substrates. These are often
discussed using the nomenclature of Fig.
Ser 195 12-14. The substrate residue contributing
the carbonyl of the amide group to be cleaved
is designated P and residues toward the
Figure 12-13 The stereochemistry of formation of a tetrahedral 1
N terminus as P , P , etc., as is shown in
intermediate by a serine protease. The most probable orientation of 2 3
Fig. 12-14. Residues toward the C terminus
groups as deduced by model building is shown. The shaded orbitals in
A and B are antiperiplanar to the entering oxygen of Ser 195. See from the peptide linkage to be cleaved are
Polgár and Halász.272 designated P ’, P ’, etc. Chymotrypsin acts
1 2

--- Page 620 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 617
most rapidly if the P residue is one of the aromatic hydrolysis to give acetate is orders of magnitude slower
1
amino acids.280 Thus, the S part of the substrate than that of acyl-enzymes derived from small substrates
1
binding site must bind preferentially to large, flat such as the chymotrypsin substrate N-acetyltyrosine
aromatic rings. The crystal structure of chymotrypsin amide.
showed this site to be composed of nonpolar side chain
groups. On the other hand, in trypsin the specificity
portion of the S site is a deep “specificity pocket”
containing a fix
1
ed negative charge provided by the
O H CH2 OH
carboxylate side chain group of Asp 189. This explains C C
why trypsin acts only upon peptide linkages containing H3C N C NH2
H
the positively charged arginine or lysine residues in
O
the P position. In elastase the specificity pocket is
1 N-Acetyltyrosine amide
partly filled by nonpolar side chains and the enzyme
can accommodate only small P side chains such as the
1
methyl group of alanine. Replacement of Asp 189 of In addition to the specificity-determining P aromatic
1
trypsin by lysine led to the predicted loss of specificity side chain, the amide groups of this substrate can form
for basic side chains. However, the mutant enzyme specific hydrogen bonds to the protein (Fig. 12-10).
did not become specific for negatively charged side These hydrogen bonds presumably help the enzyme
chains.281 This is presumably because the lysine – NH + to recognize the compound, which is bound with
3
group was not located in the same position as the Asp K of ~ 0.03 M and is hydrolyzed (with liberation of
m
189 carboxylate as a result of a different packing of NH )288,289 with k ~ 0.17 s–1.
3 cat
side chains between native and mutant enzymes. What happens when the length of the substrate
Residues P ’ and P ’ also have major effects on substrate is extended in the direction of the N terminus? The
1 2
binding by serine proteases.282– 284 Now many mutant tyrosyl residue in the foregoing compound may be
forms of subtilisin225,285 and other serine proteases are designated P . For extended substrates which contain
1
being made and are yielding a more sophisticated P , P , and additional residues (this includes most
2 3
understanding of the basis of the specificity of these natural substrates) the K values decrease very little
m
enzymes. An important factor that has emerged is from that of short substrates despite the larger number
flexibility of surface loops in allowing an enzyme to of“subsites” to which the substrate is bound. However,
adjust its structure to give a better fit to some sub- the maximum velocity is often much greater for the
strates.286,287 The specificity of the serine proteases is extended substrates than for short ones. Thus, for
also being exploited in the design of specific inhibitors N-acetyltyrosyl-glycine amide K is 0.017 M, only a
m
(Box 12-D). little less than for N-acetyltyrosine amide, but k is
cat
Many serine proteases react with p-nitrophenyl- 7.5 s–1, 440 times greater than for the shorter sub-
acetate to give acetyl enzymes. However, its rate of strate.229,288,289 Other examples have been tabulated
by Fersht.279
These observations suggest
thatthe binding energy that would be
S S S S S S’ S’ S’
5 4 3 2 1 1 2 3 expected to increase the tightness of
binding is, instead, causing an increase
Cleavage
in V 279,290 that is, it is reducing the
R O R O R O R’ O max
5 3 1 2
H H H H Gibbs energy of activation. How can
N P N P N P ’ N P ’
P 5 4 N H P 3 2 N H P 1 1 N H P 2 ’ 3 N H t s h u i b s s b t e ra ? t e Im b a in g d in s e , f t o h r a t e x as a m th p e l e e x , t i e n n t d o ed
O R 4 O R 2 O R 1 ’ O R 3 ’ the subsite S 2 (which binds residue
P ), it must compress a spring in the
O O O S’ 2
H H H H H 3 enzyme. Could not the compressed
N
N N N Ser 195 N spring now provide a source of
218 N H N H Ser 214 Gly 193 41 energy for assisting in peptide bond
O Val 216 O cleavage? If this is the case, we must
S S S S S S’ S’ ask“what are the springs?” Are
5 4 3 2 1 1 2
there amide linkages of the peptide
backbone that are distorted when
the substrate hydrogen bonds into
Figure 12-14 Standard nomenclature used to define the residues P , P . . .
1 2 the site? How is the distortion
toward the N terminus and P ', P ' . . . toward the C terminus of a peptide
1 2 transmitted to the active site and
substrate for a protease. The corresponding subsites of the protease are desig-
nated S , S . . . S ', S '. how does it stabilize the transition
1 2 1 2

--- Page 621 ---

618 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
state? We are far from understanding the answers to H
these questions. However, it is of interest that one chain
N
of H-bonds that passes through the amide between P
1
and P also passes through a carbonyl group of a β
2 +
bulge (Fig. 12-10). A second chain of H-bonds that N
connects to the same β bulge passes through the back- S – H
bone amide of the active site Ser 195, across the inter- Cys 25 His 159
face between the two domains, and through the back-
bone of the second β cylinder.85 Perhaps when substrate The close proximity of the imidazolium group greatly
binds, the strengthening of the first H-bond chain lowers the microscopic pK of the Cys 25 thiol group
a
weakens the second through competition at the β bulge, and the proximity of the resulting hydrogen-bonded
allowing some subtle rearrangement in the active site S– group greatly raises the microscopic pK of the
a
structure. We are talking here about the P – P amide. imidazolium group.
1 2
What happens at P – P , and further along the chain in Studies of the pH dependence of V /k (Eq. 9-57)
2 3 max cat
both directions? It is important to understand these reveal a bell-shaped dependence on pH with pK
a
effects; the phenomenon of increased reaction rate for values301,302 of ~ 4 and ~ 9. However, the ion pair is
longer, more specific substrates is observed with many formed at a pH below four with apparent pK values
a
proteases and other enzymes as well. of 2.5, 2.9, and 3.3 for ficin, caricain, and papain, re-
Another difference between small substrates and spectively.302 These low values can be assigned princi-
longer, more specific substrates has been found in pally to Cys 25 with only very small contributions from
studies of the effects of changing the solvent from pure His 159 (see Eq. 6-75). A third pK , perhaps of a nearby
a
H O to mixtures containing an increasing mole fraction carboxylate from Glu 50, affects the rate. For caricain
2
of2H O. This is called a proton inventory.291 For the nearby Asp 158 (Fig. 12-15) has been implicated.303,304
2
the serine proteases the rates are decreased as the 2H
content of the solvent increases, a fact that suggests
that some step involving a proton transfer, for example, Ser 176
the deprotonation of Ser 195, is rate limiting. For simple
substrates, the effect is directly proportional to the mole
O
fraction of 2H. However, for extended substrates, a H Asn 175
quadratic dependence on the mole fraction of 2H is Gln 19 O
observed. This suggests that a process involving syn- C C H
chronous transfer of two protons, as in the postulated O N
N
charge relay system, may be more important in extended H
H H
substrates than in simple ones and may account for H
the more rapid action on these substrates.290,292 How- OO
ever, other interpretations of the data are possible,
CC N
H
leaving this conclusion uncertain.229,291 SS
+
N N His 159
–
S H
Cys 25
2. The Cysteine Proteases (Thiol Proteases)
–
O
NH
Papain from the papaya is one of a family of C O
O
enzymes that includes bromelain of the pineapple,
ficin of the fig, and actinidin of the kiwifruit.293 Asp 158
Additional cysteine proteases294 from the latex of
the papaya tree Carica papaya are known as caricain,
Figure 12-15 Schematic drawing of the active site of a
chymopapain,294 and glycyl endopeptidase.295 All
cysteine protease of the papain family with a partial struc-
are members of a large superfamily which includes at
ture of an acyl-enzyme intermediate in green. The thiolate-
least 12 mammalian enzymes and many others from imidazolium pair of Cys 25·His 159 lies deep in the substrate-
both eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms.296 All binding cleft and bridges an interface between two major
share with papain a characteristic structure which was structural domains, just as the Ser·His pair does in serine
determined by Drenth and coworkers in 1968.297 The proteases (Fig. 12-10). This may facilitate small conforma-
participating nucleophile in the active sites of these tional changes during the catalytic cycle. Asn 175 provides a
enzymes is an SH group, that of Cys 25 in papain. An polarizable acceptor for positive charge, helping to stabilize
the preformed ion pair, and allows easy transfer of an imida-
adjacent imidazole from His 159 removes the proton
zolium proton to the product of substrate cleavage. The pep-
from the SH group to form a thiolate-imidazolium
tide NH of Cys 25 and the side chain of Gln 19 form an
pair.298– 300
oxyanion hole.

--- Page 622 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 619
As shown in Fig. 12-15, the side chain of Asn 175 contain high levels of the enzyme, whereas it is low in
provides papain with a third member of a catalytic triad skin and lung tissues, which are damaged by bleomycin.
analogous to that of serine proteases.305 Glutamine 19, The Ca2+-dependent neutral proteases called
together with the peptide backbone NH of Cys 25, pro- calpains are found within the cells of higher animals.
vides an oxyanion hole.306– 308 Many studies, including The 705-residue multidomain peptide chain of a chicken
structure determinations on bound aldehyde and other calpain contains a papain-like domain as well as a
inhibitors, and observation by 13C NMR309 indicate that calmodulin-like domain.328 It presumably arose from
thiol proteases act by addition of the thiolate anion to the fusion of the genes of these proteins. At least six
peptide carbonyl of the P residue, just as in step b of calpains with similar properties are known.329 Some
1
Fig. 12-11 (see also Fig. 12-12) for serine proteases.308,310 have a preference for myofibrillar proteins or neuro-
However, alternative sequences of proton transfer have filaments.330 They presumably function in normal
been suggested.311 A possible role for a strong hydrogen turnover of these proteins and may play a role in
bond has also been proposed.310 For a detailed discussion numerous calcium-activated cellular processes.331–332a
see Brocklehurst et al.312 A group of cysteinyl aspartate-specific proteases
Most of the lysosomal proteases called cathepsins (caspases) play an essential role in programmed cell
are small 20- to 40-kDa glycoproteins found in all death (apoptosis).333– 335 Recall that nematodes are cell-
animal tissues.313 Most are cysteine proteases which constant organisms. For maturation of Caenorhabditis
function best and are most stable in the low pH reducing elegans 131 programmed cell deaths must occur at
environment of lysosomes. They resemble papain in specific stages of development. An essential gene
size, amino acid sequence, and active site structures. for this process was identified and named CED-3.
Papain is nonspecific but most cathepsins have definite Deletion of this gene completely blocked the death
substrate preferences. Cathepsin B is the most abun- of these cells. CED-3 encodes a cysteine protease that
dant. There are smaller amounts of related cathepsins is highly homologous to the mammalian interleukin-
H (an aminopeptidase)314 and L315 and still less of cathep- 1(cid:2)-converting enzyme (ICE or caspase 1) which
sins C, K, and others. Cathepsin B is both an endopep- cleaves the 31-kDa pro-interleukin-1(cid:2) to form the
tidase and an exopeptidase.316 It acts on peptides with active 175 kDa species of this cytokine (Chapter 30).
arginine at either P or P but also accepts bulky hydro- At least ten caspases are known and many observations
1 2
phobic residues in P and prefers tyrosine at P .317 have confirmed their role in apoptosis (see also Chap-
1 3
Cathepsin S is less stable at higher pH than other ter 32). In caspases 1 and 2 the side chains of Cys 285
cathepsins and has a more limited tissue distribution, and His 237 form the catalytic dyad and peptide NH
being especially active in the immune system.318,319 groups of Cys 285 and Gly 238 form the oxyanion
Cathepsin K is especially abundant in the bone hole.333
resorbing osteoclasts (Chapter 8). It is essential to Parasites often use proteases in attacks on their
normal bone structure and its absence is associated hosts. The cysteine protease cruzain is secreted by
with the rare hereditary disease pycnodysostosis the trypanosomes that cause Chagas’ disease and is
(pycno) which causes short stature, fragile bones, and essential to their survival within the human body.336,337
skull and skeletal deformities.320 It may also play a Cruzain is consequently an attractive target for devel-
role in the very common bone condition osteoporosis. opment of drugs for treating this major disease.
Cathepsin C is also called dipeptidyl peptidase. It Among cysteine proteases of bacteria is a papain-
removes N-terminal dipeptides from many intracellular like enzyme from Clostridium histolyticum with a speci-
proteins activating many enzymes, including some ficity similar to that of trypsin.338 The anaerobic
other cathepsins.321,322 A prohormone thiol protease Porphyromonas gingivalis, which is implicated in perio-
cleaves peptide chains between pairs of basic residues, dental disease, produces both arginine- and lysine-
e.g., in the brain peptide precursor proenkephalin specific cysteine proteases designated gingipains.339,339a
(Chapter 30), and also on the N-terminal side of argi- Some virally encoded cysteine proteases, including
nine residues.323 Pyroglutamate aminopeptidase one from the polio virus, have trypsin-like sequences
removes pyroglutamyl (5-oxoprolyl) groups from amino with the serine of the catalytic triad replaced by cys-
termini of some peptides and proteins (see Fig. 2-4).324 teine.340,341 A human adenovirus protease also has a
Another cysteine protease cleaves isopeptide linkages Cys·His·Glu triad but a totally different protein fold.342
such as those formed by transglutaminase or those Zymogens of cysteine proteases usually have a
involving ubiquitin (Box 10-C).325 Another cysteine long terminal extension which is removed, some-
protease present in animal tissues was recognized by times by autoactivation. Propapain has a 107-residue
its ability to hydrolyze the anticancer drug bleomycin. extension.343 The 322-residue cathepsin B carries an
Thisbleomycin hydrolase is a hexamer with a central unusually short 62-residue extension in its proenzyme
channel lined with papainlike active sites as in the form.315,343,344 In every case the N-terminal extension
proteasome structure (Box 7-A)326 The enzyme also folds into a domain, one of whose functions is to block
binds to DNA.327 Unfortunately, cancer tissues often the active site cleft.

--- Page 623 ---

620 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
structures.354 The – NH group is basic enough in the
3. N-terminal Nucleophile Hydrolases and 2
environment of the protein to remove the proton from
Related Enzymes
the threonine – OH group, activating it as indicated
below. Several serine proteases use an – NH group of
The most recently discovered group of proteases 2
a lysine to form a serine·lysine dyad.346
are the N-terminal threonine hydrolases of the multi-
catalytic protease complex (MPC) of proteasomes.
H
The enzymes are arranged in a regular array inside
Serine
proteasomal compartments as shown in Box 7-A. The N H
active site is a catalytic dyad formed from the amino H O CH2
group at the N terminus of the β subunits.345–346a Lysine
Among these are the well-known E. coli leader pepti-
H O dase355,356 and other signal peptidases.357 These are
H N C Enzyme integral membrane proteins that cleave N-terminal
C N Hydroxyl·α-amine signal sequences from proteins incorporated into plasma
H H catalytic dyad membranes. Another enzyme of this class is the lexA
H C CH3
repressor and protease discussed in Chapter 28.
O
H A specific inhibitor of the major proteasomal activi-
C O (substrate) ties is lactacystin, a compound formed by Streptomyces.
Lactacystin is converted reversibly, by loss of N-acetyl-
Proteasomes of Thermoplasma contain a single type of β cysteine, into a β-lactone known as clasto-lactacystin.
The N-terminal amino group attacks the reactive four-
subunit but eukaryotic proteasomes contain subunits
membered ring of the lactone (Eq. 12-22).358,359
with at least three distinct substrate preferences.347– 349c
They all appear to use the same hydrolytic mechanism
but in their substrate specificities they are chymotrypsin- O
like, peptidylglutamyl-peptide hydrolyzing, branched
O
chain amino acid preferring, and small neutral amino NH COOH
acid preferring based on the P amino acid residue. In H3C C S
1
the spleen some of the β subunits of the proteasomes N O
C
appear to have been replaced by proteins encoded by H
the major histocompatibility complex of the immune HO CH3 CH3
HO
system (Chapter 31).347 This may alter the properties
CH3
of the proteasome to favor their function in antigen
Lactacystin
processing. Proteasomes are also ATP- and ubiquitin-
N-Acetylcysteine
dependent, as discussed in Section 6. O
The enzyme glucosylasparaginase (aspartylgluco-
saminidase) is one of a group of other enzymes that use NH OH
N-terminal threonyl groups as catalytic dyads.346,350– 353 H3C clast
β
o-
-
L
la
a
c
c
t
t
o
a
n
c
e
ystin
It removes N-linked glycosyl groups from asparagine
side chains of proteolytically degraded proteins and, C
O
as indicated on the accompanying structural formula, O
releases free aspartate and a 1-amino-N- acetylgluco- H
O
samine-containing oligosaccharide. The amino group H CH3
is then released as NH from the product by acid
3 H
catalysis in the lysosome.350 O N N Enzyme
H
OH NH OH H O
H
H3C
N-Terminal threonine
Oligosaccharide
O H2O
–
N COO C
HO O
C HO
+ H
NH
O
NH3 O
CH3
O C H
CH3
H
+
3N
N
Enzyme
Glutamine PRPP amidotransferase (Fig. 25-15) and a
O
penicillin acylase have similar active sites and overall
(12-22)
Inhibited enzyme

--- Page 624 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 621
The active sites of the N-terminal nucleophile The acyl-enzyme would be an acid anhydride. How-
hydrolases are generated autocatalytically.360– 362 A single ever, X-ray studies on pepsin363,380 and on related fungal
peptide chain is cleaved to form α and β chains as in enzymes such as penicillopepsin381 and others373,375
the following diagram. An activating nucleophile such suggested a different possibility: A water molecule,
as histidine removes a proton from an adjacent threo- hydrogen bonded to one of the active site Asp carb-
nine– OH and the resulting alkoxide ion attacks the oxylates or bridging between them, becomes the
adjacent peptide linkage, presumably via a tetrahedral nucleophile. A proton, held by the carboxylate pair,
intermediate, to form an ester linkage. Compare this protonates the substrate carbonyl to facilitate nucleo-
sequence with reactions in Box 12-A and Eq. 14-41. Hydro- philic attack.381 This is illustrated in Eq. 12-23 but with-
lysis generates the N-terminal threonine as indicated: out detail. Several intermediate sequences of reaction
steps are possible.382 At the beginning of the sequence
one of the two symmetrically placed carboxylates is
HN N protonated while the other is not. Also notice that
H O CH3 although the active site is symmetric, the substrate is
O bound asymmetrically as determined by its hydrogen
C β chain bonding into an extended binding site.
α chain H N C
N
N
H H O D 215
His 150 O COO – Thr 152 H P1' O
–
C
α chain β chain H HH O
N
OO
C HH
4. The Aspartic Proteases
H O
C O
P1 H
A fourth large group of protein-hydrolyzing en- NH O
D 32
zymes consists of pepsin of the stomach363 and related
enzymes.364 Each of these ~ 320-residue proteins is Formation of
folded into two domains which associate with a pseudo- tetrahedral
intermediate
twofold axis of symmetry that passes through the active
site.365 A second human gastric aspartic proteinase is D 215
gastricsin.365 The related chymosin (rennin),366 which P1'
O
is obtained from the fourth stomach of the calf, causes H
a rapid clotting of milk and is widely used in manufac- H C HH O
ture of cheese. Pepsin has a broad specificity but cleaves N
OO HH
preferentially between pairs of hydrophobic residues,
C
O
converting proteins into soluble fragments. It is un- H
C O H –
usual in being able to cleave X-Pro peptide bonds.367
P1
O
Chymosin has a more restricted specificity, cutting NH D 32
theκ-casein of milk between a Phe–Met bond. This
Cleavage of
decreases the stability of the milk micelles, inducing C—N bond
(12-23)
clotting.366 The serum protein renin (distinct from
rennin), the lysosomal cathepsins D and E,368– 370 an
aspartyl aminopeptidase,371 and various fungal A characteristic feature of catalysis by the aspartic
proteases are also closely related.372– 375 Renin,376,377 proteases is a tendency, with certain substrates, to cata-
which is synthesized largely in the kidneys, is involved lyzetranspeptidation reactions of the following type.
in blood pressure regulation (Box 22-D). More distantly
related aspartic proteases are encoded by retroviruses. Acetyl-Phe-Tyr + Acetyl-Phe* → Acetyl-Phe*-Tyr
The pepsin family is most active in the low pH
(12-24)
range 1– 5. All of the enzymes contain two especially
reactive aspartate carboxyl groups.378 One of them Here Phe* is an isotopically labeled residue. Although
(Asp 215 in pepsin) reacts with site-directed diazoni- such reactions suggested the possibility of some kind
um compounds and the other (Asp 32) with site- of activated amino group on the tyrosine that is cut off
directed epoxides.379 It is attractive to think that one in the initial cleavage of the unlabeled substrate, it is
of these carboxyl groups might be the nucleophile in a more likely that the released tyrosine stays in the
double displacement mechanism. The second carboxyl active site,383 while the acetyl-Phe fragment exchanges
could then be the proton donor to the cleaving group. with acetyl*-Phe.

--- Page 625 ---

622 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
BOX 12-C SYNTHETIC PROTEASE INHIBITORS
One of the goals of synthetic medicinal chemis-
H O
try is to design potent inhibitors of clinically impor- O H O C
tant proteases. Elastase inhibitors may be useful for H H H
treatment of emphysema, pancreatitis, and arthritis,a,b H3C N
C
C
N
C
C
N
N N
+
H2
while inhibitors of the angiotensinogen-converting H H
O H NH2
enzyme or of renin (Box 22-D) can help control blood
pressure. Inhibition of thrombin, factor Xa, or other
Leupeptin (Actinomyces)
blood clotting factors (Fig. 12-17) may prevent blood
clots and inhibition of the cytosolic tryptase may
provide a new treatment for asthma. Inhibition of
the cysteine protease cathepsin K may help combat Leupeptin is a slow, tight-binding inhibitor of
osteoporosis and inhibition of cysteine proteases of trypsin. Some peptide aldehydes are potent, revers-
corona viruses may fight the common cold. Cysteine ible inhibitors of cysteine proteases forming hemith-
proteases of schistosomes are also targets for pro- ioacetals with the active site cysteine.i Similarly,
tease inhibitors.c peptide nitriles form thioimidate adducts.h
Many chemical approaches are used in design-
ing inhibitors. Often, a naturally occurring inhibitor
provides a starting point. The availability of high- OH NH
resolution structures of the target enzymes and of
C C
various enzyme-inhibitor complexes assists in the
R S Enzyme R S Enzyme
rational design of tight-binding inhibitors. Use of H
combinatorial chemistry (Chapter 3)d is another Hemithioacetal Thioimidate
source of potential inhibitors. To be of practical use
in medicine many criteria of stability, solubility, and
low toxicity must be met. While most inhibitors The peptide boronic acids form adducts with
are disappointing as drugs, their use in laboratory the active site serine of serine proteases.j– l
experimentation has clarified a great deal of bio-
chemistry.
A straightforward approach is to hunt for short OH
H
polypeptides that meet the specificity requirement Peptide N CH B
of an enzyme but which, because of peculiarities OH
R
of the sequence, are acted upon very slowly. Such
+
a peptide may contain unusual or chemically H
OH
modified amino acids. For example, the peptide
E Ser
Thr-Pro-nVal-NMeLeu-Tyr-Thr (nVal = norvaline; OH
NMeLeu = N-methylleucine) is a very slow elastase H – OH
Peptide N CH B
substrate whose binding can be studied by X-ray
diffraction and NMR spectroscopy.e Thiol proteases R O
are inhibited by succinyl-Gln-Val-Val-Ala-Ala-p-
Ser
nitroanilide, which includes a sequence common to Adduct
a number of naturally occurring peptide inhibitors
calledcystatins.f They are found in various animal
tissues where they inhibit cysteine proteases. However, both X-ray crystallographym and 11B
A group of inhibitors such as leupeptin have NMRn have shown that imidazole of the catalytic
C-terminal aldehyde groups. Small oligopeptides triad may also add to the boronic acid and that a
with this structure and with appropriate specificity- tetrahedral adduct with both the serine oxygen and
determining side chains form tetrahedral hemiace- histidine nitrogen covalently bonded to boron can
tals, which may mimic transition state structures, also be formed.m Thus, in reversibly inhibited
at the active sites of the target enzymes.g,h enzymes a mixture of different chemical species
may exist. Inhibitors can be designed to bind more
tightly by providing additional bonding opportuni-
ties. For example, a suitably placed cyano group on
a phenylalanine ring in the P position of thrombin
1

--- Page 626 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 623
BOX 12-C (continued)
or other serine proteases can form a hydrogen bond Many other enzyme-activated inhibitors are being
to the peptide NH of Gly 219 (see Fig. 12-9).o developed.c,d,t
Numerous synthetic active-site directed or Epoxy groups, such as that of E-64, a compound
enzyme-activated irreversible inhibitors have been isolated from the culture medium of a species of
designed.p For example, the following chloroketone Aspergillus, react irreversibly with the active site
inhibits chymotrypsin but does not act on trypsin. thiolate group of cysteine proteases.i,u,v Related
The corresponding structure with a lysine side epoxides may become useful medications against
chain (TLCK) inhibits only trypsin. These affinity abnormal cathepsin levels.
labeling compounds initially bind noncovalently
at the active site.
O
–O C H O
H H
C C N C N NH2
+
C C N
H O H
Cl O H CH2 NH2
H CH2
H N N CH2 O CH
H3C CH3
C N S CH3
His 57 E-64, fromAspergillus japonicum
O H O
l-1-(p-Toluenesulfonyl)-amido-2-
All of the aspartic proteases are inhibited by
phenylethyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)
pepstatin, a peptide produced by some species of
– Actinomyces and which contains two residues of the
Cl
unusual amino acid statine (sta).w Pepstatin has
the sequence Isovaleryl-L-Val-L-Val-Sta-L-Ala-Sta.
H CH2
O
N N CH2
CH3 H NH3 +
C N S CH3
His 57
–
O H O H3C COO
H OH
Statine (Sta)
However, α-chloroketones are powerful alkyl-
ating agents and the bound inhibitor attacks His
57 of the catalytic triad system. The reaction is The statine residue mimics the noncovalently bonded
probably more complex than is indicated in the fore- tetrahedral intermediate, permitting formation of a
going equation and may involve an epoxy ether very tight complex. Pepstatin is a poor inhibitor of
intermediate.q Many other peptide chloromethyl human renin but its existence has inspired the syn-
ketone inhibitors have been devised.q,r thesis of numerous related compounds, some of
Isocoumarins inactivate many serine proteases. which are effective renin inhibitors.x,y Some of these
For example, 7-amino-4-chloro-3-methoxyisocoumarin inhibitors use the human angiotensinogen sequence
acylates serine 195 of elastases as follows.s with a secondary alcohol group mimicking the
tetrahedral intermediate.x,z
O H Ser 195 O O
O
–
H2N
7
H2N Ser 195 Cl H2N Ser 195
O O O
H
OCH3 CH Cl
–O
C O C CH3
C CH3
Cl C C O
O O O
OCH3 OCH3

--- Page 627 ---

624 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
BOX 12-C SYNTHETIC PROTEASE INHIBITORS (continued)
These aspartic protease inhibitors are also “lead success has been achieved. However, the rapid
compounds” in the development of inhibitors of development of mutant strains of the virus with
HIV protease.aa– cc As in statine-based inhibitors, drug-resistant proteases presents a major challenge.cc,dd
the site of occupancy by the catalytic H O (green in Mercaptans of suitable structure bind tightly
2
Eq. 12-23) is occupied in the inhibitor by something to Zn2+ in the active sites of metalloproteases. For
that mimics a tetrahedral intermediate with – CHOH –, example,captoprilee is a tight-binding competitive
– POH–, etc.bb Tremendous efforts are being expended inhibitor of the angiotensinogen-converting enzyme
2
in designing these inhibitors and considerable that is effective in lowering blood pressure and the
first of many related inhibitors.ff
As mentioned in the text, a vari-
ety of inhibitors that mimic the
geometry of a tetrahedral inter-
mediate or transition state are
also potent inhibitors of metallo-
proteases.
Stereoscopic ribbon structure of the
HIV-1 protease with the synthetic
inhibitor Sequinivircc bound in the
active site. One of the two identical
subunits (top) is shaded darker than
the second (bottom). When mutated,
the amino acid side chains shown in
ball-and-stick form with residue num-
bers shown for the top subunit led to
drug-resistant viruses. Courtesy of
Alex Wlodawer, National Cancer
Institute.cc
a Powers, J. C., Oleksyszyn, J., Narasimhan, S. L., Kam, C.-M., r Wolf, W. M., Bajorath, J., Müller, A., Raghunathan, S., Singh, T. P.,
Radhakrishnan, R., and Meyer, E. F., Jr. (1990) Biochemistry29, Hinrichs, W., and Saenger, W. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 17695 – 17699
3108– 3118 s Meyer, E. F., Jr., Presta, L. G., and Radhakrishnan, R. (1985) J. Am.
b Mattos, C., Giammona, D. A., Petsko, G. A., and Ringe, D. (1995) Chem. Soc.107, 4091– 4094
Biochemistry34, 3193 – 3203 t Groutas, W. C., Kuang, R., Venkataraman, R., Epp, J. B., Ruan, S.,
c Seife, C. (1997) Science277, 1602 – 1603 and Prakash, O. (1997) Biochemistry36, 4739 – 4750
d Peisach, E., Casebier, D., Gallion, S. L., Furth, P., Petsko, G. A., u Yamamoto, D., Matsumoto, K., Ohishi, H., Ishida, T., Inoue, M.,
Hogan, J. C., Jr., and Ringe, D. (1995) Science269, 66 – 69 Kitamura, K., and Mizuno, H. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 14771– 14777
e Meyer, E. F., Jr., Clore, G. M., Gronenborn, A. M., and Hansen, H. A. v Varughese, K. I., Su, Y., Cromwell, D., Hasnain, S., and Xuong, N.-h.
S. (1988) Biochemistry27, 725 – 730 (1992)Biochemistry31, 5172 – 5176
f Yamamoto, A., Tomoo, K., Doi, M., Ohishi, H., Inoue, M., Ishida, T., w Gómez, J., and Freire, E. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.252, 337– 350
Yamamoto, D., Tsuboi, S., Okamoto, H., and Okada, Y. (1992) x Cooper, J., Quail, W., Frazao, C., Foundling, S. I., Blundell, T. L.,
Biochemistry31, 11305 – 11309 Humblet, C., Lunney, E. A., Lowther, W. T., and Dunn, B. M. (1992)
g Ortiz, C., Tellier, C., Williams, H., Stolowich, N. J., and Scott, A. I. Biochemistry31, 8142 – 8150
(1991)Biochemistry30, 10026 – 10034 y Tong, L., Pav, S., Lamarre, D., Pilote, L., LaPlante, S., Anderson, P. C.,
h Dufour, E., Storer, A. C., and Ménard, R. (1995) Biochemistry34, and Jung, G. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.250, 211– 222
9136–9143 z Cooper, J. B., Foundling, S. I., Blundell, T. L., Boger, J., Jupp, R. A.,
i Mehdi, S. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 150 – 153 and Kay, J. (1989) Biochemistry28, 8596 – 8603
j Bone, R., Shenvi, A. B., Kettner, C. A., and Agard, D. A. (1987) aa Hui, K. Y., Manetta, J. V., Gygi, T., Bowdon, B. J., Keith, K. A.,
Biochemistry26, 7609 – 7614 Shannon, W. M., and Lai, M.-H. T. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2606 – 2610
k Takahashi, L. H., Radhakrishnan, R., Rosenfield, R. E., Jr., and bb Abdel-Meguid, S. S., Zhao, B., Murthy, K. H. M., Winborne, E., Choi,
Meyer, E. F., Jr. (1989) Biochemistry28, 7610 – 7617 J.-K., DesJarlais, R. L., Minnich, M. D., Culp, J. S., Debouck, C.,
l Nienaber, V. L., Mersinger, L. J., and Kettner, C. A. (1996) Biochemis- Tomaszek, T. A., Meek, T. D., and Dreyer, G. B. (1993) Biochemistry
try35, 9690 – 9699 32, 7972 – 7980
m Stoll, V. S., Eger, B. T., Hynes, R. C., Martichonok, V., Jones, J. B., and cc Ridky, T., and Leis, J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 29621– 29623
Pai, E. F. (1998) Biochemistry37, 451– 462 dd Chen, Z., Li, Y., Schock, H. B., Hall, D., Chen, E., and Kuo, L. C.
n Zhong, S., Jordan, F., Kettner, C., and Polgar, L. (1991) J. Am. Chem. (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 21433 – 21436
Soc.113, 9429 – 9435 ee Vidt, D. G., Bravo, E. L., and Fouad, F. M. (1982) N. Engl. J. Med.306,
o Lee, S.-L., Alexander, R. S., Smallwood, A., Trievel, R., Mersinger, L., 214– 219
Weber, P. C., and Kettner, C. (1997) Biochemistry36, 13180 – 13186 ff Gros, C., Noël, N., Souque, A., Schwartz, J.-C., Danvy, D.,
p Bode, W., Meyer, E., Jr., and Powers, J. C. (1989) Biochemistry28, Plaquevent, J.-C., Duhamel, L., Duhamel, P., Lecomte, J.-M., and
1951– 1963 Bralet, J. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.88, 4210 – 4214
q Kreutter, K., Steinmetz, A. C. U., Liang, T.-C., Prorok, M., Abeles, R.
H., and Ringe, D. (1994) Biochemistry33, 13792 – 13800

--- Page 628 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 625
Pepsin is secreted as the inactive pepsinogen, which cell wall peptides (Chapter 20).399
is activated by H+ ions at a pH below 5. Determination Another well-known zinc-containing enzyme is
of its crystal structure revealed that in the proenzyme thermolysin, a nonspecific endopeptidase widely used
the N-terminal 44-residue peptide segment lies across in laboratories. Produced by a themophilic bacterium,
the active site, blocking it.384 At low pH the salt bridges it is unusually resistant to heat. It contains four bound
that stabilize the proenzyme are disrupted and the calcium ions in addition to the active site zinc.400– 402
active site is opened up to substrates. The active site structure resembles that of pancreatic
While the cellular aspartate proteases are over 300 carboxypeptidase A and the two enzymes appear to
residues in length, the retroviral proteases are less than act by similar mechanisms.401,403,404 The mammalian
one-half this size.385– 388 That of the human HIV-I protease zinc endopeptidase neprilysin, an integral membrane
contains only 99 residues. These enzymes are cut from protein involved in inactivation of enkephalins and
a polyprotein (encoded by the viral gag and pol genes other signaling peptides, also resembles thermolysin.405
(Fig. 28-26). The pol gene encodes four other essential A related neutral endopeptidase is the product of a
enzymes as well, and these are cut apart at eight dif- gene called PEX (phosphate-regulating gene with
ferent sites by action of the protease.388 Despite its homologies to endopeptidases on the X chromosome).
small size, it displays sequence homologies with the The absence of the PEX gene product causes X-linked
larger cellular aspartate proteases and has a related hypophosphatemic rickets which leads to excessive
three-dimensional structure. Each chain has only one loss of phosphate from the body with defective miner-
active site aspartate; the functional enzymes are dimers alization of bone.406 The mitochondrial processing
and the catalytic mechanism appears to be similar to peptidase, which removes signal sequences from the
that of pepsin.388– 392 A great deal of effort is being N termini of mitochondrial proteins, also contains Zn2+
devoted to designing synthetic HIV protease inhibitors, at its active site.407,408 However, it is an αβ heterodimer
which are used in the treatment of AIDS (Box 12-C). and a member of an additional family of enzymes, one
of which includes human insulin-degrading enzyme.
In both carboxypeptidase A and thermolysin the
5. Metalloproteases active site Zn2+ is chelated by two imidazole groups
and a glutamate side chain (Fig. 12-16). In carboxypep-
The pancreatic carboxypeptidases are character- tidase A, Arg 145, Tyr 248, and perhaps Arg 127 form
ized by the presence of one firmly bound zinc ion in hydrogen bonds to the substrate. A water molecule is
each molecule. The Zn2+ can be removed and can be also bound to the Zn2+ ion. The presence of the posi-
replaced by other metal ions such as Co2+ and Ni2+, tively charged side chain of Arg 145 and of a hydro-
in some cases with reconstitution of catalytic activity. phobic pocket accounts for the preference of the enzyme
The human pancreas synthesizes and secretes proen- for C-terminal amino acids with bulky, nonpolar side
zymes for two forms of carboxypeptidase A, with a chains. The Zn2+ in thermolysin is also bound to two
preference for C-terminal hydrophobic residues, as imidazole groups and that in D-alanyl-D-alanyl carboxy-
well as carboxypeptidases B, which prefer C-terminal peptidase to three.
basic residues. Additional A and B forms393 as well as The presence of a zinc ion in the metalloproteases
more specialized nondigestive carboxypeptidases are immediately suggested a role in catalysis. Unlike
also known. In eukaryotic cells the latter participate protons, which have a weak affinity for the oxygen
in processing of proteins. Following removal of N- of an amide carbonyl group, a metal ion can form a
terminal signal sequences, processing often continues strong complex. If held in position by other ligands
with removal of basic residues from the C termini by from the protein, a properly placed zinc ion might be
carboxypeptidases N,H (also called E or enkephalin expected to greatly enhance the electrophilic nature of
convertase),394 and M, all of which are metalloen- the carbon atom of the C = O group. However, it has
zymes.395,396 Carboxypeptidase N removes C-terminal been difficult to establish the exact mechanism of
arginines from many biologically important peptides. action.410 Carboxypeptidase A cleaves both peptides
It also circulates in the plasma and protects the body and ester substrates. For peptides, K is the same for
m
by inactivating such potent inflammatory peptides as various metals while k changes, but the converse is
cat
the kinins and anaphylotoxins.397 Carboxypeptidase true for ester substrates.411 From its position Glu 270
H is located in secretory granules, while carboxypep- (Glu 143 in thermolysin) seems to be the logical nucleo-
tidase M is membrane associated.396 Dipeptidyl car- phile to attack the substrate to form an acyl-enzyme
boxypeptidase (angiotensin-converting enzyme) intermediate, an anhydride. Using the following
removes the C-terminal Pro–Phe dipeptide from specificester substrate, Makinen et al. showed that at
angiotensinogen to generate the potent pressor agent very low temperatures of – 40° to – 60°C, in solvents
angiotensin I (Box 22-D) and cleaves dipeptides from such as 50:50 ethylene glycol:water, an acyl-enzyme
many other substrates as well.398 A D-alanyl-D-alanyl intermediate can be detected spectroscopically. It
carboxypeptidase cleaves D-alanine from the ends of could even be separated from free enzyme412 by gel

--- Page 629 ---

626 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Hydrophobic cavity
Y248
OH
Peptides with C-terminal
amino acids with aromatic
or bulky, branched side
chains are best substrates
H
O H O H N R145
C – + N
H N H O H N H
Bond cleaved H
by enzyme
C NH
E270 O P 1 O
H69
O – H N
Attacking nucleophile H O Zn2+
w
m
i
a
t
y
h
b
g
e
e n
—
er
C
al
O
b
O
a
–
se
or H 2 O NH
H
N NH
catalysis by —COO– O – O
H O Figure 12-16 Structure of the active site of carboxypeptidase
P H196 A with a peptide substrate present. See Christianson and
2
E72 Lipscomb.409
filtration at – 60°C and its cyanoborohydride reduction Furthermore, many observations favor an alternative
product was characterized.413 mechanism. A hydroxide ion derived from a water
molecule bound to the zinc ion may be the initial
attacking nucleophile.404,419– 422 Both X-ray crystallo-
graphic studies and EPR investigations403,414 show that
O the zinc in carboxypeptidases can coordinate at least
– five surrounding atoms. As shown in Fig. 12-16, the
C COO
Zn2+ could hold the attacking water molecule and, at
O C
the same time, provide the positive charge for stabiliz-
H CH2 ing the resulting tetrahedral intermediate. Glu 270 (or
in thermolysin His 231) acts as a base to deprotonate
O-(trans-p-cinnamoyl)-l-β-phenyllactate the bound H
2
O. Mock and Stanford argue that the
H O is probably displaced when the peptide carbonyl
2
binds and that the H O is then deprotonated and adds
2
The intermediate appears to be the acid anhydride to the polarized carbonyl.404
formed by Glu-270.414,415 The conformation of the The pH dependence of the action of carboxypep-
intermediate was deduced by ENDOR spectroscopy tidase A is determined by pK values of ~ 6 and ~ 9.5
a
and its formation and reaction interpreted according for the free enzyme422 and of ~ 6.4 and ~ 9 for k .420
cat
to stereoelectronic principles.416 For thermolysin the values for k are ~ 5 and ~ 8.404
cat
Assignment of pK values has been controversial. They
a
may all be composites of two or more microscopic
constants but probably, at least for carboxypeptidase,
O Glu 270 the low pK is largely that of Glu 270 while the high
a
C one represents largely the dissociation of a proton
from the zinc-bound H O.
O C 2
Earlier studies of carboxypeptidase had indicated
O that Tyr 248 moves its position dramatically upon sub-
strate binding, and it was suggested that its phenolic –
If the anhydride mechanism is correct, the water mole- OH group protonates the leaving group in the acylation
cule bound to the Zn2+ probably provides an HO– ion step. However, a mutant in which Tyr 248 was replaced
necessary for the hydrolysis of the intermediate anhy- by phenylalanine still functions well.423
dride.417 Phosphonamidates,424,425 phosphonate esters, and
Although these results seem convincing there are oxo-methylene substrate analogs, which presumably
objections.410 The mechanism deduced for hydrolysis mimic the geometry of the tetrahedral intermediate or
of an ester may be different than that for a peptide.418 transition state of the intermediate or transition state

--- Page 630 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 627
of the catalytic cycle, are effective inhibitors of zinc Many aminopeptidases are metalloenzymes.437
proteases. X-ray studies of complexes of such inhibitors Most studied is the cytosolic leucine aminopeptidase
with both thermolysin and carboxypeptidase A sup- which acts rapidly on N-terminal leucine and removes
port the suggestion that the Zn2+ binds the carbonyl other amino acids more slowly. Each of the subunits
oxygen of the amide bond that is to be cleaved in a of the hexameric enzyme contains two divalent metal
ions, one of which must be Zn2+ or Co2+.438,439 A me-
– thionine aminopeptidase from E. coli contains two
O O
Co2+ ions440,441 and a proline-specific aminopeptidase
α 1 P C from the same bacterium two Mn2+.442 In all of these
α
C N 2 Phosphonamidate
enzymes the metal ions are present as dimetal pairs
H similar to those observed in phosphatases and discussed
in Section D,4 and to the Fe – Fe pairs of hemerythrin
–
O O and other diiron proteins (Fig. 16-20). A hydroxide ion
that bridges the metal ions may serve as the nucleophile
α P C
1
C O Phosphonate ester in the aminopeptidases.438 A bound bicarbonate ion
may assist.438a
O
H
R
C C CH2 C Oxo-methylene analog H N H
M2+
O C
N H
substrate and that a glutamate side chain could activate
O–
a Zn2+-bound water to form an attacking nucleophile. M2+ H Substrate
A similar conclusion was reached from the structure of
a thermolysin–product complex.426
Another large group of zinc proteases are the A metalloenzyme peptide deformylase removes
matrix metalloproteases which act on proteins of the formyl groups from the N termini of bacterial pro-
the extracellular matrix, such as collagen, proteogly- teins. Although the active site is similar to that of
cans, and fibronectin.427– 429c These enzymes have been thermolysin,443 the Zn2+ form of peptide deformylase
classified as collagenases,gelatinases (which act on is unstable. Both Ni2+ and Fe2+ form active, stable
denatured collagen), stromelysins (which are activated enzymes.444,445
in response to inflammatory stimuli),430– 432 and a mem-
brane type. The group also includes the digestive en-
zymeastacin, from the crayfish,433 and metalloproteases 6. ATP-Dependent Proteases
from snake venoms.429,434 The matrix metalloproteases
are essential to the remodeling of the extracellular Much of metabolism is driven by the Gibbs energy
matrix that occurs during wound healing, tissue growth, of hydrolysis of ATP so it shouldn’t be surprising that
differentiation, and cell death. An example of tissue ATP is sometimes rather directly involved in hydrolytic
remodeling is the development of dental enamel (Box degradation of polypeptide chains. Much of protein
8-G). The proteinaceous matrix formed initially must processing occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum,446
be digested away, perhaps by the metalloprotease which also assists in sorting unneeded and defective
enamelysin, and replaced by the dense mineral of proteins for degradation in the ubiquitin–proteasome
enamel.435 Excessive secretion of collagenase by fibro- system. Proteasomal degradation occurs in the cytosol,
blasts is observed in rheumatoid arthritis and other in the nucleus, and along the ER. However, the pre-
inflammatory conditions. dominant location is the centrosome.446a
At least 64 different matrix metalloproteins are Polyubiquitination of proteins requires ATP (Box
known.427 Each enzyme consists of three domains. 10-C) and additional ATP is utilized in the proteasomes
An 80- to 90-residue N-terminal propeptide domain (Box 7-A) during the selection of polyubiquitinated
contains a cysteine whose –S– group binds to the active proteins for hydrolysis.447,448 With 28 subunits the 26S
site zinc, screening it from potential substrates. The proteasome is complex and not fully understood.448
central catalytic domain is followed by a hinge region The ATP-hydrolyzing subunits appear to all be in the
and a C-terminal domain that resembles the serum cap regions. Is the ATP used to open and close the
iron binding and transporting hemopexin.427,436 The entry pores? To induce conformational changes in all
mechanism of action is probably similar to that of subunits as part of a catalytic cycle? Or to unfold
thermolysin.430 folded proteins to help them enter the proteasomes?449

--- Page 631 ---

628 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Some answers may be obtained from smaller acting on accessible and chemically appropriate parts
bacterial, mitochondrial, and chloroplast ATP-dependent of the proteins. Evolutionary selection has evidently
proteases. Cells of E. coli contain at least nine proteases, led to the particular set of pathways that we observe
which have been named after the musical scale as Do, for any organisms.
Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti, Di, and Ci.450,451 Most are serine Because they must often cleave large polyproteins,
proteases but two, Ci and Pi, are metalloproteins. many viruses encode processing proteases.464– 466b For
Protease La (Lon protease, encoded by gene lon) example, the entire RNA genome of the poliovirus
has attracted particular attention because the hydrolysis encodes a large polyprotein which is cut by two virally
of two molecules of ATP occurs synchronously with encoded chymotrypsin-like cysteine proteases within
cleavage of a peptide linkage in the protein chain.452 Tyr-Gly and Gln-Gly sequences;341,465 Asn-Ser sequenc-
This enzyme, as well as protease Ti (more often es are also cut, apparently autocatalytically. As we
calledClp, for caseinolytic protease),451,453,454 is have already seen, retroviruses encode their own
ATP-dependent.451 aspartic protease. Most cellular and secreted proteins
The Lon protease of E. coli is a large 88-kDa serine of bacteria or eukaryotes also undergo processing.
protease with the catalytic domain, containing active This ranges from removal of N-formyl groups to cutting
site Ser 679, in the C-terminal half. The N-terminal off signal peptides, addition or formation of prosthetic
portion contains two ATP-binding motifs and a linker groups, internal cleavages, and modifications at the
region.455,456 A homologous protein known either as C termini. A variety of peptidases are required.
Lon or as PIM1 is present in mitochondria.457,458 The Degradation of proteins, which converts them
E. coli proteases Clp (Ti) include ClpAP and ClpXP, back to amino acids as well as other products, takes
which are heterodimers, each containing the catalytic place in part in the cytosol via the ubiquitin-protease
subunit ClpP and either ATPase ClpA or ClpX. The system. Proteolysis also occurs in ER and external cell
active enzyme may be designated ClpAP.459– 461 A spaces through the action of membrane-bound and
homolog of ClpP has been found in human mitochon- secreted proteases. Loosely folded proteins, which can
dria.461a The ATPase Clp forms seven-subunit rings arise in various ways, are subject to rapid degradation.
resembling the rings of proteasomes (Box 7-A), while For example, synthesis of a polypeptide chain on a
the catalytic subunit ClpA forms six-membered ribosome may be accidentally disrupted with formation
rings.451,454 Despite the mismatch in symmetry and of a protein with a shorted chain. Mature proteins
the fact that they are serine proteases, these enzymes may become damaged. For example, certain histidine
appear similar to proteasomes. However, each catalytic residues are readily attacked by oxidizing reagents.
subunit has an ATPase neighbor. Why is it needed? Oxidative damage may mark proteins for rapid degen-
The related ClpBis both an ATPase and a chaperonin. It eration.450 In E. coli, proteases So and Re attack oxi-
is essential for survival of E. coli at high temperatures.461b dized glutamine synthetase much more rapidly than
Another ATP-dependent protease identified the intact native enzyme.450,467 In mammalian cells the
among heat shock proteins of E. coli is known as proteasomes degrade oxidized as well as poorly folded
Hs1V–Hs1U or (ClpQ–ClpY). It has a threonine pro- proteins.468 However, proteasomal digestion is not
tease active site and is even more closely remeniscient complete and peptide fragments may be secreted.
of eukaryotic proteasomes.462–463a Also active in E. coli Peptide fragments of proteins are also formed in the ER
is another ring-like protease, a membrane-bound zinc and may be secreted. Thus, a variety of small peptide
endopeptidaseFtsH (or HflB).463b Similar eukaryotic hormones and other biologically active peptides are both
proteases also exist.460 generated and inactivated in or around cells.469– 471
Some receptors are activated by proteases.471a
Circulating proenzymes of the blood clotting factors,
7. The Many Functions of Proteases of the complement system (Chapter 31), represent a
specialized group of secreted signaling proteins that
Many of the enzymes considered in the preceding are able to initiate important defensive cascades. Pro-
sections function within the digestive tract. Others teases also act more directly in defense systems of the
function in the processing of newly formed peptide body. For example, serine proteases cause lysis of the
chains, while others act in the intracellular degradation target cells of cytotoxic T lymphocytes472 (Chapter 31)
of proteins. Yet others are secreted from cells and and activated neutrophils473 (Chapter 18). At the same
function in the external surroundings. Both processing time, pathogenic bacteria often secrete proteases that
and intracellular degradation can be viewed as parts assist in attack on their hosts474 and schistosomes secrete
ofbiosynthetic loops (Chapter 17) that synthesize mature an elastase that helps them penetrate skin and invade
proteins, and then degrade them when they have their hosts.475
served their function or have become damaged. The
pathways involved are varied and complex, a natural
result of thousands of enzymes and other compounds

--- Page 632 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 629
molecules is so tight that it is hard for a water molecule
8. Protease Inhibitors of Animals and Plants
to enter and complete the catalytic act. The complex
reacts very slowly, keeping the enzyme inactive. There
Premature conversion of proenzymes such as
is not enough inhibitor to interfere with the large
trypsinogen into active proteases in the pancreas
amounts of trypsin formed from trypsinogen in the
would be disastrous. To prevent this, the pancreas also
small intestine so that trypsin can function there.
produces inhibitors. The complex cascades that control
Most protease inhibitors act by mechanisms similar
blood clotting would also be unstable were it not for
to that of the pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. They are
the presence in blood of numerous inhibitory proteins.
very slow substrates with a reactive loop that carries
Indeed, inhibitors of proteases are found everywhere
suitable P , P , and P ' residues that meet the specificity
in animals, plants, and microorganisms.476– 478 They 1 2 1
requirements of the enzyme. Additional noncovalent
are usually proteins but small antibiotic protease
interactions prevent dissociation and make the energy
inhibitors are also produced by microorganisms. Pro-
barrier for hydrolysis so high that the reaction is ex-
tein inhibitors are usually specific for a given type of
tremely slow.488,494,495
enzyme: The serpins inhibit serine proteases, and the
The serpins are larger ~ 400-residue proteins.498– 500
cystatins inhibit cysteine proteases.479– 483 Other
They also form complexes in which hydrolysis and
inhibitors block the action of metalloproteases484– 486
release of the serpin occurs very slowly. However,
and aspartic proteases. Inhibitors help not only host
structural analysis before reaction and after release
organisms but also parasites. For example, Ascaris
showed that a major rearrangement occurs in the
suum, a very large nematode that is thought to infect
serpin structure. The P through ~ P residues of the
1/4 of the human population of the earth and nearly 1 15
cleaved reactive loop are inserted into the center of the
all of the pigs, secretes a pepsin inhibitor.487 However,
the large 720-kDa serum (cid:1)-macroglobulins (Box 12-D) mainβ sheet of the serpin, leaving the P 1 and P 1 ' residues
~ 7 nm apart.499,500 It seems likely that the rearrange-
inhibit all classes of proteases.
ment begins during formation of the tight inhibited
About 20 families of protein inhibitors of proteases
complex, which cannot be dissociated by boiling in a
have been described.488 The egg white ovomucoids
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution and which may
comprise one family. Turkey ovomucoid is a three-
be an acyl-enzyme.501,502 A serpin molecule can act
domain protein whose 56-residue third domain is a
only once.
potent inhibitor of most serine proteases.488,489 The 58-
Blood contains several serpins. They are abundant,
residue pancreatic trypsin inhibitor490 is a member
accounting for about 10% of the total protein of human
of another family of small proteins. A 36-residue
plasma.478,500 The most abundant is the (cid:1)1-protease
insect (locust) protease inhibitor is even smaller.491
inhibitor or α -antitrypsin, a 394-residue glycoprotein
Inhibitors that block the action of trypsin and other 1
component of the α-globulin fraction of blood serum.500a
proteases are found in many plants. The inhibitor
There is no trypsin in tissues, but this inhibitor blocks
activity is usually highest in seeds and tubers, but
the action of other serine proteases, including cathepsin
synthesis of inhibitors can be induced in other parts
G and leukocyte elastase.503 Hereditary absence of
of plants e.g. tomato and potato by wounding.492
α -protease inhibitor often leads to severe pulmonary
See also Chapter 31. Legumes contain small 60- to 1
emphysema at an early age. Elastase released by
76-residue inhibitors (Bowman–Birk inhibitors) each
neutrophils at sites of inflammation degrades many
containing seven disulfide linkages, and they are
components of connective tissue including elastin,
relatively stable toward cooking and toward acid
collagen, and proteoglycans. Without the presence
denaturation in the stomach.493,494 Although they
of protease inhibitor too much damage is done to
interfere with protein digestion they seem to have an
surrounding tissue. A lack of this inhibitor is one of
anticarcinogen effect.493 Soybeans also contain a larger
the commonest genetic defects among persons of
181-residue trypsin inhibitor (Kunitz type).495
European ancestry, affecting 1 in 750 persons born.504– 506
Several inhibitor–protease complexes have been
The most serious known mutation is a replacement of
crystallized and details of their interactions are known.
guanine by adenine at a specific point in the DNA and
For example, the pancreatic trypsin inhibitor binds at
a resultant replacement of Glu 342 with lysine in the
the active site of trypsin with K >1013 M–1 at neutral
f protease inhibitor. This in some manner adversely
pH.496 The two molecules fit snugly together,490,497 the
affected the processing and secretion of the protein.
inhibitor being bound as if it were a peptide substrate
At its reactive site the α -protease inhibitor has the
with one edge of the inhibitor molecule forming an 1
antiparallelβ structure with a peptide chain in the sequence
enzyme. Lysine 15, which forms part of this β structure,
Ala-Ile-Pro-Met*-Ser-Ile-Pro-Pro,
enters the specific P binding site for a basic amino
1
acid in a substrate. Thus, the protease inhibitor is a
the Met-Ser pair marked by the asterisk fitting into the
modified substrate which may actually undergo attack
P -P ' sites (Fig. 12-14). The methionine (Met 358) in
at the active site. However, the fit between the two 1 1

--- Page 633 ---

630 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
BOX 12-D MOLECULAR MOUSETRAPS
The large 720-kD α -macroglobulin of human within the following sequence, which is the same as
2
serum, as well as related proteins of vertebrate and that in α -macroglobulin:
2
invertebrate circulatory systems and of egg whites
of birds and reptiles, is a trap for proteases.a–f Human
1010 1015
macroglobulin is a homotetramer consisting of two
G C G E E* N(T) M
pairs of identical 180-kDa subunits, each pair being E*, encoded as Q
HC S C (CH)
held together in an antiparallel configuration by 2 22
O
two disulfide bridges. Each subunit contains a
“bait region” with cleavage sites appropriate for
nearly all known endoproteasesf and also a thioester Here the side chains have been added for the thioester-
linkage as explained later. Electron microscopic forming cysteine and glutamate and the sequence
reconstructions of the native protein and its com- numbers are for C3. The thioester-forming glutamate
plexes with proteases show that a major structural is labeled E* because it is not encoded as glutamate
transformation occurs.e,f The macroglobulin traps but as glutamine, suggesting a mechanism of thio-
two protease molecules of the size of trypsin, or one ester formation. Protein C4 exists as two subforms,
larger one such as plasmin, in an internal cavity. C4A and C4B. Both C3 and C4A react predominately
The internal thioesters, which are formed between with lysine amino groups, but C4B reacts with – OH
Cys 949 and Gln 952 (with loss of NH ) in each groups of cell surface polysaccharides.h It has a
3
subunit, become reactiveg and form covalent bonds histidine at position 1106. There is good evidence
withε-amino groups of various lysine side chains of that it is adjacent to the C = O group of the thioester
the trapped proteases. and reacts to form an acyl-imidazole which is more
reactive with hydroxyl groups than is a thioester:
O
H
N 949 N
CH2
O
CH2
H
HN
H O
S H COO – S
O N H H 1106
952
H2N O N
O
orNH2 NH
Lys CH3
H
O
N 949
Protease
H
SH –
O S H
H
Protease NH
O
N O
952
H N
R +
NH
The serum proteins C3 and C4, members of the
complement system (Chapter 31), are converted
into their active forms, C3b and C4b, by proteolytic
removal of short N-terminal peptide fragments.
Both C3b and C4b bind tightly to cell surfaces, a SH
feature that helps to direct the complement system’s O
attack to the surfaces of invading organisms. This R
O N
tight binding also involves covalent attachment of
NH
macromolecules by reaction with a preformed thio-
ester just as with α -macroglobulin.h– j In fact, the
2
thioester linkage was first discovered in the comple- Activation of C3 and C4 apparently allows the
ment proteins. Both C3 and C4 contain the thioester preformed thioester, which is buried in the interior

--- Page 634 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 631
BOX 12-D (continued)
of these proteins, to become exposed on the external e Boisset, N., Taveau, J.-C., Pochon, F., and Lamy, J. (1996) J. Biol.
surface where it can react. The high group transfer Chem.271, 25762 – 25769
f Qazi, U., Gettins, P. G. W., Strickland, D. K., and Stoops, J. K.
potential of the thioester ensures that the reaction
(1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 8137– 8142
will go to completion. g Gettins, P. G. W. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12233 – 12240
h Law, S. K. A., and Dodds, A. W. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 263 – 274
a Sottrup-Jensen, L. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 11539 – 11542 i Khan, S. A., Sekulski, J. M., and Erickson, B. W. (1986) Biochem-
b Fothergill, J. (1982) Nature (London)298, 705 – 706 istry25, 5165 – 5171
c Jacobsen, L., and Sottrup-Jensen, L. (1993) Biochemistry32, j Dodds, A. W., Ren, X.-D., Willis, A. C., and Law, S. K. A. (1996)
120– 126 Nature (London)379, 177– 179
d Andersen, G. R., Koch, T. J., Dolmer, K., Sottrup-Jensen, L., and
Nyborg, J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 25133 – 25141
this sequence, as well as another nearby methionine that involve several cascades of proteolytic enzymes
residue, is very susceptible to oxidation to sulfoxides: together with a number of accessory cofactors.514– 516
The first step in clotting results from “activation” of
blood platelets which aggregate to form a platelet plug
+
H NH3
that slows bleeding.514,517 The clot, which is formed by
CH3
the insoluble fibrin, grows on the platelet surfaces and
–OOC S strengthens the plug. The initial rapid formation of a
O O clot occurs via the tissue factor pathway (or extrinsic
Methionine sulfoxide pathway; right side of Fig. 12-17) which is triggered by
the exposure in injured tissues of tissue factor (TF),
The oxidation, which may be caused by such agents a transmembrane glycoprotein518– 522 and a member of
as myeloperoxidase (Chapter 16) released from leuko- the cytokine receptor superfamily.518 Human TF is a
cytes,507 inactivates the inhibitor. This may be physio- 263-residue protein with a single membrane-spanning
logically important in permitting the proteases to be region and a small 20-residue C-terminal cytoplasmic
uninhibited in the immediate vicinity of the leukocyte. domain. The 219-residue extracellular domain consists
Cigarette smoke also inactivates α -protease inhibitor largely of two IgG-like domains (Fig. 12-18).519,523 This
1
by oxidation of the same methionine residues and the protein stimulates the conversion of fibrinogen524– 526
lungs of smokers contain the oxidized inhibitor.508 into the insoluble fibrin through the action of three
However, the major cause of emphysema among proteases–factor VIIa, factor Xa, and thrombin. These
smokers appears to be an increase in released neutro- enzymes are generated from proenzymes VII, X, and
phil elastase.509 One approach to the treatment of prothrombin, respectively in a cascade mechanism.
emphysema involves weekly intravenous injection of Factor VII binds tightly to TF,527,527a,b which also
α -antitrypsin.510 This treatment may be improved binds Ca2+ and phospholipid of the cell membranes.
1
by use of genetically engineered oxidation-resistant Within this complex a plasma protease, such as throm-
variants of the antitrypsin such as Met 385→Val.504,511 bin or factor VIIa or Xa, cleaves a single Arg-Ile bond
Efforts are also being made to introduce an α -anti- in VII to form active VIIa.528– 530 The TF·VIIa complex
1
trypsin gene into lung epithelial cells.510,512 is a very active protease which cleaves a specific pep-
Blood plasma also contains at least nine other pro- tide bond in factor X to form Xa531– 533 which continues
tease inhibitors. One of these, the thrombin inhibitor the cascade. Notice that there are autocatalytic features:
antithrombin III (Section 9), contains the sequence VII can be converted to the active VIIa by the action of
Arg-Ser-Leu at the P , P ', and P ' sites. A tragic case Xa and the accessory factor Va is generated from the
1 1 2
of a person born with a Met 385 → Arg mutation in precursor, factor V, in part through the action of throm-
α -antitrypsin has been reported.513 This converted bin.514,534– 535 Factors Xa and Va together with Ca2+ and
1
the antitrypsin to an antithrombin causing a bleeding phospholipid form the active prothrombinase complex
disorder that was eventually fatal. which attacks prothrombin to form the active enzyme
thrombin.536,537 The roles of factor Va and Ca2+ appear
to be to hold the prothrombin and the activated pro-
9. Coagulation of Blood tease Xa together on the phospholipid surface.538 This
localizes the clotting. Factor Xa is unusually specific,
The clotting of blood following injury and the subse- cleaving only after arginine in the sequence. Its activa-
quent dissolving of the clot are familiar phenomena tion of prothrombin results from cleavage of two

--- Page 635 ---

632 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
The intrinsic pathway The tissue factor pathway
Surface TF (Tissue Factor, 30 kDa),
contact a transmembrane
glycoprotein
High MW
kininogen (150 kDa) VII (45.5 kDa)
Prekallikrein Kallikrein (88 kDa)
+
TF·VII complex
XII (Hageman factor, XIIa
plasma
80 kDa) + proteases,
e.g. Xa or
Thrombin thrombin
+
XI proenzyme (160 kDa) XIa TF·VIIa
surface
Ca2+
IX (Christmas factor, IXa VIIa TF
proenzyme, 57 kDa)
+
Thrombin VIIIi (inactive)
VIII (Antihemophilic VIIIa
factor, 330 kDa)
As complex
with vWF
Phospholipid Ca2+
Va (170 kDa) V (330 kDa)
X (Stuart factor, 56 kDa) Xa
+ + + + Prothrombinase complex
II (Prothrombin, 72 kDa) Thrombin (39 kDa)
+ +
Hirudin
I (Fibrinogen, 340 kDa) Fibrin (loose clot)
HO – Fibrinopeptides
2
Figure 12-17 Major components of
the human blood clotting cascades.
XIII XIIIa (Transamidase) The site of action of the leech anti-
(Fibrin stabilizing
coagulant protein hirudin is also
factor, 320 kDa)
Firm clot indicated.
peptide bonds, which releases the 39-kDa thrombin 10 20 30
from the much larger, immobilized 72-kDa proen- ANTFLE*E*VRKGNLE*RE*CVE*E*TCSYE*E*AAFE*ALE*SS
zyme.236,531
Thrombin, like most other clotting factors, is also a Ca2+ which helps to tie these proteins to the phospho-
serine protease. However, the clotting factors are multi- lipids of platelet surfaces. In factors VII, IX, X, and
domain proteins that are more elaborate and more protein C this Ca2+-binding domain is followed by two
specific539 than the digestive enzymes. Prothrombin, epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains, each
as well as factors VII, IX, and X and the anticoagulant containing one residue of erythro-β-hydroxyaspartate
protein C, contain at their N-terminal ends several or hydroxyasparagine formed by hydroxylation of an
residues of γ-carboxyglutamate (Gla), an amino acid aspartate or asparagine residue in the first EGF-like
generated in a posttranslational modification that domain.540,540a,b The C-terminal catalytic domain of
depends upon vitamin K (Chapter 15). In human each enzyme contains the protease active site.
prothrombin there are ten of these in the following Fibrinogen is an elongated molecule with an (αβγ)
2
N-terminal sequence, where E* represents Gla. Since structure.524,541,541a Thrombin cleaves specific Arg-Gly
many of these enzymes are also dependent upon bonds in the α and β chains releasing short (14- to16-
activation by calcium ions (see Fig. 12-17), it is thought residue) “fibrinopeptides” from the N termini of the
that the function of Gla is to assist in the binding of peptide chains. This leaves Gly-Pro-Arg “knobs” at

--- Page 636 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 633
after surgery, but absence of XII does not. This fact
suggests that direct activation of XI by thrombin is
important and that the kallikrein–factor XII pathway
is usually less important.
Factor IX (Christmas factor) is next in the intrinsic
mechanism cascade. It can be activated either by XIa
or by VIIa of the tissue factor pathway. The absence of
a functional factor IX leads to the inherited X-linked
bleeding disorder hemophilia B which affects 1 in
30,000 males. The condition can be mild or very seri-
ous551,552 and may be caused by a variety of mutations
or by incorrect splicing of the messenger RNA for the
416-residue factor IX. The level of factor IX in blood
increases with age, almost doubling by old age.552a
Factor IXa causes a rapid activation of factor X
only if Ca2+, phospholipid,553,554 and the accessory
factor VIIIa555 are present. The IXa·VIIIa complex acts
on X about 2 x 105 times faster than does IXa alone.
This complex cleaves the same bonds in X as does the
VIIa·Va complex formed in the tissue factor pathway.514
The 2332-residue factor VIII and factor V have similar
structures that include three repeats of a domain homo-
logous to the blue copper-containing plasma protein
ceruloplasmin (Chapter 16).556– 559 Tyrosine 1680 of
VIII apparently must be converted to a sulfate ester for
full activity.560
The absence of factor VIII in about 1/ 10,000 males
born, leads to the severe X-linked bleeding disorder
Figure 12-18 A ribbon drawing of the three-dimensional hemophilia A. Human factor VIII is encoded by a
structure of the extracellular region (residues 3 to 213) of 186-kb gene containing 26 coding exons. Severe cases
human tissue factor. Strands of domain 1 and 2 are labeled
of hemophilia are usually a result of point mutations
A to G. Two helices are labeled α , and α and the three
1 2 that produce stop codons in this gene and therefore a
asparagines that provide the glycosylation sites are also
shortened protein. Milder cases may result from an
marked. MolScript drawing from Harlos et al.520
amino acid substitution.561 Factor VIII circulates in the
plasma as a complex with the von Willebrand factor,
(vWF), a large multimeric protein derived by proteo-
lytic cleavage, glycosylation, and sulfation of a 2813-
the N termini of the α-chains and these fit into com- residue precursor.562– 566 The mature 2050-residue vWF
plementary“holes” in the γ chains to form nonco- stabilizes factor VIII in the blood. Another important
valently linked aggregates.542– 544 The clot that forms function of vWF is to bind platelets to damaged endo-
is unstable, but it is soon crosslinked by the action of thelial surfaces.567,568 Like fibrinogen, vWF contains
thetransamidase (transglutaminase or factor XIIIa; RGD sequences specific for binding to adhesion recep-
Eq. 2-23).545,546 The fibrin monomers, von Willebrand tors.569,570 It also binds to collagen. A serious inherited
factor (discussed in following paragraphs), fibronectin, bleeding disorder caused by deficiency of vWF was
collagen, and other proteins all become crosslinked. first discovered among inhabitants of islands in the Gulf
The slower intrinsic mechanism first described of Bothnia, Finland, in 1926 by von Willebrand.563,571
in 1964547,548 consists of a cascade involving six proteases If mild forms of the disease are included, vWD defi-
(Fig. 12-17, left side). Again, autocatalytic cycles are ciency is the commonest bleeding problem. However,
present in the activation by XIIa of both prekallikrein549 abnormalities have been identified in almost every one
and XII and in activation by thrombin of factors XI and of the proteins in the coagulation cascades.514
VIII. This intrinsic pathway is initiated by the serine Until recently, these bleeding diseases were treated
protease proenzymes prekallikrein and factor XII by regular injections of the appropriate factors isolated
together with the accessory protein high-molecular- from human plasma. This was both costly and carried
mass-H- kininigen.549 Activation occurs when blood a high risk of infection by HIV, hepatitis, or other
contacts surfaces such as glass or kaolin (a clay).547,548,550 contaminating viruses. Now, cloned genes are used
Factor XI can also be activated by thrombin. Heredity for commercial production of the factors.572,573 Experi-
absence of factor XI leads to bleeding problems, especially ments in animals, designed to lead to eventual gene

--- Page 637 ---

634 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
replacement therapy, have been somewhat success- protease present in kidney tissue and urine, and
ful.573,574 It is of interest to compare the relative con- tissueplasminogen activator (tPA),590,591 a
centrations of several of the clotting factors in plasma 527-residue protease which is now produced by
and to compare these with their positions in the cas- recombinant DNA technology. It is sometimes used to
cade of the tissue factor (extrinsic) pathway.515 dissolve blood clots in emergency situations, such as
myocardial infarction and pulmonary embolism,592
mg / L Mass kDa µM but can also cause serious bleeding problems. Plasmin
is inhibited by the plasma (cid:1) antiplasmin and is
2
VII 0.5 45.5 0.01 inactivated by action of clotting factor XIIa. Likewise,
V 10.0 330 0.03 tPA is inhibited by several protease inhibitors present
in tissues and in plasma. One is a fast-acting serpin
Prothrombin 150 72 2.1
called plasminogen activator inhibitor.593 Another
Fibrinogen 3,000 340 8.8
anticoagulant compound of medical interest is hirudin,
a 65-residue peptide from the leech. It binds very tightly
Why do we have the intrinsic pathway when the to thrombin (K = 1 pM) preventing its action.594– 596
d
tissue factor pathway provides rapid clot formation? Insects also produce antithrombin.597,598 Ticks599,600
The answer seems to be that the tissue factor pathway and some insects598 inject proteins that inhibit Xa
is needed immediately after injury but that it is turned selectively.599 Anticoagulants are of great medical
off quickly by the anticoagulation systems of the
importance and much effort is being devoted to the
body. As a result the protease plasmin begins to dis- design of better inhibitors of thrombin,601–603 factor Xa,604
solve (lyse) the clot within a few hours. The intrinsic
and other components of the blood coagulation cascade.
pathway is apparently needed to maintain the clot for
Inherited deficiencies of the anticoagulant path-
a longer period.514
ways with associated problems of thrombosis are
What prevents the clotting mechanism, with its known. These include problems with protein C,576,605
autocatalytic cycles, from running out of control? In plasminogen,606 and antithrombin.607,608
part the answer lies in the localization of the enzymatic
activation to tissue surfaces near a wound. The flow
of blood rapidly dilutes components that escape into
10. Esterases and Lipases
the general circulation and liver cells take up and
destroy the active proteases. A variety of circulating
A group of esterases hydrolyze simple oxygen esters.
antiproteases including the tissue factor pathway
Some of these are designed to hydrolyze a particular
inhibitor575 act on these escaped enzymes. Two anti-
ester or small group of esters, while others have a
coagulation systems that are localized on vessel walls576 more nonspecific action. Acetylcholinesterase609– 611a
also come into action very quickly. The circulating
is specific for acetylcholine (Eq. 12-25), a neurotrans-
polysaccharide heparin (Chapter 4) forms a complex
mitter that is released at many nerve synapses and
with the serpin antithrombin. Antithrombin traps
neuromuscular junctions (Chapter 30). The acetylcho-
thrombin as an inactive complex or compound577,578a
line, which is very toxic in excess, must be destroyed
and heparin greatly accelerates the inactivation.578
rapidly to prepare the synapse for transmission of
Kallikrein and factors IXa, Xa, XIa, and XIIa are also
another impulse:
inhibited.
Thrombin is an allosteric protein which exists as
O
a mixture, in nearly equal amounts, of a fast-acting
form that cleaves fibrinogen and is stabilized by Na+, H3C C CH3
and a slow-acting form that initiates the second anti- +
O CH2CH2 N CH3
coagulant cascade.579 The slow acting form, bound to
thrombomodulin,527a,540b,580,580a,b,581 an endothelial Acetylcholine CH3
Acetylcholine
cell surface protein, attacks the proenzyme of another
serum protease called proteinC.582,582a Activated H 2 O Acetylcholine esterase
protein C (APC) inactivates the accessory clotting
CH3
factors Va and VIIIa. The accessory factor protein S583
– +
is also needed for rapid inactivation. A blood clot is H3C COO HO CH2CH2 N CH3
temporary and its dissolution begins as soon as it is CH3
formed, largely through the action of plasmin, a (12-25)
protease derived from the circulating 791-residue
plasminogen584– 588 through the action of yet other The more widely distributed butyrylcholinesterase612
proteases. Plasminogen often becomes crosslinked
is less specific but prefers butyrylcholine. Acetylcholinest-
to cell surface proteins by transglutaminase.586 erase is a very efficient catalyst:613– 615 k = 1.6 x 104 s–1
Plasminogen activators include urokinase,589 a cat

--- Page 638 ---

C. Displacement Reactions on Carbonyl Groups 635
andk /K = 2 x 108 M–1s–1 at 25°C. It exists as a series group of acetylcholine. Instead, the lining of the
cat m
of molecular forms containing varying numbers of gourge is rich in aromatic side chains which may
68-kDa catalytic subunits, 100-kDa structural subunits interact with the methyl groups of the substrate and
and subunits with triple-helical ~120-kDa collagen- by their polarizability stabilize the charge.611,638 Most
like“tails.”609,616 The subunits are joined by disulfide lipases, including cutinase, also have an Asp-His-Ser
bridges to give aggregates that range from simple or Glu-His-Ser triad as well as some form of oxyanion
dimers of catalytic subunits to tailed forms containing hole.620,632,639 Like the serine proteases, the lipases
8–12 catalytic subunits and non-collagenous struc- have bell-shaped pH optima.
tural subunits as well. The tailed forms are secreted Phospholipase A cleaves the ester linkage at the
2
from cells and may be designed to take up residence 2 position in phospholipids.640– 642 One isoenzyme
in the basal lamina of synapses, whereas the dimers form is secreted by the pancreas as a proenzyme
are apparently attached to phosphatidylinositol an- whose N-terminal seven residues are removed by
chors in the membranes (Fig. 8-13).617 Human liver trypsin to give an active 125-residue enzyme. Phos-
carboxylesterases are relatively nonspecific enzymes pholipase A of a similar type is abundant in venoms
2
that hydrolyze ester groups of various drugs and toxins of reptiles and bees. The venom and pancreatic en-
including cocaine and heroin. Products are often ex- zymes have closely similar three-dimensional struc-
creted in the urine.618 Thioesterases function in tures.643– 645 Although the folding pattern is different
biosynthesis of fatty acids, polyketides (Chapter 21), from that of chymotrypsin, imidazole (His 48) and
and many other substances.619 carboxylate (Asp 99) groups are present in the active
Lipases620,621 hydrolyze triacylglycerols. The pan- site in an orientation resembling that of the catalytic
creatic digestive lipase622,623 acts faster on emulsified triad of serine protease. The enzyme requires calcium
fats than on glycerol esters in true solution but re- ions, one of which binds at an appropriate point for
quires the cooperation of a small 10-kDa colipase.624 complexation with the substrate carbonyl as it is con-
Cholesterol esterase hydrolyzes not only cholesterol verted to an oxyanion intermediate. The backbone
esters but also esters of fat-soluble vitamins, phospho- NH of Gly 30 may also serve as an oxyanion ligand.
lipids, and triacylglycerols.625,626 Other lipases include However, in most phospholipases there is no active
gastric627 and hepatic lipases and a lysosomal acid site serine. Instead, a water molecule is positioned to
lipase628 which also attacks neutral lipids. Plasma serve as the attacking nucleophile in formation of the
lipoprotein lipase629,630 digests fats in the chylomicrons oxyanion as is indicated in the following scheme,
and from the very low-density lipoproteins of blood. which shows a truncated phosphatidylethanolamine
Hormone-sensitive lipase hydrolyzes stored triacyl- as the substrate.643 Phospholipase A is up to 1000
2
glycerols in the cytosol in response to catecholamines, or more times as active on phospholipids in micelles
ACTH, and other hormones.631 The phospholipases as on dissolved substrates.621,646,647 Apparently, the
attack phospholipids, while cutinase,632
produced by some fungi, cleaves the
G30
ester linkages in the cutin (Chapter 21)
C
of plant surfaces. Fungal lipases are N
important industrial commodities. O
H
Numerous structural and mechanistic O
D49 H
studies have been made with – Ca2+ OO
O H48
them.620,629,633– 635 The gene for a lipase O H N
OO
from Candida rugosa has been synthe-
sized using codons that maximize its
OO––
N
OO OO
expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae PP 2 HH
3 1
and which allow for further genetic OO
engineering of the lipase.636 EEththaannoollaammiinnee OO O H O – D99
All of these esterases appear to act O
by mechanisms closely related to those O
of proteases. Acetylcholinesterase H
contains an active site serine that reacts
with organophosphorus compounds O
(Box 12-E) and is part of an Asp-His-
Y52
Ser catalytic triad which lies in a deep
“gorge” as well as an oxyanion hole.637
A surprise is the absence of an essential
carboxylate group that might bind the Y73
positively charged trimethylammonium

--- Page 639 ---

636 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
BOX 12-E INSECTICIDES
Over 200 organic insecticides, designed to kill R O S R O O
insects without excessive danger to humans and P P
animals, are presently in use.a– e Many of these R O X R O X
compounds act by inhibiting cell respiration; others Highly toxic
uncouple ATP synthesis from electron transport.
The chlorinated hydrocarbons such as DDT act on The desulfuration reaction involves microsomal
nerves in a manner that is still not fully understood. oxidases of the liver, the sulfur being oxidized
One of the largest classes of insecticides acts on the ultimately to sulfate.f The reactivity of parathion
enzyme acetylcholinesterase of nerve synapses. with cholinesterases depends upon the high group
Like chymotrypsin, it contains an active site serine transfer potential imparted by the presence of the
residue that reacts with organophosphorus com- excellent leaving group, the p-nitrophenolate anion.
pounds. The extreme toxicity of esters of pyrophos- If the P– O linkage to this group is hydrolyzed before
phate and of dialkylphosphonofluoridates was the desulfuration takes place, the phosphorus com-
recognized in the 1930s and led to their develop- pound is rendered harmless. Thus, the design of an
ment in Germany and in England as insecticides effective insecticide involves finding a compound
and as nerve gases. Among the most notorious is which insects activate rapidly but which is quickly
diisopropylphosphonofluoridate (diisopropylfluo- degraded by higher animals. Other factors, such as
rophosphate; DFP), for which the LD (dose lethal rate of penetration of the insect cuticle and rate of
50
to 50% of the animals tested) is only 0.5 mg kg–1 excretion from the organism, are also important.
intravenously. This exceedingly dangerous com- The phosphorylated esterases formed by the
pound can cause rapid death by absorption through action of organophosphorus inhibitors are very
the skin. stable, but some antidotes can reverse the inhibition.
The following structures are a few of the organ- The oxime of 2-formyl-1-methylpyridinium ion
ophosphorus compounds and other acetylcholinest- (pralidoxime) is very effective.g Its positive charge
erase inhibitors that are selectively toxic to insects. permits it to bind to the site normally occupied by
the quarternary nitrogen of acetylcholine and to
displace the dialkylphospho group:
O O Et O S
Et O O Et
P
P O P
Et O O Et
Et O O NO2
Tetraethyl pyrophosphate O OR
(TEPP) Parathion
–
N+ C N O P OR
H
H3C O S O O
C N
CH3 CH3 O
P H C O Et H Pralidoxime
H3C O S O Seryl (enzyme)
C O Et Carbaryl, a widely used methyl carbamate, is a
pseudosubstrate of acetylcholinesterase that reacts
O
105 to 106 times more slowly than do normal sub-
Malathion Carbaryl
strates. The carbamoylated enzyme formed is not
as stable as the phosphorylated enzymes and the
The characteristic high group transfer potential of a inhibition is reversible.
phospho group in pyrophosphate linkage, which A basic problem is that most insecticides are
makes ATP so useful in cells, also permits tetraethyl designed to attack the central nervous system of the
pyrophosphate to phosphorylate active sites of acetyl- insect, the system that depends heavily upon acetyl-
cholinesterases. While TEPP is very toxic, it is rapidly choline. However, in human beings the readily
hydrolyzed; all harmful residues are gone within a accessible peripheral nervous system also depends
few hours after use. upon acetylcholine, e.g., in neuronuscular junctions.
Two insecticides that have been used widely are The danger of poisoning is great. Another approach
parathion andmalathion. They are less toxic than is to attack the glutamate-dependent peripheral
DFP or TEPP and do not become effective insecticides system in insects, e.g., with inhibitors of glutamate
until they undergo bioactivation during which decarboxylase. Glutamate functions as a neuro-
conversion from a P = S to a P = O compound occurs: transmitter in the human body but only in the well-

--- Page 640 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 637
BOX 12-E (continued)
protected central nervous system. c Kamrin, M. A., ed. (1997) Pesticide Profiles, CRC Press, Boca
Another important problem is the development Raton, Florida
d Casida, J. E. (1973) Ann. Rev. Biochem.42, 259 – 278
of insects resistant to insecticides. This often arises
e Wilkinson, C. F., ed. (1976) Insect Biochemistry and Physiology,
as a result of increased levels of carboxylesterases Plenum, New York
which hydrolyze both organophosphates and car- f Nakatsugawa, T., Tolman, N. M., and Dahm, P. A. (1969)
baryl.h,i A mutation that changed a single active site Biochem. Pharmacol.18, 1103 – 1114
g Wilson, I. B., and Ginsburg, S. (1955) Biochim. Biophys. Acta.18,
glycine to aspartate in a carboxylesterase of a blow-
168– 170
fly changed the esterase to an organophosphorus h Raymond, M., Callaghan, A., Fort, P., and Pasteur, N. (1991)
hydrolase which protected the fly against insecticides.j Nature (London)350, 151– 153
i Karunaratne, S. H. P. P., Hemingway, J., Jayawardena, K. G. I.,
Dassanayaka, V., and Vaughan, A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
a Büchel, K. H., ed. (1983) Chemistry of Pesticides, Wiley, New 31124 – 31128
York j Newcomb, R. D., Campbell, P. M., Ollis, D. L., Cheah, E.,
b Hassall, K. A. (1990) The Biochemistry and Uses of Pesticides, 2nd Russell, R. J., and Oakeshott, J. G. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
ed., VCH Publ., Weinheim U.S.A.94, 7464 – 7468
substrate-binding cavity of the protein is designed to steroidal antibiotic fusidic acid (Chapter 22, Section G)
accommodate phospholipid molecules in the preferred is a competitive inhibitor.655 A related transferase is
conformation found in the micelles.643 Most of the aspartate carbamoyltransferase (Fig. 7-20; Chapter 24).
other lipases have lids which close over the active sites
and impede access of substrates. Binding to a phospho-
Cl
lipid surface apparently induces a conformational Cl
H OH H
change that opens the lid. This allows substrate to enter
from the lipid surface.620,621,646 Cutinases, which do N H
1
not display interfacial activation, do not have lids. Phos- O
pholipase A activity is stimulated by an applied elec-
2 H CH2 OH
trical field, a result that suggests that its activity in vivo 3
O2N
may be regulated in part by the membrane potential.648 Inactivated by acetylation here
Chloramphenicol, a broad-spectrum
Streptomyces antibiotic
11. Other Acyltransferases
Penicillin and related antibiotics are inactivated by
Acyl groups are frequently transferred from β-lactamases (Box 20-G), some of which resemble serine
amides or esters to various acceptors in biosynthetic proteases in forming acyl enzymes with active site
reactions. Among the many known acyltransferases serine side chains.656,657 Others are zinc metallogen-
are the ribosomal peptidyl transferases (Chapter 29), zymes.658,659 Amidohydrolases such as asparaginase
a transacylase involved in bacterial peptidoglycan andglutaminase,660,661 deacetylases,662 and many
synthesis (Chapter 20), transglutaminase (Eq. 2-23),649,650 other hydrolases can also be described as acyltrans-
γ-glutamylcyclotransferase (Box 11-B), and transacyla- ferases.
tion reactions involving acyl-CoA derivatives. Exam-
ples of the latter are N-acetylation651 or myristoylation
(Chapter 8) of proteins, the formation of acetylcholine D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom
from choline652 and of acetylcarnitine from carnitine
(Eq. 17-4), and acetylation of the antibiotic chloram- Nucleophilic displacements on phosphorus (Table
phenicol. The high group transfer potential of thioesters 10-1, reaction type 1C) are involved in virtually every
ensures that these reactions proceed to completion. aspect of cellular energetics and in many aspects of
Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT),653 the biosynthesis. One large group of such enzymes are
enzyme that catalyzes acetylation and inactivation of phosphotransferases, which transfer phospho (also
the antibiotic by bacteria, is much used in studies calledphosphono or, traditionally in biochemistry,
of gene expression (Chapter 28). A catalytic histidine phosphoryl) groups from one nucleophilic center to
removes the proton from the 3-OH group and a serine another. When transfer is to water the enzymes are
hydroxyl provides an oxyanion hole to accommodate calledphosphatases, and when from one group in a
the anticipated tetrahedral intermediate.652,654 The molecule to another in the same molecule, mutases.

--- Page 641 ---

638 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Enzymes that transfer a phospho group from ATP to
water are ATPases and those that transfer the phos-
pho group from ATP to some other nucleophile are
kinases. Substituted phospho groups can also be
transferred. Thus, nucleases, members of a larger
class of phosphodiesterases, hydrolyze nucleic acids
by transfer of nucleotidyl groups to a hydroxyl group
of water. Polynucleotide polymerases transfer
nucleotidyl groups to growing polynucleotide chains.
An intramolecular nucleotidyl transferase is adenylate
cyclase. Topoisomerases carry out a sequence of
phosphotransferase reactions.
1. Questions about Mechanisms
Consider the following general equation for trans-
fer to nucleophile Y – of a phospho group attached in
an ester or an anhydride linkage to form ROH, which
could be an alcohol, carboxylic acid, or a phosphoric
acid such as ATP.
O
O R
δ– δ–
Y – P O Y P OR
HO HO OH
OH
Transition state
ROH
–
Y—POH
3 (12-26)
This equation could also represent a half-reaction in a
double-displacement process. As with displacements
on saturated carbon atoms, two basic mechanisms can
be imagined. The first is S 2-like or associative.663– 667
N
The transition state might be represented where the
bonds from the phosphorous atom to Y and to O are
approximately equally formed. In an in-line displace-
Equatorial positions
ment, where Y, P, and – OR are colinear, this mecha-
nism leads to inversion if a chiral phospho group is
used. There is another possibility for the associative
mechanism. Whereas a carbon atom can form only O R O
a
four stable covalent bonds, phosphorus is able to form Y – P O Y P OR Apical
five. While nucleophilic attack on carbon leads to a HO HO OH positions
transient five-bonded transition state (Eq. 12-2), attack OH
on phosphorus could produce a relatively long-lived
Pentacovalent intermediate,
pentacovalent intermediate (Eq. 12-27). Notice that
a trigonal bipyramid
two transition states are involved. Remember that our b
conventional way of drawing phosphate esters with a
double bond from phosphorus to one of the oxygens is
Oδ–
misleading. All of the P – O bonds share some of the Y P δ O – R R—O –
double-bond character and the phosphate group has
HO OH
many characteristics of a completely single-bonded Y—POH
3 2
structure:
Second transition state
–
– –
HO O HO O
+
P ≡ P
–
O O O O
Likewise, in the transition state structures of Eq. 12-27,
stepb, the P– O bonds, except for that to – O R, are equiv-
alent and all have partial double-bond character.
Geometric complexities. The geometry of the
pentacovalent intermediate in Eq. 12-27 is that of a
trigonal bipyramid. In this structure the bond angles
in the equatorial plane are 120°, whereas all of the
angles between any of those bonds and the two that
attach to the groups in the apical positions are 90°.
This disparity arises naturally from the fact that it is
impossible to place five points on the surface of a
sphere all equidistant one from the other. The attack
of Y– from the side opposite O – R (an in-line attack)
leads to a trigonal bipyramid in which – O – R and – Y
occupy the two apical positions. However, if Y – attacks
a face opposite one of the other oxygens (adjacent
attack),– O – R will take an equatorial position.
The chemical reactivities of groups in the apical
and equatorial positions of pentacovalent intermediates
are different.664 In particular, elimination of a nucleo-
philic group to form a tetrahedral phosphate is easier
from an apical position than from an equatorial position.
For the in-line displacement of Eq. 12-27 elimination of
RO– should be easy. However an adjacent attack would
leave–OR in an equatorial position. Before it could be
eliminated, the intermediate would probably have to
undergo a permutational rearrangement by which
–OR would be transferred from an equatorial to an
apical position.
One type of permutational rearrangement, known
aspseudorotation, can be visualized as in Eq. 12-28.668,669
The axial groups a and b move back while equatorial
groups 2 and 3 move forward, still in the same equato-
(12-27)

--- Page 642 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 639
rial plane. Equatorial group 1 does not move. This O
decreases the 120° bond angles between the equatorial a
R O P R OH
groups and increases the bond angles between group 1
–
O
and the axial groups until all four bond angles to group H O
1 are equivalent. The resulting square pyramid is a
O
high-energy transition state structure in the pseudo-
rotation process and can either revert to the original Y O P
–
structure or, by continued motion of the groups in the H O O
same directions as before, to the structures shown at b
O
–
Y O P O
2
1
1
2 OH (12-29)
a
a P b P b
a
3 dissociative mechanism but without free metaphosphate.
3
b The concept is supported by studies of kinetic isotope
effects.677,678
2
1 Coping with negative charges. We visualize
P b phospho group transfers as involving attack by a
a nucleophile bearing at least a partial negative charge.
However, phospho groups also carry one or two nega-
3 (12-28)
tive charges and that in ATP even more. Therefore, it
does not seem surprising that many phosphotrans-
the bottom of Eq. 12-28. In the final structure, groups ferases are metalloenzymes, sometimes containing
2 and 3 are axial and the original axial groups a and b bound Zn2+ which neutralizes some of the negative
are equatorial. Pseudorotation is slow enough that it charge. Furthermore, enzymes usually accept ATP as
could be rate limiting in enzymatic reactions. Stereo- a substrate only when it is accompanied by a divalent
electronic effects could also affect these rates.670,671 metal ion,679 usually Mg2+. Another way in which
However, much evidence indicates that enzymes almost enzymes deal with the negative charges on phospho
always avoid these complexities by using in-line groups is to have arginine side chains in appropriate
mechanisms. positions to interact by forming strong ion paired-
hydrogen bonds. It is often assumed that it is essential
Metaphosphate ions. An alternative to an asso- to neutralize the charge on the phospho group to avoid
ciative mechanism is an S 1-like or dissociative electrostatic repulsion from a partial or complete
N
mechanism which can occur by elimination of a negative charge on the attacking nucleophilic center.
metaphosphate ion (Eq. 12-29, step a). A nucleophilic However, with a dissociative mechanism and a meta-
reagent can then add to the eliminated metaphosphate phosphate-like intermediate the transition state may
in step b. The formation of metaphosphate is analogous be reached without charge neutralization.679,680 Inter-
to formation of carbocation during the action of lysozyme actions of Mg2+ with phosphorus-containing substrates,
(Eq. 12-11). This dissociative mechanism could lead like those of fixed positive charges in the protein may
either to racemization or to inversion of a chiral phos- also be essential for binding the substrate correctly to
phate. Metaphosphate ions have been shown to exist. an enzyme.
They are generated in certain nonenzymatic elimination
reactions in aprotic solvents672– 674 and they are reactive
electrophiles able to react as in Eq. 12-29. However, 2. Magnetic Resonance Studies
there is some doubt that they can exist free in aqueous
media.675 Jencks and associates concluded from studies There have been many investigations of phospho-
of linear Gibbs energy relationships that in the transition transferases by NMR and EPR methods.681,682 One
state for nonenzymatic phospho transfer reactions approach is to use paramagnetic ions such as Mn2+,
there is a large amount of bond breaking and a small Cu2+, or Cr3+ to induce nuclear relaxation in substrate
amount of new bond formation in the transition and coenzyme molecules at active sites of enzymes.
state676 but no free metaphosphate. There is a large Flavin radicals and specifically introduced nitroxide
dependence of the rate on the pK of the leaving spin labels can serve as well. Paramagnetic ions greatly
a
group, but there is still a small dependence on the increase the rate of magnetic relaxation of nearby
pK of the entering nucleophile. Thus, we have a nuclei (Chapter 3, Section I). Thus, small amounts of
a

--- Page 643 ---

640 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Mn2+ in a sample lead to broadening of lines in ordinary
1H,13C, and 31P NMR spectra. Adenosine
–
Useful information about enzymes can sometimes P
α
be obtained by observing effects of paramagnetic ions
on the NMR signal of protons in the solvent water. C
The relaxation time of solvent protons is usually greater
Mn2+
–
than 1 s. However, in the ion Mn(H O) 2+ the protons β
2 6 C N
of the coordinated water molecules relax much more P – C
N
rapidly, both T and T being ~ 10–1 s. Since the coordi- P C
1 2 +
nated water molecules usually exchange rapidly with γ
Oxygen
N
the bulk solvent, a small number of manganese ions Hydrogen – Creatine
can cause a significant increase in relaxation rate for all
of the water protons. Broadening of the proton band is
observed and differences in T 1 and T 2 can be measured Figure 12-19 Proposed transition state structure formed
by appropriate methods. Paramagnetic relaxation from Mn2+, ATP, and creatine bound in the active site of
effects usually increase as the inverse sixth power of muscle creatine kinase. Based on EPR spectroscopy with
the internuclear distance. Knowing the Mn2+–H regiospecifically 17O-labeled substrates. The electrical charg-
distance to be 0.287 ± 0.005 nm for hydrated Mn2+, it es have been added in one possible constellation. However,
hydrogen atoms bound to phospho groups are not shown.
has been possible to relate the effects on T and T to
1 2 After Leyh et al.684
the number of H O molecules coordinated at any one
2
time to a protein-bound metal ion and to their rate of
exchange with the bulk solvent.
Relaxation effects on 1H,13C, and 31P, while more
difficult to observe, can provide geometric information Phosphorus-31 NMR has been used to measure
about active sites. The theory is complex, but under internal equilibrium constants within enzyme-
some conditions the paramagnetically induced relax- substrate (ES) complexes.663,685– 687 By having both
ation can be described adequately by Eq. 12-30. substrate and product concentrations high enough to
saturate the enzyme, all of the enzyme exists as ES and
enzyme–product (EP) complexes in equilibrium with
r = C [ T f(τ ) ]1/6
1M c (12-30) each other. For a phosphotransferase at least one sub-
strate and one product contain phosphorus. Although
Here r is the internuclear distance, C is a combina- the NMR resonances are broadened by binding to the
tion of physical constants, and T is the longitudinal large, slowly tumbling protein, their areas can be mea-
1M
relaxation time. The complex function f(τ ) depends sured satisfactorily and can be used to calculate an
c
upon the correlation time τ , the resonance frequency equilibrium constant such as that for Eq. 12-32:
c
of the nucleus being observed, and the frequency of
precession of the electron spins at the paramagnetic k
f
centers. The value of τ can be estimated (Chapter 3) ES EP
c k
and, in turn, the distance r according to Eq. 12-30. r
Such studies on creatine kinase (Eq. 12-31) utilized K’ = [EP]/[ES] (12-32)
both a bound Mn2+ ion and a nitroxide spin label to
estimate distances of various protons from the nitrox- An example is illustrated in Fig. 12-20. In this
ide.683 Together with EPR measurements (Box 8-C), experiment685 the relative areas of the 31P signals of
which gave the Mn2+–nitroxide distance, a model of the ADP (one for free ADP and one, slightly more intense,
ATP·Mn2+ complex in the active site was constructed. for MgADP) and of the signal for phosphoenolpyruvate
Additional EPR experiments on Mn2+ complexes with (PEP) were measured in the absence of enzyme and in
ATP and ADP containing 17O in the α,β, or γ phospho the presence of a catalytic amount of pyruvate kinase
groups showed that in the enzyme·ATP· creatine (Fig. 12-20A). The results verified that the equilibrium
complex the metal ion is bound to all three phospho constant for the overall reaction (Eq. 12-33) is very
groups of ATP. It remained coordinated with the two high (3300).
phospho groups of ADP and also that of the phospho-
creatine product in the enzyme·ADP·creatine-P com- Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) + ADP → ATP + pyruvate
plex as well as in the transition state, which is pictured
(12-33)
occurring via a metaphosphate ion.684
However, with an excess of enzyme (Fig. 12-20B)
k f the internal constant was estimated as
Creatine-P + ADP ATP + creatine
k
r (12-31)

--- Page 644 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 641
[E · MgATP · pyruvate] PEP
K’ = = 0.5 – 1.0
[E· MgADP · PEP] β-P (ADP)
(12-34)
α-P (ADP) Initial (no E)
A
This is a difficult measurement
and reinvestigation by another group686
γ-P (ATP)
indicated that the amount of the
PEP-containing complex had been
β-P (ATP)
overestimated and that K’=10.
If the rates of the forward and
backward reactions in Eq. 12-34 are β-P (ADP) Equilibrium mixture
of the same order as the spin-lattice B α-P’s (Catalytic E)
relaxation times (T ) of the 31P in the
1
bound substrate and product, the
rate constants k and k can be evalu-
f r
ated by saturation-transfer NMR.688
This is done by irradiating one Equilibrium mixture
resonance, e.g., that of the γ-P of (Catalytic E)
C P PEP(?) [Pyruvate] / [ATP]≈15
ATP, and observing whether this i
causes a loss of intensity of the
r r e e s c o ei n v a i n n c g e i t f s o r p t h h o e s p p h ro o d g u r c o t u w p h f i r c o h m is ( P + E A P M + P P ? i ) γ β -P -P ( A (A T D P) P + ) α-P’s
ATP. This technique was used to D β-P (ATP) Equilibrium mixture
observe the creatine kinase reaction Excess enzyme
(Eq. 12-31) in living muscle in both
relaxed and contracting states. For
resting muscle the observed forward
flux was 1.7 x 10–3 M s–1 and the
backward flux 1.2 x 10–3 M s–1.
Thus, this reaction, which supplies
ATP for contraction of the muscle E + EDTA
from stored phosphocreatine,
appears to be operating at or near
equilibrium. This had been assumed
–8 –4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24
but had previously been difficult to
prove. Two-dimensional NMR tech- Chemical shift (ppm)
niques can now be used for this kind
of measurement.689
Figure12-20 Equilibria in pyruvate kinase reaction as studied by 31P NMR
When31P is bonded to 18O the at 40.3 MHz, pH 8.0, 15°C. (A–C) Equilibria with low enzyme in levels ~ 15%
chemical shift of the 31P is altered 2H O. (A) 31P NMR spectrum of 1.5 ml of reaction mixture; PEP, 13.3 mM;
2
by 0.0206 ppm from that when the ADP, 14.1 mM; MgCl , 20 mM; potassium Hepes buffer, 100 mM; KC, 50 mM
2
phosphorus is bonded to 16O. This without enzyme. (B) Equilibrium mixture after the addition of ~ 1 mg of
allows18O labels introduced into pyruvate kinase to the reaction mixture. (C) Equilibrium after the addition
phospho groups to serve as tracers of potassium pyruvate (final concentration of 200 mM) to the sample of the
which can be followed continuously spectrum in (B). (D,E) Equilibrium with enzyme concentrations in excess of
during reactions.683 The technique is the substrates. Sample volumes ~ 1.1 ml with 10% 2H 2 O. (D) Equilibrium
mixture set up with enzyme (2.8 mM active sites); 2.8 mM PEP; 2.4 mM ADP;
useful in studies of stereochemistry
5.7 mM MgCl ; 100 mM potassium Hepes; 100 mM KCl. (E) Spectrum after
(see Section 2) and for examination the addition o 2 f 50 µl of 400 mM EDTA (pH readjusted to 8.0) to the sample of
ofpositional isotope exchange.690
spectrum D. The EDTA removes metal ions, stopping the catalytic reactions
This latter technique is often used and sharpening the resonances. From Nageswara Rao et al.685
with ATP containing 18O in the
β,γ-bridge position. If an enzyme
transfers the terminal (γ) phospho
group to an acceptor via a phosphoenzyme but without a nonbonding position as the phospho group is repeat-
loss of the ADP, we may expect positional isomerization. edly transferred back and forth between ATP and the
The18O will move between the β,γ-bridge position and acceptor and as the phospho group rotates.682,690

--- Page 645 ---

642 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Equation 12-35 shows one part of this isomerization. 18
O
The negative oxygens have been omitted here to avoid
16
implying a known state of protonation or a localization O P
16
of charge. R O
17O
An ester chiral at the phosphorus atom; R configuration
O O
O Considerable ingenuity was required in both the
γ
P 18 P β O P α O Adenosine synthesis of these chiral compounds695,697 and the
Acceptor – O – – – stereochemical analysis of the products formed from
O O O them by enzymes.698– 700 In one experiment the phospho
a ATP group was transferred from chiral phenyl phosphate
to a diol acceptor using E. coli alkaline phosphatase as
O 2– O a catalyst (Eq. 12-36). In this reaction transfer of the
phospho group occurred without inversion. The chirality
18
Acceptor P P O AMP
of the product was determined as follows. It was
– –
O O O cyclized by a nonenzymatic in-line displacement to
give equimolar ratios of three isomeric cyclic diesters.
Enzyme-product complex
These were methylated with diazomethane to a mixture
of three pairs of diastereoisomers triesters. These dia-
O O
stereoisomers were separated and the chirality was
Acceptor + P O P O AMP determined by a sophisticated mass spectrometric
– O O – 18 O – (12-35) s a p n e a c ly tr s o is s . c 6 o 92 p y A a s n im d p is l e il r l u a s n t a r l a y t s e i d s i e n m F p ig lo . y 1 s 2 - 3 2 1P 2 . N S M in R ce
alkaline phosphatase is relatively nonspecific, most
phosphate esters produced by the action of phospho-
Figure 12-21 illustrates the use of the technique in transferases can have their phospho groups transferred
investigating the possible participation of metaphos- without inversion to 1,2-propanediol and the chirality
phate in a nonenzymatic reaction. can be determined by this method.
3. Stereochemistry
2 2
Evidence for an in-line S 2-like mechanism of most
N
enzymatic phospho group transfer reactions comes
largely from study of chiral phospho groups.663,692– 695
A chiral phosphate can be introduced at either the α
3
orβ phosphorus of ATP by substitution of one of the 3
oxygen atoms by sulfur. A chiral phospho group in
theβ position can be formed by substituting one oxygen
by S and a second by 18O. 1
1
– O
O
P O O Adenosine
α
2–
O3P O P
–13.5 –13.6 –13.7 –13.8
–
S O
ppm relative to trimethyl phosphate
ATPαS (R configuration at P)
Notice that the negative charge is largely localized on Figure 12-21 The 31P NMR spectrum at 101.2 MHz of Pα of
sulfur in these phosphorothioate compounds.696 More isotopically labeled ADP. This was recovered from an exper-
general is the use of 17O and 18O to form a chiral phos- iment in which ADP containing 87 atom % of 18O in all four
pho group: oxygens around Pβ was allowed to undergo partial (~ 20%)
nonenzymatic hydrolysis to AMP and P. Peaks 1 represent
– S OO the species containing no 18O bonded to i Pα. Peaks 2 repre-
P O O Adenosine sent all species with 18O in the Pα–O–Pβ bridge, and peaks 3
2–
O3P O
β
P
T
re
h
p
e
r
s
e
e
s e
h
n
a
t
v
s
e
p
u
e
n
ci
d
e
e
s
r
w
go
it
n
h
e
1
p
8O
os
i
i
n
ti o
n
n
o
a
n
l
b
i
r
s
i
o
d
t
g
o
i
p
n
e
g
e
p
x
o
ch
si
a
ti
n
o
g
n
e
s
.
a
F
t
r
P
o
α
m
.
–
O O Lowe and Tuck.691
ATPβS (S configuration at P)

--- Page 646 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 643
16 The first structure drawn is for a Mg–ATP S
O – OH complex with a chiral β-phosphothioate group.
O P 17 CH2 C The Mg2+ is expected to bond to oxygen. How-
O H
18O HO CH3 ever, in the second complex, in which Cd2+ has
Phenyl[(R)-16O,17O,18O] phosphate S-propane-1,2-diol been substituted for Mg2+, it is expected that the
Cd2+ will bond to sulfur. Therefore, the stereo-
16
O chemically equivalent structure will be obtained
OH
OH 17O P CH2 C only when the compound has the S configuration
18O O H at the phosphorus. In the third of the foregoing
CH3 complexes, Mg2+ has been replaced by Cr3+ to
(R)
give an exchange-inert complex of ATP in
(12-36)
which the Cr3+ will remain attached firmly to
Although inversion was not observed with the the same two oxygen atoms under most experimental
E. coli alkaline phosphatase, it has been observed for conditions. Notice also that in this complex, the AMP
ribonucleases and many other hydrolytic enzymes and portion occupies a different position than in the first two
for most kinases transferring phospho groups from complexes. It is called the ∆screw-sense isomer,702
ATP. The difference lies in the existence of a phospho- while the upper two complexes are Λ screw-sense
enzyme intermediate in the action of alkaline phospha- isomers. We may reasonably expect that an enzyme,
tase (see Eq. 12-38). Each of the two phosphotransferase which may provide additional ligands to the metal
steps in the phosphatase action apparently occurs with ions, will prefer one or the other of these screw-sense
inversion. The simplest interpretation of all the exper- isomers. For α,β-bidentate ATP complexes both α and
imental results is that phosphotransferases usually act by β phosphorous atoms become chiral centers and even
in-line S 2-like mechanisms which may involve metaphos- more isomers are possible.
N
phate-ion-like transition states that are constrained to react The use of exchange inert Cr3+ and Co3+ complexes
with an incoming nucleophile to give inversion. An adjacent of ATP has been developed by Cleland and associ-
attack with pseudorotation would probably retain the ates.702– 705 The β,γ-bidentate chromium complexes
original configuration and is therefore excluded. were separated into the Λ and ∆ isomers.704 Each was
The substrate for many phosphotransferases is separated further into a pair of “ring-puckering isomers”.
MgATP. Which of the possible isomers of this chelate These metal complexes are all competitive inhibitors of
complex is utilized by these enzymes? Since Mg2+ MgATP and both ring puckering isomers of the ∆ screw
associates and dissociates rapidly from the complexes sense are very slow substrates of various kinases. The
there are several possibilities: a tridentate complex with Λ isomers serve as very slow substrates for pyruvate
oxygens from α,β, and γ phospho groups coordinated kinase, adenylate kinase, and fructose-6-phosphate
with the metal ion, an α,β-bidentate, a β,γ-bidentate, or kinase.703 The ∆ exo isomer is the strongest inhibitor
a monodentate complex. Most evidence suggests that of creatine kinase, suggesting this same conformation
β,γ-bidentate complexes of the following types are the for the MgATP substrate. The disastereoisomers of
true substrates. ATPαS and ATPβS have also been tested with kinases
in the presence of either Mg2+ or Cd2+. With creatine
kinase695,706 the isomers with the R configuration at
O
phosphorus are preferred in the presence of Mg2+ but
P O O AMP those with the S configuration are preferred in the pres-
Mg–ATPβS complex ence of Cd2+. This might be related to the previously
O O P withΛ screw sense,
mentioned preferences of the metals for O vs. S ligands,
R configuration at P
Mg O S and would suggest that this enzyme prefers the Λ isomer
(see foregoing structures). However, EPR studies with
O the corresponding Mn2+ complexes suggest that the
∆ isomer is preferred by the enzyme.693 There are 12
P O O AMP isomers of monoammine Cr(III)ATP. Their use has
Cd–ATβS complex
O O P withΛ screw sense, provided information about the location of water
S configuration at P molecules in metal complexes of kinases.707
Cd S O In the following sections we will consider several
individual phosphotransferases.
O
P O O
O O P Cr–ATP complex
with∆ screw sense
+
Cr O O AMP

--- Page 647 ---

644 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
O O
CH3
O
The product 1-phospho-(S)-propane-1,2-
P P P diol1 (here shown as R at phosphorus) is
O O O
O 2 O 5 OCH3 converted by in-line ring closure to an
equimolar mixture of three cyclic diesters.
H3C O P O P
O
O P
OCH3
O P
O T
tr
h
ie
e
s
s
t
e
e r
a
s
r
.
e
O
m
f
e
t
t
h
h
e
y
s
l
e
a
,
t e
o
d
n l
t
y
o
3
g i
a
v
n
e
d
s i
6
x
g
c
i
y
v
c
e
l i
s
c
harp
OH O O O
H O 3 6
CH3 31P resonance because the 17O in the others
broadens the lines.
(R)1
O O
CH3
O O=16O
P P P
O O O =17O
4 7
CH3
=18O
Set of cyclic ‘Syn’ cyclic ‘Anti’ cyclic
diesters triesters triesters
R-phospho-compound S-phospho-compound
OCH CH
3 3 Two cyclic triesters 3 and 6 from an R-
O O
P ‘Syn’ P phospho compound and two others 8 and
O O
O 9 from an S-phospho compound will give
sharp31P NMR resonances.
3 8
+ +
O
O O
P ‘Anti’ P
O O
CH OCH
3 3
6 9
Predicted Observed
Predicted and observed 31P NMR spectra of
the mixtures of syn and anti cyclic triesters
R derived from labeled samples of 1 phospho-
(S)-propane-1,2-diols that are R and S at
phosphorus.
1 Hz/division
S
Figure 12-22 Method for determining
chirality of phospho groups containing 16O,
17O, and 18O. From Buchwald and
1 Hz/division Knowles.701

--- Page 648 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 645
Acid phosphatases, which have pH optima of ~ 5
4. Phosphatases
and are inhibited by fluoride ion, occur in bacteria,
fungi, plants, and animals. In bone, the acid phosphatase
The phosphatases catalyze hydrolysis of phosphate
content is high in the osteoclasts which function in the
esters to produce inorganic phosphate:667
resorption of calcium from bone. The highest content
O of acid phosphatase in humans is in the prostate and
an elevated serum level has long been used as a diag-
R O P O – + H2O R OH + HPO4 2–
nostic indicator of prostatic cancer.715 Acid phosphatase
O – (12-37) is a periplasmic enzyme in E. coli.716 Phosphoenzymes
have been trapped from both plant and animal acid
Theacid phosphatases and alkaline phosphatases
phosphatases.717 For example, a brief incubation with
are nonspecific and cleave many different phosphate
32P-labeledp-nitrophenyl phosphate followed by rapid
esters, whereas glucose-6-phosphatase,fructose-
denaturation in an alkaline medium gave a covalently
1,6-bisphosphatase, and many others are specific for
labeled protein from which 32P-containing N δ-phos-
single substrates. The nonspecific phosphatases may
phohistidine was isolated. In agreement with kinetic
provide inorganic phosphate ions in places where they
evidence that a phosphoenzyme is a true intermediate,
are needed, e.g., in mineralizing bone. All phosphatases
there is no inversion of chiral phospho groups by liver
help to drive metabolic cycles (Chapter 17).
or prostate acid phosphatases.718
The alkaline phosphatases are found in bacteria,
Some acid phosphatases from animals and plants
fungi, and higher animals but not in higher plants. In
are violet in color and contain iron (Chapter 16) and an
E. coli alkaline phosphatase is concentrated in the peri-
Mn3+-containing acid phosphatase has been isolated
plasmic space. In animals it is found in the brush border
from sweet potatoes.720 These enzymes have dimetal
of kidney cells, in cells of the intestinal mucosa, and in
centers, often containing one Zn2+ and one Fe3+with
the osteocytes and osteoblasts of bone. It is almost absent
bridging carboxylate and hydroxide ions between the
from red blood cells, muscle, and other tissues which
metals. Imidazole, tyrosinate, and carboxylate side
are not involved extensively in transport of nutrients.
chains hold the metals as in Fig. 16-20. A water mole-
The alkaline phosphatase of E. coli is a dimer of
cule bound to the Fe3+ is thought to dissociate with
449-residue subunits which requires Zn2+, is allo-
a low pK of 4.8 to give an Fe3+·–OH complex. The
sterically activated by Mg2+, and has a pH optimum a
hydroxyl ion can then attack the phospho groups, one
above 8.667,708– 711 At a pH of ~ 4, incubation of the
enzyme with inorganic phosphate leads to formation
of a phosphoenzyme. Using 32P-labeled phosphate, it R166
was established that the phosphate becomes attached
in ester linkages to serine 102. The same active site
sequence Asp-Ser-Ala is found in mammalian alkaline
phosphatases. These results, as well as the stereo-
NH
chemical arguments given in Section 2, suggest a
NH
double-displacement mechanism of Eq. 12-38: 2+
+ H Mg
R–O–P (P Se h r o 1 sp 02 h – at O as H e) P i HN H O Ser 102 O
Substrate H O O P 2– H O –
O O
R–O–H S ( e E r n 1 z 0 y 2 m – e O –P – ) P H 2 O (12-38) Zn2+ – Z 2 n + O – O D51
N D327
O
O
The active site contains two Zn2+ ions and one Mg2+ ion H N N N D369
which are held by imidazole and carboxylate groups.
H331 NH
The inorganic phosphate in an enzyme–product com-
plex is bound to both zinc ions (Fig. 12-23). The Ser
N
102 side chain is above one Zn. In the enzyme-P inter- H
mediate it would be linked to the phospho group as H370
an ester which would then be hydrolyzed, reversibly,
H412
by a water molecule bound to Zn.712–713a This water
presumably dissociates to Zn+– OH and its bound
hydroxyl ion carries out the displacement. This reaction Figure 12-23 Schematic drawing of the product inorganic
may be preceded by a proton transfer to an oxygen atom phosphate bound in the active site of E. coli alkaline phos-
of the phospho group.714 phatase. See Ma and Kantrowitz.719

--- Page 649 ---

646 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
of whose oxygen atoms is coordinated with the Zn2+. flexibility involved in allosteric changes, the active
The mechanism resembles that proposed for a site is not fully formed until the substrate binds.
phosphotriesterase (Fig. 12-24). The triesterase cata- Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase forms one domain
lyzes detoxification of organophosphorus toxins such of a bifunctional kinase-phosphatase (Chapter 11).
as parathion (Box 12-E) and seems to have evolved It has two imidazole rings, as well as side chains from
rapidly from a homologous protein of unknown func- a glutamate and two arginine residues at the catalytic
tion.721 The phosphotriesterase contains two Zn2+ ions and substrate-binding site.728a
in a dimetal center. An unusual structural feature is a The 357-residue mammalian glucose-6-phospha-
carbamate group, formed from Lys 169 and CO , which tase plays an important role in metabolism (Chapter
2
provides a bridging ligand for the metal pair.721– 725 A 17). Defects in the enzyme cause a glycogen storage
carbamylated lysine also functions in ribulose bisphos- disease (Box 20-D) and severe disruption of metabo-
phate carboxylase (Fig. 13-11). lism.731 However, the molecular basis of its action is
Phosphatases specific for such substrates as glucose- not well-known. Furthermore, the active site of the
6-phosphate, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, and phospho- enzyme is located in the lumen of the endoplasmic
glycolate help to drive metabolic cycles (Chapter 17). reticulum732 and glucose-6-phosphate must pass in
The 335-residue fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase associ- through the plasma membrane. An additional glucose-
ates to form a tetramer with D symmetry.726– 730 The 6-phosphate transporter subunit may be required to
2
allosteric enzyme exists in two conformational states allow the substrate to leave the cytoplasm.73
(see Chapter 11). Activity is dependent upon Mg2+ or Pyrophosphatases, which are present in all cells,
othersuitable divalent cation, e.g., Mn2+or Zn2+, and is and catalyze hydrolysis of inorganic pyrophosphate
further enhanced by K+ or NH +. While the dimetal (PP ) to orthophosphate (P) (see Chapter 6, Section D),
3 1 i
sites depicted in Figs. 12-23 and 12-24 are quite rigid and also drive metabolic sequences. The very active pyro-
undergo little change upon formation of complexes phosphatase of E. coli has a turnover number of over
with substrates or products, the active site of fructose- 2 x 104 s–1 at 37°C. The 1000 molecules per cell are
1,6-bisphosphatase is more flexible. There are three sufficient to immediately hydrolyze any pyrophosphate
metal-binding sites but they contain no histidine side produced by bacterial metabolism.733 The much studied
chains and have been seen clearly only in a product soluble pyrophosphatases of E. coli,734,735 yeast,736 and
complex.727,728 Perhaps because of the need for other organisms736a,b are metalloenzymes that are most
active with Mg2+. Two Mg2+ ions are held, mostly by
carboxylate side chains, while a third apparently enters
H55 the active site as magnesium pyrophosphate, perhaps
MgP O –. As with other metallohydrolases, a metal-
R 2 7
OEt H bound hydroxyl ion may serve as the attacking nucleo-
NH OEt N H230 phile.
O
D301 P At least three distinct families of protein phospha-
O
N N tases remove phosphate groups from serine, threonine,
O and tyrosine side chains in proteins.737 Their role in
O – – OH OH
2 control of numerous biochemical processes has been
Zn2+
Zn2+
discussed in Chapter 11, Section C,2. The catalytic
N
NH domains or subunits of the protein phosphatases act
N together with regulatory domains or separate regula-
– –
HN O O tory subunits to control thousands of reactions. For
C OH 2
example, protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) together with a
+ H201 glycogen-targeting subunit dephosphorylates inactive
NH
glycogen kinase (see Fig. 11-4). Belonging to the same
H57 ε family is calcineurin (PP2B), a phosphatase activated
by Ca2+ through binding to calmodulin (Box 6-D). There
K169
are two families of Ser/Thr phosphatases. Their poly-
peptide folding patterns differ, but the active sites have
Figure 12-24 Hypothetical event in the action of a phos- similar dimetal centers resembling those in Figs. 12-24
photriesterase. A carbamylated lysine (lower center), as well and 16-20 with Mn2+ + Fe2+, Zn2+ + Fe3+, and probably
as a water molecule, bridge the two Zn2+ ions, which are other pairs of metals.737– 740 The family containing PP1
held by imidazole and aspartate carboxylate groups. The
has weak sequence homology with the purple acid
bound H O can be deprotonated to give the HO– complex
2 phosphatases.740 Another common feature of these
shown. The substrate may displace the HO – ion from the
enzymes is a conserved His-Asp dyad (His 125 and
right-hand zinc and thereby move close to the bound HO –
which attacks as indicated. Based on Cd2 +-containing Asp 95 in PP1) which is thought to be a proton donor,
structure and discussion by Benning et al.722 protonating the leaving group (– O –) in a manner

--- Page 650 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 647
reminiscent of the serine proteases. The reaction is esterification step, the hydroxyl group on the 2' position
evidently initiated by attack of an –OH ion held by the of the ribose ring is thought to be deprotonated by
dimetal center. This would resemble the mechanism attack of either the imidazole of His 12, as shown in
pictured in Fig. 12-24 except that the phospho group Fig. 12-25, or by the adjacent amino group of Lys 41.
would carry two negative charges. (In the latter case His 12 would have to remove a
The protein tyrosine phosphatases also exist as proton from the – NH + group of Lys 41 before it could
3
several families with numerous functions in control attack.) In either case the positive charge of Lys 41
of transcription, growth, differentiation, and metabo- would help to neutralize the negative charge on the
lism.741– 743 These enzymes function by a double- phosphate. The deprotonation of the 2'– OH may
displacement mechanism, as in Eq. 12-38, but with a occur synchronously with its attack on the adjacent 3'
cysteine side chain rather than serine. The cysteine is phospho group. An in-line displacement of the oxygen
present in the conserved sequence (H/V)CX R(S/T). attached to the 5' carbon of the next nucleotide unit is
5
The arginine binds the phospho group and helps to thought to be assisted by His 119. Its protonated imida-
stabilize the transition state, which probably is meta- zolium group may transfer a proton to a phosphate
phosphate-like.742 oxygen atom prior to or synchronously with formation
of the new P – O bond in step a (Fig. 12-25).754 The
intermediate formed in step a is a cyclic 2', 3'-diphos-
5. Ribonucleases (RNases) phate which then undergoes hydrolysis by attack of
a water molecule in step b to give the free nucleoside
Many hydrolases act on phosphodiester linkages, 3'-phosphate. The overall reaction is a two-step double-
which abound in nature.725,744 Some are digestive displacement, analogous to that with chymotrypsin,
enzymes but others serve more specific metabolic except that a neighboring group in the substrate rather
functions. Ribonuclease A (RNase A), the pancreatic than an amino acid side chain is the nucleophilic catalyst.
digestive enzyme responsible for breakdown of RNA, The pH dependence of the enzyme is in agreement
was one of the first enzymes for which a structure was with this mechanism because there are two pK values
a
deduced. By 1963 Moore and Stein and their associates, of ~ 5.4 and ~ 6.4 which regulate the catalytic activity.
who had earlier developed ion exchange methods for Microscopic pK values of His 12 and His 119 have
a
separating amino acids and peptides (Fig. 3-6), had been measured by NMR spectroscopy as ~ 6.1 and ~ 6.3
determined the sequence of the 124-residue bovine and are shifted somewhat by binding of nucleotides.
enzyme.745 They observed that Lys 41 was unusually A bacterial peptidase splits a 20-residue fragment
reactive with dinitrofluorobenzene and that photo- containing His 12 from the N-terminal end of RNase
oxidation of His 12 and His 119, which are almost at A. This “S-peptide” can be recombined with the rest
opposite ends of the peptide chain, inactivates the of the molecule, which is inactive, to give a functional
enzyme. They concluded that both histidines are at enzyme called ribonuclease S. In a similar way, resi-
the active site, a conclusion that was later substantiated dues 119 – 124 of RNase A can be removed by digestion
by X-ray crystallography.746– 748 A segment 12 nucleo- with carboxypeptidase to give an inactive protein
tides in length can fit into the cleft in the enzyme that which lacks His 119. In this case, a synthetic peptide
contains the active site. The negatively charged phos- with the sequence of residues 111 – 124 of RNase A forms
phates of the RNA backbone form 8 – 9 electrostatic bonds a complex with the shortened enzyme restoring full
to lysine and arginine side chains of the enzyme.749,750 activity.755
However, the only close interactions of the nucleic acid Stereochemical studies support in-line mechanisms
bases with the enzyme occur at the site of cleavage as for both the transesterification and hydrolysis steps
shown in Fig. 12-25. The four residues His 12, Lys 41, of ribonuclease catalysis. For example, chiral uridine
Thr 45, and His 119 are strictly conserved in the RNAse 2',3'-cyclic phosphorothioates are hydrolyzed with
A superfamily.749 The carboxylate of Asp 121 apparently inversion of configuration, with the diastereoisomer
helps to orient the proper tautomer of His 119 for shown yielding a 2'-monophosphothioate of the R
catalysis.751 configuration at phosphorus.
Ribonuclease A was the first enzyme to be synthe-
sized in the laboratory. Fully active ribonuclease has
been synthesized,752 as have new modified enzymes. HO CH2 Uracil
For example a 63-residue peptide made up of five O
segments of the native RNase sequence retained mea-
3'
surable catalytic activity.753 Using total synthesis, 2'
unnatural amino acids, such as 4-fluorohistidine, have O O
P
been incorporated at specific positions in RNAse.752 H2O
–
Cleavage of a phosphodiester linkage in the sub- S O
Uridine 2',3'-cyclic phosphorothioate
strate chain occurs in two steps. In the first or trans-

--- Page 651 ---

648 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Transesterification step is also in-line757 as it is shown O
in Fig. 12-25. Study of kinetic isotope effects in H O– H CH3
2 O
D O mixtures suggested that two protons may move H
2 N
synchronously as the enzyme–substrate complex
passes through the transition state.758 Although H N Thr 45
Lys 41 N O O
RNase A is one of the most studied of all enzymes, O C
there are still uncertainties about the mechanism. Is a
proton removed first by His 12 (Fig. 12-25), as has long
been assumed, or is a proton transferred first from His NH3 + His 12
119 to the oxygen of the phospho group?759,760 Is the O O
reaction concerted, as suggested by kinetic isotope H
effects,761 or is there a pentacovalent intermediate? – O P O N NH
The specificity of RNase A for a pyrimidine on the O
Base
3' side of the phosphodiester bond that is cleaved is
O
H
evidently ensured by the pair of hydrogen bonds from
N
O-2' of the pyrimidine to the backbone NH of Thr 45 +
HN
and a second from the N-4' proton to the side chain
OH of the same threonine (Fig. 12-25). Other nucleases, His 119 OH
such as ribonuclease T 2 ,762 with different specificities a Transesterification
also make use of hydrogen bonding of the base at the
3' side of the cleavage point with backbone amide
groupings. N
O
Various bacterial ribonucleases as well as the fungal
ribonucleases T , U , and U (see also Fig. 5-43) have
1 1 2
amino acid sequences related to that of RNase A763,764,764a +
NH3
but with distinctly different three-dimensional struc- O O
tures. The active sites contain Glu, His, and Arg side
chains. For RNase T 1 , Glu 58 and His 92 appear to – O P H N + NH
O
provide acid–base catalysis with assistance from Tyr O
38, Arg 77, and His 40.763,765 A glutamate carboxylate H H
Base
also appears to be the catalytic base in the related RNase, N HO O
calledbarnase, from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens.766 HN
In addition to extracellular digestive enzymes, the
RNase family contains many intracellular enzymes
that are involved in turnover of RNA.767,768 RNase H OH
digests away RNA primers during DNA synthesis
b Hydrolysis
(Chapter 27). RNase H activity is also present in a
domain of viral reverse transcriptases and is absolutely
N
essential for the replication of HIV and other retro-
O
viruses.769 The structures of the reverse transcriptase
RNase H domain and of the E. coli enzyme are simi-
lar.769– 771 Unlike RNase A, the RNases H are metallo- NH3 + His 12
enzymes which apparently contain two Mg2+ ions held O O
by carboxylate groups and utilize a metal bound HO – H
ion as in previously discussed phosphatases. Secreted – O P O N NH
RNases sometimes have specific functions. For example, O
H
the 123-residue angiogenin is homologous to pancreatic HO Base
O
H
RNases but acts to induce formation of new blood
N
vessels (angiogenesis).772– 774 This is essential to growth +
HN
of solid cancers as well as for normal growth. The
enzyme is a very poor catalyst but its RNase activity OH
appears essential for its biological function. Mutation
of any of the catalytic residues His 13, Lys 40, or His
114 abolishes all angiogenic activity. A neurotoxin
Figure 12-25 Proposed two-step in-line reaction mechanism
secreted by eosinophils775 is one of a group of selec-
for ribonuclease A. The hydrogen bonding that provides
tively toxic RNases.776,777 Intracellular RNases are often
recognition of the pyrimidine base at the 3' end created by
found as complexes of specific inhibitor proteins.778 the cleavage is also shown. See Wladkowski et al.756

--- Page 652 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 649
Smaller self-cleaving RNAs have been found
6. Ribonuclease P, Ribozymes, and Peptidyl
among plant viruses and viroids. Many of them have
Transferase
a common catalytic core which can be converted into
30- to 40-nucleotide ribozymes. Only 17 nucleotides
A very different ribonuclease participates in the
and three hydrogen-bonded helical stems are required
biosynthesis of all of the transfer RNAs of E. coli.
to form the self-cleaving “hammerhead” domain, which
Ribonuclease P cuts a 5' leader sequence from pre-
has a structural similarity to the catalytic core of the
cursor RNAs to form the final 5' termini of the tRNAs.
Tetrahymena ribozyme. The hammerhead ribozymes
Sidney Altman and coworkers in 1980 showed that the
(Fig. 12-27) represent one form of small ribozyme.793– 797
enzyme consists of a 13.7-kDa protein together with a
Another is the hairpin ribozyme shown in Fig.
specific 377-nucleotide RNA component (designated
12-28,798,801 which also shows the even smaller lead-
M1 RNA) that is about five times more massive than
dependent“leadzyme,” a ribozyme that doesn’t
the protein.779 Amazingly, the M1 RNA alone is able
occur in nature.
to catalyze the ribonuclease reaction with the proper
In an intact viral self-cleaving RNA the entire
substrate specificity.780– 782a The protein apparently
catalytic center is formed from a single strand. Stems
accelerates the reaction only about twofold for some
II and III of the hammerhead ribozyme (Fig. 12-27C)
substrates but much more for certain natural substrates.
are closed by large loops. In the ribozyme shown, loop
The catalytic center is in the RNA, which functions
III has been cut off and stem II has been closed by a
well only in a high salt concentration. A major role of
tight loop to form a compact catalytic RNA that will
the small protein subunit may be to provide counterions
cut a substrate having a suitable nucleotide sequence
to screen the negative charges on the RNA and permit
for binding to the ribozyme. Only 12 bases in this ribo-
rapid binding of substrate and release of products.783
zyme are highly conserved. By varying the sequences
Eukaryotes, as well as other prokaryotes, have enzymes
in the ribozyme half of stems I and III, catalysts that
similar to the E. coli RNase P. However, the eukaryotic
cleave after any sequence GUX, where X=A, C, or V,
enzymes require the protein part as well as the RNA
can be designed. Such catalysts are useful in the labo-
for activity.784
ratory and potentially also in medicine.
Thomas Cech and associates independently dis-
What groups of a ribozyme bind to substrates and
covered another class of catalytic RNA molecules. These
what groups participate in catalysis? Like peptides,
are self-splicing RNAs that cut out intervening se-
RNAs have amide groups that can hydrogen bond to
quences from themselves to generate ribosomal RNA
substrates. Adenine and cytosine can supply protonated
precursors (see Chapter 28).785– 787 They act only once
amino groups which could participate in acid–base
and are therefore not enzymes. However, the introns
catalysis. This is evidently the case in the peptidyl
that are cut out during self-splicing are ribozymes
transferase centers of ribosomes. The RNA in these
which, like the RNA from ribonuclease P, can act
centers catalyzes a transesterification in which an
catalytically and have properties similar to those of
aminoacyl group is transferred from an aminoacyl-tRNA
protein enzymes. They exhibit the kinetic properties
anto the growing polypeptide chain attached to a
of enzymes and are denatured by heat. The RNAs are
second tRNA molecule. The reaction is evidently
folded into compact structures resembling those of
catalyzed by a universally conserved adenine ring
globular proteins. Like tRNA, they contain loops and
located at position 2486 in the Haloarcula marismortii
hydrogen-bonded stems. Phylogenetic comparisons
23S RNA (position 2451 in E. coli). There are no protein
(Chapter 29) of the M1 RNA of ribonuclease P iso-
groups within 1.8 nm of the location of peptide bond
lated from various species have allowed prediction
synthesis.798a The active site adenine appears to be
of precise secondary structures.783,788,789 A simplified
much more basic than normal. A high pK of 7.6 controls
M1 RNA consisting of 263 nucleotides from conserved a
the peptidyl transferase, and also controls the methy-
regions of the molecule is catalytically effective.783
lation of the active site adenine by dimethylsulfate.798b
Tetrahymena ribozyme also has a complex structure
The site of protonation is thought to be largely N3 of
with a 247-nucleotide catalytic core formed by two
adenine 2486, which is probably the basic center in-
structural domains (Fig. 12-26).790,791 The crystal struc-
volved in catalysis. The peptidyltransferase reaction
ture of a third ribozyme, one found in the RNA of the
may be initiated as follows.798a
human pathogen hepatitis delta virus (HDV), has also
been determined.792 It is a smaller 72-nucleotide self-
cleaved molecule with a very different structure from
that in Fig. 12-26. It makes use of a double pseudo-
knot (see Fig. 5-29) to bind the RNA into a compact,
tightly hydrogen-bonded structure with a deep active
site cleft. It is the fastest known naturally occurring
self-cleaving RNA and is able to react at a rate of more
than 1 s–1 at its optimum temperature of 65°C.

--- Page 653 ---

650 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
A similar catalytic mechanism is probably used by the
H
small 85-nucleotide hepatitis delta virus ribozyme
H
N N whose catalytic base is thought to be N3 of cytosine 75,
which is associated with a pK of ~ 6.1.798c Both this
a
N Adenine 2486
HDV ribozyme and the ribosomal RNA resemble serine
N
3 proteases with histidine as the catalytic base. Howev-
N
er, the self-splicing RNA of Tetrahymena initiates a
O H R nucleophilic attack with the 3'– OH group of a gua-
tRNA O n+1
C N H nosine molecule that is bound to a site in the P7 region
H Aminoacyl–tRNA
(Fig. 12-16A) and which acts as a cofactor (see Fig. 28-
H C
O 18). Ribonuclease P and all group I and II self-cleaving
HN R n O introns also use an external nucleophile such as a
tRNA
guanosine– OH and form 3'-OH and O-phosphate or
Peptide
A Figure 12-26 (A,B) Stereoscopic views of
theTetrahymena ribozyme. (A) Ribbon
tracing of the phosphodiester backbone.
The successive conserved structural ele-
ments, from the 5' and 3' ends are designat-
ed P1 to P9. The P4 – P6 region forms one
major domain, while the P3 and P5 – P9
regions form a second domain which folds
around the first. From Golden et al.790 (B)
Structure of the P4 – P6 domain viewed
from the back side as pictured in (A). From
Cateet al.791 The active site lies between
this domain and the larger one which folds
over it leaving the active site in a deep
crevice.790 The active site is centered above
the“tetraloop” GAAA (residues G150 to
A153), which is shown with lighter shading
(in B) near the upper center of the P4 – P6
domain. (C). Details of one of three layers
of hydrogen-bonded interactions between
purine and pyrimidine bases involved in
interaction of the tetraloop with the adja-
B cent helix in the P5 region. Cleavage occurs
in the P1 domain, which folds into the
active site and is not shown in these draw-
ings. Courtesy of Thomas Cech.
C

--- Page 654 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 651
A B C2.1
Cleavage site
G1.1
Substrate
C3
5’
C17
OH
Ribozyme
U4
3’
D
O
5' Cytosine
O
17
3'
C 3’ 5’ O O
H
C G
III Substrate O O
U A P
15.2C G16.2
15.1A U16.1 Point of O
A C17 cleavage
II G A 13 14 1.1 AGGAU 3’
A G G C C 12
U 11
2.1UC C UG Figure 12-27 (A) Structure of a hammerhead ribozyme. The cleavage
U G C C G G10.1 9 4 3C I 5’ site region is drawn with dark lines. (B) The cleavage region showing
A G 87 6 5 G U the cleavage site in the substrate strand. From Baidya and Uhlenback.793
U A (C) Diagram of a hammerhead ribozyme with standard numbering of
nucleotides. The three helical stems are labeled I, II, and III. From Bevers
et al.796 (D) Simplified cleavage mechanism which resembles step aof
Fig. 12-25 and ignores the known participation of metal ions.
U
A B
Cleavage site C C C Cleavage site 2 3
I II C 1 G A 4
+5 UG –5 10 C G 5
C A C Substrate 5’ G G A C C C A G 3’
Substrate 3’UUUGUC CAGU
A 50
Ribozyme AAACAG GUCAA UA Ribozyme 3’ C C U G G G U C 5’
5’ G A GA A 10 C C G G (“leadzyme”) 9 A 8 G 7 6
A U III
G C
20 A C C
G A Cleavage site
A U U A
A A 40 RNA substrate 3’ GCGUGGGU GAGAGAGG 3’
A U
C B A DNA enzyme 5’ CGCACC CA C TC TC T CC 5’
Hairpin ribozyme U G A
A G G G
C G C C
A U IV T A
C G A A
30 G U G C
U CTA
Figure 12-28 (A) A hairpin ribozyme formed from the minus strand of a satellite RNA associated with tobacco ringspot
virus. On the basis of hydroxyl radical footprinting (see Fig. 5-50), to identify protected areas a folding pattern that brings
domains A and B together to form a compact catalytic core has been proposed.798 (B) A “leadzyme,” a ribozyme dependent
upon Pb2+ for cleavage of RNA.802,803 (C) An RNA-cleaving DNA enzyme.804

--- Page 655 ---

652 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
phosphodiester ends at the cleavage points. Hammer- activities.816– 819 Among the new catalysts produced in
head ribozymes utilize the 2'-OH of the ribose at the this way are very small ribozymes that cleave RNA
cleavage site to form a 2',3'-cyclic phosphate ester as in specifically in the presence of Pb2+ (Fig. 12-28B).802,803
stepa of the ribonuclease A reaction (Fig. 12-25) and as The leadzyme is more active with neodymium (Nd3+)
indicated in Fig. 12-27D. Ribozymes act by in-line + Pb2+ than with lead alone, suggesting a two-metal
mechanisms, causing inversion of the configuration at mechanism.820 Other artificial ribozymes include RNA
the phosphorus.799,800 ligases,817 acyltransferases,821 and DNA hydrolases.822,823
Most ribozymes, as well as RNase P,805,806 require Is it possible to find a DNA enzyme? Without the 2'– OH
one or two metal ions for activity.807 Magnesium ions of ribose to form hydrogen bonds it seemed doubtful,
predominate and many Mg2+ ions are bound at distinct but an RNA-cleaving DNA enzyme has been selected
sites in crystalline ribozymes. Hammerhead and hair- from a population of ~ 1014different small DNA mole-
pin ribozymes work reasonably well with monovalent cules. The DNA enzyme (Fig. 12-28C) will cleave RNA,
ions. One proposed mechanism is for an HO – ion whose sequence fulfills the base pairing requirements
bound to the Mg2+ to remove H+ from the 2'– OH of the of two 8-deoxynucleotide recognition domains. Cleav-
ribose ring as follows: age occurs between an unpaired purine and a paired
pyrimidine using a metal-dependent mechanism that
gives a 2',3'-cyclic phosphate as in ribonuclease A
O cleavage.804
Base
O
7. Deoxyribonucleases (DNases)
O O A multitude of nucleases cleave DNA, single- or
H
–O O– double-stranded. They range from the pancreatic
(S) P+ (R) O H digestive enzyme DNase I through specialized nucleases
Mg+
that function during DNA repair and the hundreds of
O
M2+ restriction endonucleases that have become so valuable
in modern laboratory work. Some nucleases leave a
3'-phosphate ester at a cut end in a DNA chain, while
When the pro-R oxygen of the phospho group (labeled others leave a 5'-phosphate end.824 Many nucleases
R in the accompanying structure) was replaced by sulfur are dealt with in later chapters. Only a few will be
the rate of cleavage decreased 103-fold. However, the mentioned here.
rate was restored fully when Cd2+ was added, presum- One of the most studied enzymes of this group is
ably because of the high affinity of cadmium ions for the 149-residue micrococcal (staphylcoccal) nuclease
sulfur ligands.808 This supports the possibility of a from Micrococcus which cleaves either RNA or single-
dual role for Mg2+ in activating a water molecule to or double-stranded DNA. The relatively nonspecific
provide HO– and in stabilizing negative charges on enzyme cuts nearly randomly at the 5' side of the
the phospho group by interaction with the pro-R oxygen phosphodiester linkages, leaving 3'-phosphate groups.
in the transition state. Several investigators have sug- It enhances the uncatalyzed hydrolysis rate at least
gested that two metal ions may be needed. One possi- 1016-fold.825– 827 The crystal structure showed that the
bility is for a mechanism similar to that proposed for majority of the acidic and basic side chains of the
alkaline phosphatase (Fig. 12-25) and other phospho- protein interact with each other through clusters of
transferases.809,810 The Tetrahymena ribozyme functions hydrogen bonds. At the active site the side chains of
best if both Mg2+ and Mn2+ are present.811 A second both Arg 35 and Arg 87 form pairs of hydrogen bonds
metal may act as a Lewis acid facilitating loss of the to the 5'-phosphate group of the specific inhibitor
5'-OH as indicated by M2+ ( in gray) in the preceding deoxythymidine 3',5'-diphosphate (Fig. 12-29). While
diagram. Metal ions may also participate in conforma- Arg 87 appears to be in a position to protonate the
tional changes as well as have structural functions in leaving group – O–,13C NMR experiments showed that
ribozymes.812,813 Studies of the kinetics of action of all of the arginine side chains had pK values above
a
hammerhead ribozymes have suggested that the intrin- 11.6. However, Tyr 85 has a pK of 9.5, which appears
a
sic ribozyme-substrate binding energy is utilized for to control k /K .828 A Y85F mutant lacks this pK .
cat m a
catalysis.814 This may be possible because the ribozyme The X-ray structure also suggests that Glu 43 may be
is only partially folded in the ground state but it folds the attacking nucleophile and that it may deprotonate
into a tighter conformation in the transition state.815 a water molecule bound to the Glu 43 carboxylate.
Methods have been devised for generating enor- The resulting HO – probably carries out a direct in-line
mous numbers of RNA molecules with random se- attack as shown in Fig. 12-29. Mutants such as E43D,
quences and for selecting those with unusual catalytic E43Q, and E43S have greatly decreased activity,829 in

--- Page 656 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 653
O to and cuts both strands of the palindromic sequence
H
N R87 5'-GAATTC; EcoRV,835 which cuts both strands in the
O N O – center of the sequence 5'-GATATC; and BamH1, which
O O P – H binds to the sequence 5'-GGATCC and cleaves after
H C O H N O N the 5' G on each strand.836 A high-resolution structure
3 H + is also known for Cfr10I, which recognizes the less strict
R35 O N H sequence 5'-PuCCGGPy and cleaves both strands after
H
– the 5' Pu.837 All of these enzymes require Mg2+ and have
HN + N H P OO active sites containing carboxylate groups. Two-metal
H 2 N H – O H mechanisms have been suggested.
O
HO H Restriction endonuclease EcoRI is able to cut a
D40 O
O
D
–
2
O
1
C Ca2 O +
O H
H
– O
c
g
h
ro
a
u
in
p
i
a
n
t
d
th
sD
e
N
sp
A
e c
w
if
h
ic
i c
c
h
le
h
av
as
a g
a
e
c
s
h
i
i
t
r
e
a
.8
l
3
p
8
h
T
o
h
p
e
h
r
o
e
r
a
o
c
t
t
h
i
i
o
o
n
ate
H O H C O occurs with inversion of configuration at phosphorus,
O H suggesting direct in-line attack by a hydroxyl ion
T41 E43 generated from H 2 O.
Attempts are being made to design semisynthetic
restriction endonucleases specific for single-stranded
Figure 12-29 Drawing showing the hydrogen-bonding
DNA or RNA. For example, an oligonucleotide with
interactions between the guanidinium ions of arginines 35
a sequence complementary to a sequence adjacent the
and 87 of the micrococcal (staphylococcal) nuclease with the
linkage that is to be cut can be covalently linked to a
5'-phosphate of the inhibitor thymidine 3',5'-diphosphate in
the complex of E + I + Ca2+. A possible mechanism is illus- relatively nonspecific nuclease. Such an enzyme derived
trated. A hydroxyl ion bound to Ca2+ carries out an in-line from micrococal nuclease cuts a single-stranded chain
attack on the phosphorus. See Libson et al.826 of either DNA or RNA adjacent to the double-stranded
region of the ES complex.839
agreement with this mechanism. The nearby Ca2+ is 8. Mutases
essential. For this nonspecific nuclease there is no
hydrogen bonding of a purine or pyrimidine base of Phosphotransferases that shift phospho groups from
the substrate to the enzyme. one position within a substrate to another are often
The digestive enzyme, pancreatic DNAse I, makes calledmutases. For example, phosphoglucomutase
single-stranded cuts in double-stranded (ds) DNA. catalyzes the interconversion of glucose 1-phosphate
An exposed strand of peptide chain from the enzyme and glucose 6-phosphate, an important reaction that
binds into the minor groove of B-type DNA.830 Because bridges glycogen metabolism and glycolysis (Fig. 11-2).
this groove becomes too narrow in long (A+T) rich This 561-residue protein operates through formation of
sequences, they are cleaved slowly. Certain hypersen- an intermediate phosphoenzyme.840–842 The phospho
sitive sites are cleaved very rapidly, perhaps because group becomes attached to the OH of Ser 116 and can
the DNA at these regions is bent or is able to bend to be transferred either to the 6 or the 1 position of a glucose
give a very good fit to the enzyme active site. A histi- phosphate (step a and reverse of step b in Eq. 12-39).
dine which is hydrogen bonded to a nearby carboxy- The two-step reaction accomplishes the reversible
late of a glutamate side chain appears to be a catalytic isomerization of glucose 1-phosphate and glucose 6-
base that acts upon a water molecule as in phospholi- phosphate via glucose 1,6-bisphosphate. Evidently,
pase A (Section D,10), displacing the 3' oxygen of the the glucose bisphosphate, without leaving the enzyme
phosphodiester linkage. An imidazolium group from is reoriented to allow transfer of the phospho group to
a second histidine is hydrogen bonded to an aspartate either the 1- or 6-position.841 The phospho enzyme is
carboxylate and a tyrosine – OH to form a catalytic relatively unstable and can undergo hydrolysis to free
triad that can protonate the 3' – O – as it is displaced.831 enzyme and P. To prevent loss of active enzyme in this
i
Two Mg2+ ions are also required. Both are held by way, a separate reaction (catalyzed by a kinase; Eq. 12-39,
different carboxylate side chains and may also interact stepc)843 generates glucose 1,6-bisphosphate, which
with oxygen atoms of the phospho group to neutralize rephosphorylates any free enzyme formed by hydroly-
charge and stabilize the transition state. sis of the phospho enzyme. The glucose 1,6-bisphos-
In contrast to DNAse I, the restriction endonu- phate can be regarded as a cofactor or cosubstrate for
cleases, which are discussed in Chapter 5, Section H,2 the reaction.
and in Chapter 26, have precise substrate sequence Phosphoglycerate mutase, which interconverts
specificities. Three of the best known restriction endo- 2-phosphoglycerate and 3-phosphoglycerate in glyco-
nucleases are called EcoRI,832– 834 an enzyme which binds lysis (Fig. 10-3, step c), functions by a similar mecha-

--- Page 657 ---

654 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
OH atoms of a second substrate.848 Examples include
hexokinase, the enzyme responsible for synthesis of
O
HO
glucose 6-phosphate from free glucose and ATP (Fig.
HO 11-2, step a);phosphofructokinase, which forms
OH
O PO3
2– fructose 1,6 bisphosphate in the glycolysis pathway
(Fig. 11-2, step b); and phosphoglycerate kinase, and
Glucose-1-phosphate
E–Ser–O–PO2– pyruvate kinase, both of which form ATP from ADP
ATP 3
in the glycolysis pathway (Fig. 10-3, steps b, c, andf).
c There are many others. Kinases vary greatly in size
Kinase a
and in three-dimensional structure. For example, a
O PO3 2– ADP smalladenylate kinase, which phosphorylates AMP
to ADP (Eq. 6-65), is a 22-kDa monomer of 194 residues.
O
HO
Pyruvate kinase is a tetramer of 60-kDa subunits and
E–Ser–OH
HO muscle phosphofructokinases are tetramers of 75- to
OH
O PO3
2– 85-kDa subunits. The three-dimensional structures also
vary. While all kinases consist of two domains built
Glucose-1,6-bisphosphate
around central β sheets (Fig. 12-30), there are several
b
O PO3
2– different folding patterns.849 The two-domain struc-
tures all have deep clefts which contain the active sites.
HO O Both adenylate kinase (Fig. 12-30) and hexokinase
HO crystallize in two or more forms with differing confor-
OH mations.850 This and other evidence suggests that as a
OH kinase binds and recognizes its two correct substrates,
Glucose-6-phosphate (12-39)
the active site cleft closes by a hinging action that
brings together the reacting molecules in the correct
nism.843– 845 However, the enzyme-bound phospho orientation.851– 853 In the crystal structure shown in
group is carried on an imidazole group. The essential Fig. 12-30 both ADP and AMP are bound in a nonpro-
cosubstrate required by some phosphoglycerate mu- ductive complex. If the ADP were replaced with ATP
tases is 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate.845 It is formed from (or the AMP with a second ADP) to form a productive
the glycolytic intermediate 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate complex the two reacting phospho groups would be
(Fig. 10-3) by action of another mutase, bisphospho- ~ 0.8 nm apart. A reaction could not occur without
glycerate mutase.843,846 further closing of the active site cleft.854 Evidence for
domain closure has been obtained for many other
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate→ 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate kinases. For example, substrate complexes of phos-
(12-40) phoglycerate kinase have been crystallized in both
“open” forms and “closed” forms in which a 30°
This is also the pathway for synthesis of 2,3-biphos- hinge-bending movement has brought the ligands
phoglycerate in red blood cells where it serves as an together for an in-line phospho group transfer.855
important allosteric regulator (Chapter 7). Two human For many enzymes an ATP binding site has been
phosphoglycerate mutase isoenzymes are known. revealed by study of nonhydrolyzable analogs of ATP
One is found in muscle and the other in brain and such as “AMP-PNP” whose structure is shown in
other tissues.844 A hereditary lack of the muscle type Fig. 12-31.856 AMP-PNP has been used in thousands
enzyme is one of the known types of glycogen storage of investigations of ATP-dependent processes.857
diseases (Box 20-D). For example, the structure of a phosphoglycerate
Humanphosphomannomutase, which catalyzes · Mg2+· AMP-PNP complex in the active site of phos-
the interconversion of mannose 1- and 6- phosphates, phoglycerate kinase has been determined.858 Modeling
appears to carry the phospho group on an aspartate of a transition state complex indicates that all three
side chain in the sequence DXDX (T/V), which is negatively charged oxygens of the ATP portion of struc-
conserved in a family of phosphomutases and phos- ture are stabilized by hydrogen bonding.852 Related
phatases.847 The first aspartate in the sequence is analogs such as AMP-PCH P (Fig. 12-3) have been used
2
phosphorylated during the enzymatic reaction. in similar ways.859 Another analog Mg2+· Ap A (Fig.
5
12-31) is a bisubstrate inhibitor which binds to adenylate
kinases, fixing the enzymes in a closed conformation
9. Molecular Properties of Kinases that is thought to resemble the transition state.859,860
The Mg2+ complex of ATP is regarded as the true
Kinases transfer phospho groups from polyphos- substrate for kinases. The metal usually also binds
phates such as ATP to oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur both to the phospho groups of ATP and to groups on

--- Page 658 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 655
Figure 12-30 Stereoscopic α-carbon
plots of a 194-residue subunit of adeny-
late kinase from the archaebacterium
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius with ADP (left
side) and AMP (right side) bound into
the active site. From Vonrheim et al.854
Courtesy of G. E. Schulz.
O in ATP Adenylate kinase performs the essential function
S in ATPγS NH2 of recovering AMP formed by many enzymatic pro-
CF in AMPCFP
2 2 cesses and converting it to ADP (Eq. 6-65) which can
N
HO O O – be reconverted to ATP by oxidative or substrate level
HH
– O P NN phosphorylation. The enzyme is present in all organ-
P
O P O O O N N isms. In vertebrates different isoenzymes function
in the cytosol, mitochondrial intermembrane space,
O O–
and mitochondrial matrix.862,863 A group of other
nucleotide and deoxynucleotide kinases convert
nucleoside monophosphates into diphosphates.864,865
HO OH
AMP-PNP Some of them, e.g., uridylate kinase are similar in
structure and properties to adenylate kinase.866,867
O –O O O O – Another member of the adenylate kinase family is
– phosphoribulokinase, an important photosynthetic
O P O P O
P enzyme (see Fig. 17-14, step a).868
HO P O P O O Adenosine Most kinases transfer chiral phospho groups with
O O– O O – inversion and fail to catalyze partial exchange reactions
ApA, a bisubstrate inhibitor of adenylate kinase that would indicate phosphoenzyme intermediates.
5
However, nucleoside diphosphate kinase contains
an active site histidine which is phosphorylated to
Figure 12-31 Some useful analogs of ATP. form a phosphoenzyme.869 The enzyme catalyzes
phosphorylation of nucleoside diphosphates other
than ADP by a nucleotide triphosphate, usually ATP.
the enzyme. Crystallographic investigations as well as
studies with exchange-inert ATP complexes (Section 2)
XTP E His YTP
have suggested that the metal ion is bound initially to
the terminal (γ) and adjacent (β) phospho groups of (usually ATP)
ATP. However, this metal bridge could prevent rather XDP E His P YDP
than assist the reaction. For some phosphotransferase (12-41)
reactions with exchange-inert complexes the product
appears to be the α,β-bidentate complex of ADP (see Here, X is usually adenosine and Y is any ribonucleo-
Section 2) suggesting that movement of the metal ion side or deoxyribonucleoside. This enzyme supplies all
from the β,γ- to the α,β-bidentate ATP complex may of the nucleotide triphosphates except ATP for use in
occur either prior to or during transfer of the phospho the many cellular processes that require them.870– 872
group. Theoretical calculations also suggest a movement The enzyme aligns the substrate, holding the phospho
in the metal complexation as the reaction progresses.861 group with a pair of arginines and a magnesium ion.
EPR studies that involved observation of hyperfine The phospho group is aligned for an in-line displace-
coupling between 17O in substrates and Mn2+ in the ment by N δ of His 122, part of a hydrogen-bonded
active site led Reed and Leyh to conclude that the His–Glu dyad. Formation of the phosphoenzyme occurs
activating metal ion is bound to all three phospho in less than 1 ms without significant conformational
groups in the transition state.849 change other than a 30° rotation of the histidine ring.870,873

--- Page 659 ---

656 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
Hexokinase, the enzyme that phosphorylates H H
glucose to glucose 6-phosphate, exists as four isoen- – O O C H +
–
zymes in mammals. Hexokinases I, II, and III are large O O
P C –
~ 100-kDa monomers with similar amino acid sequences, Adenosine O O P O – P O COO
a single active site, and complex allosteric regulatory OH – O
ADP O PEP
properties. The three-dimensional structure is known
for hexokinase I, which is the pacemaker of glycolysis
in the brain.874,875 Hexokinase IV (glucokinase) is a CH3
50-kDa protein that is found in liver and in the β cells ATP O C
–
of the pancreas. It has a low K and is not inhibited by COO
m
glucose 6-phosphate, properties that allow for rapid Pyruvate (12-42)
uptake of glucose after a meal.876 Its properties are
similar to those of a major isoenzyme of yeast,877 a
dimer of identical 50-kDa subunits whose structure
CH2 CH3
is also known.878 The glucose-binding residues are HO C O C
– –
conserved in yeast hexokinase, in glucokinase, and in COO COO
Enolpyruvate
brain hexokinase. The sequence of the latter suggests
(12-43)
that it may have arisen by a doubling of a shorter
hexokinase gene.879
Fructose 6-phosphate kinase (phosphofructo- and a product of the phosphotransfer step.891 Pyruvate
kinase) has attracted much attention because of its kinase requires not only two equivalents of a divalent
regulatory properties (Chapter 11).880– 882 Prokaryotic cation such as Mg2+ or Mn2+ but also a monovalent
forms are somewhat simpler.883 The related fructose cation, usually K+. However, Li+, Na+, NH +, Rb+, Tl+,
4
6-phosphate 2-kinase is a component of a bifunctional and others can substitute. The monovalent cation
kinase-phosphatase (Fig. 11-2, steps d and e) and has a induces an essential conformational change. Using
structure similar to that of adenylate kinase.884 205Tl NMR it was found that the thallium ion binds
Phosphoglycerate kinase is encoded by the mam- about 0.6 nm from Mn2+ that is also present in the
malian X chromosome. Several mutant forms are asso- active site.892 All three metals interact directly with the
ciated with hemolytic anemia and mental disorders.885,886 γ phospho group of ATP.891 Pyruvate kinase is a regu-
Mutation of Glu 190, which is in the hinge region far lated allosteric enzyme present in four isoenzymic
from the active site, to Gln or Asn markedly reduces forms in mammals.893–894a
enzymatic activity.887 Protein kinases, which were discussed in Chap-
Creatine kinase transfers a phospho group to a ter 11, phosphorylate selected – OH groups of serine,
nitrogen atom of the quanidinium group of creatine (Eq. threonine, and tyrosine side chains in proteins. Exami-
12-31 and Fig. 12-19). Several isoenzymes participate nation of the sequences in the complete genome of
in its function of buffering the ATP level in tissues yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) indicates the presence
such as muscle fibers, neurons, photoreceptors, and of at least 113 protein kinase genes, which account for
spermatozoa which experience high and fluctuating ~ 2% of the total DNA.895 Higher eukaryotes have
energy needs.888 A form from the mitochondrial inter- more. While structures of these enzymes vary widely,
membrane space of chicken heart is an octomer of 380- they share a common two-domain catalytic core struc-
residue subunits.889 The structurally and mechanisti- ture.896,897 The best known, and one of the simplest of
cally similar arginine kinase has an analogous function them, is the catalytic subunit of cyclic AMP-dependent
in many invertebrates, e.g., in the horseshoe crab, which protein kinase.897,898 The substrate MgATP binds into
provided enzyme for a structure determination.890 the active site cleft with the γ-phospho group protrud-
The ~ 500-residue subunits of pyruvate kinase ing to meet the appropriate site of a bound protein
consist of four domains,891 the largest of which contains substrate (Fig. 12-32). Most protein kinases are regu-
an 8-stranded barrel similar to that present in triose lated by an “activation loop” that must be correctly
phosphate isomerase (Fig. 2-28). Although these two placed before the ES complex can be formed. As dis-
enzymes catalyze different types of reactions, a com- cussed in Chapter 11, regulation of the cAMP-dependent
mon feature is an enolic intermediate. One could kinase depends upon inhibition by a regulatory sub-
imagine that pyruvate kinase protonates its substrate unit. In the cAMP-dependent kinases and many other
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) synchronously with the protein kinases the activation loop (not shown in Fig.
phospho group transfer (Eq. 12-42). However, the 12-32), which helps to form the substrate site, contains
enzyme catalyzes the rapid conversion of the enolic a phosphothreonine residue which is essential for activity.
form of pyruvate to the oxo form (Eq. 12-43) adding It is a stable feature of the cAMP-activated kinase,
the proton sterospecifically to the si face. This and incorporated at position 197, but for some tyrosine
other evidence favors the enol as a true intermediate kinases it is generated by autophosphorylation.899

--- Page 660 ---

D. Displacement on a Phosphorus Atom 657
Figure 12-32 The active site of cyclic AMP-depen-
dent protein kinase with bound ATP and a segment
of an inhibitory peptide (green) blocking the sub-
strate site. The small ball is an alanine side chain; it
would be Ser or Thr in a substrate. The ATP is
clamped by the glycine-rich loop at the top of the
figure. Hydrogen bonds from peptide NH groups
bind the β and γ phospho groups of ATP. A magne-
sium ion (not shown) also binds to the β and γ
phosphate oxygens and to the invariant Asp 184.
The Asp 166 carboxylate is probably the catalytic
base for deprotonation of the substrate – OH. From
Grantet al.896 Courtesy of Susan S. Taylor.
For the enzyme to be activated the phosphothreonine by a histidine imidazole.908,908a This iron atom is appar-
must form a hydrogen-bonded ion pair with Lys 189 ently the receptor for NO, a major gaseous hormone,
and be hydrogen bonded to His 87, tying together which is discussed in Chapter 18.
critical regions of the catalytic domain. The regulatory
subunits, unless occupied by cAMP (Chapter 11) are
competitive inhibitors of the substrates.900 Cyclic 10. Nucleotidyl Transferases
GMP-activated kinases also have distinct functions.901
Intryosine kinases902– 904 C-terminal src-homology An important group of enzymes transfer substit-
domains (Fig. 7-30 and Chapter 11) fold over and uted phospho groups, most often nucleotidyl groups.
interact in an inhibitory fashion until an appropriate The nucleases, ATPases, and GTPases, which have
activating signal is received (see Fig. 11-13). already been discussed, belong to this group as do
A relative of the kinases is adenylate cyclase, the nucleic acid synthesizing enzymes, the DNA and
whose role in forming the allosteric effector 3',5'-cyclic RNA polymerases,909– 911reverse transcriptase,912
AMP (cAMP) was considered in Chapter 11. This andtopoisomerases. As with other phosphotransfer-
enzyme catalyzes a displacement on Pα of ATP by the ases, the nucleotidyl transfers occur with inversion913,913a
3'-hydroxyl group of its ribose ring (see Eq. 11-8 , step and crystallographic investigations also support in-line
a). The structure of the active site is known.905 Studies mechanisms as illustrated in the following scheme.
with ATPαS suggest an in-line mechanism resembling Two metal ions assist.
that of ribonuclease (step a, Eq. 12-25). However, it is
Mg2+ dependent, does not utilize the two-histidine –
O O
mechanism of ribonuclease A, and involves an aspar- 5'-Polynucleotide O –
tate carboxylate as catalytic base.906 All isoforms of O P
adenylate cyclase are activated by the α subunits of 3' O P O O P O
–
some G proteins (Chapter 11). The structures907 of G sα H O O O –
and of its complex with adenylate kinase905 have been Base
determined. The G sα activator appears to serve as an O
allosteric effector.
Guanylate cyclases, which form cyclic GMP,
occur in particulate and soluble forms.908 The latter
HO H (or OH)
have been of great interest because they are activated
by nitric oxide (NO). The soluble guanylate cyclases
are αβ heterodimers. The C-terminal regions of both α The inorganic pyrophosphate formed is hydrolyzed
andβ subunits are homologous to the catalytic domain to inorganic phosphate by pyrophosphatase. Specific
of adenylate cyclase. The N-terminal domain of the α information about the polymerases and topoisomerases
subunits contains heme whose Fe atom is coordinated is given in Chapters 27 and 28.

--- Page 661 ---

658 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
E. The Adenylate Kinase Fold, the P Loop, and binding“G proteins” such as the protooncogenes ras
ATPases and GTPases (Fig. 11-7A) and also to sequences in myosin and in
mitochondrial ATP synthase.914 This includes the
A magnesium–ATP-binding fragment consisting glycine-rich“P loop” which extends from Gly 15 to
of ~ 40 residues at the N terminus of adenylate kinase Gly 22 in the porcine cytosolic enzyme and contains a
contains sequences homologous to those in the GTP- highly conserved lysine [Lys 21 of porcine adenylate
BOX 12-F THE TOXICITY OF ALUMINUM
Aluminum, in the form of oxides and silicate the rates of GTP hydrolysis and of Ca2+-induced
minerals, is the most abundant element in the earth’s depolymerization of microtubules.q Aluminofluoride
crust. Yet it appears to be actively excluded from ions, such as AlF –, react with phosphates to form
4
most living organisms. It seems surprising that a ions such as,
naturally occuring Al3+-dependent enzyme hasn’t
O
been found, but there is no evidence that Al is an
–
essential element. Until recently, it was usually R O P O AlF
3
regarded as harmless. The aluminum salts known
O
as alums are used in baking powders and have been
added to pickles and other foods. Aluminum sulfate which may be potent competitive inhibitors of
is often used as a coagulant to clarify turbid drink- enzymes acting on ATP, GTP, or other phosphate-
ing water. Because of the insolubility of Al(OH) containing substrate.r,s However, Fe3+ can be replaced
3
and of aluminum phosphate the concentration of by Al3+ in a purple acid phosphatase (Chapter 16)
Al3+ is very low at neutral pH. However, small with retention of good catalytic activity.t
amounts of AlOH2+, Al(OH) +, and Al(OH) – are
2 4
present in water. Fluoride complexes such as AlF2+ a Martin, R. B. (1986) Clinical Chemistry32, 1797–1806
may also be present. Soluble complexes, such as that b Macdonald, T. L., and Martin, R. B. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.
with citrate, may permit some Al3+ to be absorbed 13, 15–19
c Andress, D. L., Kopp, J. B., Maloney, N. A., Coburn, J. W., and
by the body.a,b
Sherrard, D. J. (1987) N. Engl. J. Med.316, 292–296
The toxicity of aluminum has been recognized d Sedman, A. B., Klein, G. L., Merritt, R. J., Miller, N. L., Weber, K.
most clearly by the development of bone disease O., Gill, W. L., Anand, H., and Alfrey, A. C. (1985) N. Engl. J.
Med.312, 1337–1342
caused by deposition of Al in bones of patients
e Bishop, N. J., Morley, R., Chir, B., Day, J. P., and Lucas, A. (1997)
on hemodialysisa– c and in infants on intravenous
N. Engl. J. Med.336, 1557–1561
therapy.d,e Excessive Al in the water used for dialysis f Good, P. F., and Perl, D. P. (1993) Nature (London)362, 418
may also cause brain damage. Dietary aluminum g Shen, Z. M., Perczel, A., Hollósi, M., Nagypál, I., and Fasman,
may be one cause of Alzheimer’s disease,f– h but this G. D. (1994) Biochemistry33, 9627–9636
h Walker, P. R., LeBlanc, J., and Sikorska, M. (1989) Biochemistry
is controversial as is a possible role of aluminum
28, 3911–3915
in vaccines in causing inflammation in muscle.i,j i Landsberg, J. P., McDonald, B., and Watt, F. (1992) Nature
Solubilization of soil aluminum by acid rain has (London)360, 65–68
ij Malakoff, D. (2000) Science288, 1323–1324
been blamed for the decline of forests in Europe and
j Godbold, D. L., Fritz, E., and Hüttermann, A. (1988) Proc. Natl.
North America,j for the death of fish in acid waters,k
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 3888–3892
and for very large reductions in yield for many k Birchall, J. D., Exley, C., Chappell, J. S., and Phillips, M. J. (1989)
crops.l,m An aluminum-resistant strain of buckwheat Nature (London)338, 146–148
l Barinaga, M. (1997) Science276, 1497
makes and secretes from its roots large amounts of
mMa, J. F., Zheng, S. J., Matsumoto, H., and Hiradate, S. (1997)
oxalate which binds and detoxifies the Al3+ ions.m
Nature (London)390, 569–570
Al3+ has a radius somewhat less than that of Fe3+ n Roskams, A. J., and Connor, J. R. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(Table 6-10) and it may sometimes occupy empty U.S.A.87, 9024–9027
Fe3+ binding sites. Thus, the transferrinn in blood o Martin, R. B., Savory, J., Brown, S., Bertholf, R. L., and Wills, M.
R. (1987) Clinical Chemistry33, 405–407
carries some Al3+, although citrate is probably a more p Viola, R. E., Morrison, J. F., and Cleland, W. W. (1987) Biochemis-
important carrier.o Al3+ binds preferentially to oxy- try19, 3131–3137
gen ligands and can compete with Mg2+. However, q Macdonald, T. L., Humphreys, W. G., and Martin, R. B. (1987)
Science236, 183–186
the slower rate of ligand exchange reactions with
r Troullier, A., Girardet, J.-L., and Dupont, Y. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.
Al3+ may interfere with the proper functioning of
267, 22821–22829
the metal. Brain hexokinase is strongly inhibitedp s Chabre, M. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 6–10
by Al3+ and the binding of Al3+ to tubulin decreases t Merkx, M., and Averill, B. A. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 6683–
6689

--- Page 662 ---

F. Displacements on Sulfur Atoms 659
kinase and Lys 17 of the archaeal enzyme (Fig. 12-30)] the phosphotransferase system by which sugars and
and of the ras oncogene product).915 The lysine side other compounds are brought into bacterial cells
chain appears to interact with the β and / or γ phospho (Chapter 8).
group of ATP or GTP. The peptide chain of the P loop
wraps around the β phospho group as the chain turns
from the first β strand into the first helix. This can be F. Displacements on Sulfur Atoms
seen in Fig. 12-30, in which the P loop surrounds the β
phospho group of ADP. Two peptide NH groups also Nucleophilic displacement reactions occur on
bind to the β phospho group on a side opposite to that sulfur atoms in various oxidation states. A common
occupied by Mg2+. A similar loop in the dinucleotide- reaction is thiol–disulfide exchange (Eqs. 10-9, 11-7),
binding domain of a dehydrogenase can be seen hydro- a reaction in which a nucleophilic thiolate anion
gen bonded to the Pα and Pβ phospho groups of NAD+ attacks one of the sulfur atoms of a disulfide. Proteins
in Fig. 2-13. Consensus sequences for three groups of such as thioredoxin of E. coli and thioltransferases
glycine-rich loops are:896 (Box 15-C), which contain internal disulfide bridges, can
be reduced by disulfide exchange with thiols such as
Dinucleotide-binding G X G X X G glutathione (Box 11-B). The reduced proteins may
P loop G X X X X G K (S/T) then undergo similar exchange reactions that cleave
Protein kinase G X G X X G X V disulfide linkages in other molecules. An example is
glutathione reductase (Fig. 15-12). Thioltransferases
The protein kinase loop is seen at the top of Fig. may also serve as protein disulfide isomerases
12-32 and extends from Gly 50 to Val 57. These con- (Chapter 10, Section D,3). Nucleophilic displacements
served loops help to hold the ATP in place and to orient on sulfur or on selenium atoms are steps in a variety
it correctly. Do they have any other significance? The of enzymatic reactions. Among these are glutathione
answer is not clear. These glycine-rich loops fold across peroxidase (Eq. 15-59) and thiosulfate: cyanide sulfo-
theβ−γ diphosphate linkage that is broken when ATP transferase (Eq. 24-45).
or GTP is hydrolyzed. Cleavage of both of these mole- While esters of sulfuric acid do not play as central
cules is associated with movement. Kinases close a role in metabolism as do phosphate esters, they
around ATP, and parts of G proteins (Fig. 11-7) move occur widely. Both oxygen esters (R – O – SO –, often
3
when these regulatory devices function.915,916 Cleavage referred to as O-sulfates) and derivatives of sulfamic
of ATP causes movement in the ATPase heads of muscle acid (R – NH – SO –,N-sulfates) are found, the latter
3
myosin, providing the force for muscular contraction occurring in mucopolysaccharides such as heparin.
(Chapter 19). Somewhat the opposite occurs in mito- Sulfate esters of mucopolysaccharides and of steroids
chondrial ATP synthase (Chapter 18) when movement are ubiquitous and sulfation is the most abundant
in the synthase heads snaps ADP and inorganic phos- known modification of tyrosine side chains. Choline
phate together to form ATP. Common to all of these sulfate and ascorbic acid 2-sulfate are also found in
processes is a movement of charge within the ATP (or cells. Sulfate esters of phenols and many other organic
its cleavage products) from the attack nucleophile into sulfates are present in urine.
the neighboring phospho group, as is indicated by the Sulfotransferases917– 920a transfer sulfo groups to
arrows in the following diagram. O and N atoms of suitable acceptors (reaction type 1D,
Table 10-1). Usually, transfer is from the “active sul-
fate,”3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate
M2+ –
– O (PAPS),921 whose formation is depicted in Eq. 17-38.
O O
HO P Sulfatases catalyze hydrolysis of sulfate esters. The
–Nu: P O R importance of such enzymes is demonstrated by the
O geneticmucopolysaccharidoses. In four of these
disease-specific sulfatases that act on iduronate sulfate,
Not shown in this diagram is an accompanying flow heparanN-sulfate, galactose-6-sulfate, or N-acetylglu-
of positive charge which may include movement of cosamine-4-sulfate are absent. Some of these, such as
a metal ion, addition and loss of protons, and which heparanN-sulfatase deficiency, lead to severe mental
may induce conformational changes.914 The latter retardation, some cause serious skeletal abnormalities,
are essential not only to muscle contraction and ATP while others are mild in their effects.922
synthesis but also to many other processes that depend Sulfatases are unusual in having a residue of
upon the Gibbs energy of cleavage of ATP and related formylglycine at the active site. This is generated
compounds. This includes the pumping of ions oxidatively from cysteine in human enzymes923,923a and
against concentration gradients (Chapter 8), the action from serine in some bacterial sulfatases.924,924a Absence
oftopoisomerases (Chapter 27) which function to of this modification results in a multiple sulfatase
alter the supercoiling in DNA, and the functioning of deficiency disease. A probable mechanism of sulfatase

--- Page 663 ---

660 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
based on a crystal structure determination is given by nucleophile. Still less frequent (d) is a displacement on
Eq. 12-44.923 C-5' as shown in Eq. 17-37. If the nucleophile Y in any
of these displacement reactions is H O, the resulting
2
hydrolysis tends to go to completion, i.e., the phospho,
E CH2 SH
adenylyl, and pyrophospho groups of ATP all have
R
Enzyme
(Substrate) high group transfer potentials (Table 6-6). If Y is an
Oxidation
O – OH group in an ordinary alcohol the transfer reaction
O –
E C
SO3 also tends to go to completion because the group
H transfer potential of a simple phosphate ester is rela-
H
Formylglycine – tively low. Consequently, phosphorylation by ATP is
O
form C often used as a means of introducing an essentially
O H irreversible step in a metabolic pathway.
R O H – O O O
–
b O
H O SO3 – Adenos d ine C 5' O P α O β P O P γ OH a
C
O H H H c O O –
ATP
SO4
2–
(12-44)
2. Acyl Phosphates
G. Multiple Displacement Reactions and the Transfer of a phospho or adenylyl group from ATP
Coupling of ATP Cleavage to Endergonic to the oxygen atom of a carboxylate group yields an
Processes acyl phosphate, a type of metabolic intermediate of
special significance. Acyl phosphates are mixed anhy-
A combination of successive displacement reactions drides of carboxylic and phosphoric acids in which
of two types is required in many enzymatic reactions, both the acyl group and the phospho group have high group
including most of those by which the cleavage of ATP
is coupled to biosynthesis. To harness the group trans-
O O
fer potential of ATP to drive an endergonic metabolic O –
process there must be a mechanism of coupling. C P
R O O H (R)
Otherwise, hydrolysis of ATP within a cell would
Acyl phosphate
simply generate heat. An essential part of the coupling
mechanism usually consists of a nucleophilic displacement
on phosphorus followed by displacement on carbon. Like- transfer potentials. As a consequence, acyl phosphates
wise, the synthesis of ATP and related compounds can serve as metabolic intermediates through which
often begins with a displacement on carbon followed the group transfer potential of ATP is transferred into
by one on phosphorus. other molecules and is harnessed to do chemical work.
A typical example is the synthesis of acetyl coen-
zyme A (Eq. 12-45). See Fig. 14-1 for the complete
1. Transfer of Phospho, Pyrophospho, and structure of – SH group-containing coenzyme A.
Adenylyl Groups from ATP
The first step in coupling ATP cleavage to any H3C COO – HS CoA
process is transfer of part of the ATP molecule to a Acetate CoenzymeA
nucleophile Y, usually by displacement on one of the ∆G’ (pH 7) = +35.1 kJ mol–1 (+8.4 kcal mol–1)
three phosphorus atoms. The nucleophilic attack may
be (a) on the terminal phosphorus (Pγ) with displace-
ment of ADP or (b) on the internal phosphorus (Pα) H2O
with displacement of inorganic pyrophosphate. In the O
first case, Y – PO H– is formed; in the latter, Y-adenylyl H3C C
3
S CoA
(sometimes shortened to Y-adenyl) is formed. More
rarely, displacement occurs (c) on the central phospho- Acetyl coenzyme A (12-45)
rus (Pβ) with transfer of a pyrophospho group to the

--- Page 664 ---

G. Multiple Displacement Reactions and the Coupling of ATP Cleavage to Endergonic Processes 661
Because the acetyl group in the product also has a high to the enzyme until the second step in the sequence
group transfer potential, ∆G’ for this reaction is highly takes place. When 18O is present in the acetate (desig-
positive and the formation of acetyl-CoA will not nated by the asterisks in Eq. 12-48) it appears in the
occur spontaneously. However, the sum of ∆G’ for the phospho group of AMP as expected for the indicated
reaction in Eq.12-45 plus that for the hydrolysis of ATP mechanism.
(Eq. 12-46) is nearly zero (+ 0.6kJ mol–1).
3. General Mechanism of Formation of
ATP4– + H O→ ADP3– + HPO 2– + H+ Thioesters, Esters, and Amides
2 4
∆G‘ = – 34.5 kJ mol–1 (– 8.3 kcal mol–1) (12-46)
The sequences of Eqs. 12-47 and 12-48 are general
ones used by cells for linking carboxylic acids to – OH,
Coupling of the two reactions is accomplished by first – SH, and – NH groups to form oxygen esters, thioesters,
2
letting an oxygen atom of the nucleophilic carboxylate or amides, respectively. ATP can be cleaved at either
group attack Pγ of ATP to form acetyl phosphate (Eq. Pα or Pγ. If cleavage is at Pα (Eq. 12-48) the hydrolysis
12-47, step a). In the second step (step b) the sulfur atom of inorganic pyrophosphate (PP) to P provides an
i i
of the – SH group of coenzyme A (often abbreviated additional coupling of ATP cleavage to biosynthesis
CoA– SH) attacks the carbon atom of the acetyl phos- as is discussed in Chapter 17, Section H.
phate with displacement of the good leaving group P.
i
While∆G’ for Eq. 12-47, step a, is moderately positive
–
O
(meaning that a relatively low concentration of acetyl O
O
phosphate will accumulate unless the [ATP] / [ADP] R C P O P P
ratio is high), the equilibrium in Eq. 12-47, step b, O *– O ATP
favors the products.
Adenosine
HO
O a PP i Pyrophos 2 phatase 2 P i
H3C C
–
O
–
ATP4– O O O
a ∆G' (pH 7) = +13.2 kJ mol-1 R C P O Adenosine
*
ATP3– O Acyl adenylate
O O b
–
H3C C
Acetyl
O O
O P OH R' SH
CoA S H O – phosphate R' OH – O * P O Adenosine
R' NH2 AMP
b ∆G' (pH 7) = –12.6 kJ mol-1
O
Pi
R C Thioester
O
S R'
CoA S C
CH3 O
Acetyl-CoA (12-47) R C Oxygen ester
O R'
O
The two reactions of Eq. 12-47 are catalyzed by R C Amide
acetate kinase925 and an S-acetyltransferase, respec- N R'
H (12-48)
tively. The sequence represents an essential first stage
in bacterial utilization of acetate for growth. It is also
used in a few bacteria in reverse as a way of generating An enzyme catalyzing a reaction similar to that of
ATP in fermentation reactions. On the other hand, acetyl-CoA synthetase is succinyl-CoA synthetase
most eukaryotic cells make acetyl-CoA from acetate by (succinate thiokinase).926,927 The enzyme from E. coli
coupling the synthesis to cleavage of ATP to AMP and has been studied most. The first step is formation of
P. A single enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase (acetate a phosphoenzyme by transfer of the γ phospho group
i
thiokinase) catalyzes both steps in the reaction (Eq. from ATP to N ε of histidine 246 in the α subunit of the
10-1). The sequence parallels that of Eq. 12-47, but the 140-kDaα β tetramer.926 The phospho group is then
2 2
initial displacement is on Pα of ATP to form acetyl transferred to succinate to form succinyl phosphate,
adenylate. This intermediate remains tightly bound which reacts with coenzyme A, as in step b, Eq. 12-48,

--- Page 665 ---

662 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
to form succinyl-CoA. Crystallographic studies sug- using a synthetase reaction in reverse; then the ATP or
gest that for this step the succinyl phosphate and the GTP formed could be used to make the new linkage by
coenzyme A may be bound to opposite α subunits in the action of another acyl-CoA synthetase. However,
the tetramer.926 However, in some bacteria and in special enzymes, the CoA transferases, function more
eukaryotes the enzyme appears to operate as an αβ directly (Eq. 12-50). The mechanism is not obvious.
heterodimer.927
Glutamine synthetase,928,929 a large enzyme
–
R COO Succinyl-CoA
containing 12 identical 468-residue subunits with 622
symmetry (as in Fig. 7-12), has a major regulatory func- ∆G ~ 0
tion in nitrogen metabolism, which is discussed in
O
Chapter 24. Apparently, the intermediate acyl phos- R C Succinate
phate (γ-glutamyl phosphate) has a transient existence S CoA
and all three reactants–glutamate, NH +, and ATP– Acyl-CoA (12-50)
4
must be bound to the enzyme concurrently before the
active site becomes functional. Early evidence for the How can the CoA be transferred from one acyl group
acyl phosphate930,931 included reduction by sodium to another while still retaining the high group transfer
borohydride to an alcohol (Eq. 12-49a) and isolation potential of the acyl group?
of the internal amide of glutamic acid 5-oxoproline The following experiments shed some light.
(Eq. 12-49b). Kinetic studies of succinyl-CoA–acetoacetate CoA
transferase indicate a ping-pong mechanism. The
enzyme alternates between two distinct forms, one of
H NH3 + which has been shown to contain bound CoA.932–934
_ The E-CoA intermediate formed from enzyme plus
O PO3 2
– OOC C acetoacetyl-CoA was reduced with 3H-containing
sodium borohydride and the protein was completely
O hydrolyzed with HCl. Tritium-containing α-amino-δ-
γ-Glutamyl phosphate b
hydroxyvaleric acid was isolated. Since thioesters (as
NaBH4 Pi
H H
well as oxygen esters) are cleaved in a two-step process
a Pi N
O
+
H NH3
+ – OOC H3N H
5-Oxoproline
HO
–
– COO
OOC
Homoserine
CH2OH
(12-49) α-Amino-δ-hydroxyvaleric acid
to alcohols by reduction with borohydride, it was con-
Ammonium ions appear to be bound at a specific site cluded that the intermediate E-CoA is a thioester of
and to be deprotonated by the Asp 50 carboxylate.929 the Glu 344 side chain. In exchange reactions 18O from
Theaminoacyl-tRNA synthetases join amino labeled succinate entered both the E-CoA intermediate
acids to their appropriate tRNA molecules for protein and the carboxyl group of acetoacetate.
synthesis. They have the very important task of select- A mechanism involving formation of a transient
ing both a specific amino acid and a specific tRNA and anhydride is similar to reactions discussed in preceding
joining them. The enzymes differ in size and other sections.717,720 The student should be able to write
properties. However, they all appear to function by a out the step-by-step detail. Does this mechanism
common basic chemistry that makes use of cleavage of explain the 18O exchange data? A second possibility
ATP at Pα (Eq. 12-48) via an intermediate aminoacyl is a 4-center reaction (Eq. 12-51). However, mecha-
adenylate and that is outlined also in Eq. 17-36. These nisms of this type have not been demonstrated for
enzymes are discussed in Chapter 29 . enzymatic reactions.
O
4. Coenzyme A Transferases
O
E C O
– E C
The following problem in energy transfer arises CoA S O S + C
occasionally: A thioester, such as succinyl-CoA, is
C O R
available to a cell and the energy available in its unstable CoA
linkage is needed for synthesis of a different thioester. O R (12-51)
It would be possible for a cell to first form ATP or GTP,

--- Page 666 ---

663
References
1. Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and 21. Fu, Z., Hu, Y., Konishi, K., Takata, Y., Ogawa, 50. Braun, C., Lindhorst, T., Madsen, N. B., and
Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, New York (pp. H., Gomi, T., Fujioka, M., and Takusagawa, F. Withers, S. G. (1996) Biochemistry35, 5458–5463
78–110) (1996)Biochemistry35, 11985–11993 50a. Namchuk, M. N., McCarter, J. D., Becalski, A.,
2. Lowe, J. N., and Ingraham, L. L. (1974) An 22. Takata, Y., Konishi, K., Gomi, T., and Fujioka, Andrews, T., and Withers, S. G. (2000) J. Am.
Introduction to Biochemical Reaction Mechanisms, M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 5537–5542 Chem. Soc. 122, 1270–1277
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 23. Schluckebier, G., O’Gara, M., Saenger, W., and 51. Gorenstein, D. G., Findlay, J. B., Luxon, B. A.,
3. Bruice, T. C., and Benkovic, S. J. (1966) Cheng, X. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.247, 16–20 and Kar, D. (1977) J. Am. Chem. Soc.99, 3473–
Bioorganic Mechanisms, Benjamin, New York 24. Szczelkun, M. D., Jones, H., and Connolly, B. 3479
(2 vols.) A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10734–10743 52. Kirby, A. J. (1983) The Anomeric Effect and
3a. Kyte, J. (1995) Mechanism in Protein Chemistry, 25. O’Gara, M., Roberts, R. J., and Cheng, X. Related Stereoelectronic Effects at Oxygen,
Garland Publ., New York (1996)J. Mol. Biol.263, 597–606 Springer, Berlin
3b. Fersht, A. (1999) Structure and Mechanism in 25a. Reddy, Y. V. R., and Rao, D. N. (2000) J. Mol. 53. Bennet, A. J., and Sinnott, M. L. (1986) J. Am.
Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Biol.298, 597–610 Chem. Soc.108, 7287–7294
Protein Folding, Freeman, New York 26. Patel, D. J. (1994) Nature (London)367, 688–690 54. Sinnott, M. L. (1986) in Mechanisms of
3c. Silverman, R. B. (1999) The Organic Chemistry 27. Jeltsch, A., Christ, F., Fatemi, M., and Roth, M. Enzymatic Reactions: Stereochemistry A.
of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions, Academic (1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 19538–19544 Steenbock Symposium (Frey, P. A., ed), pp. 293–
Press, San Diego, California 28. Lotta, T., Vidgren, J., Tilgmann, C., Ulmanen, 305, Elsevier, New York
3d. Sinnott, M., ed. (1998) Comprehensive Biological I., Melén, K., Julkunen, I., and Taskinen, J. 55. Phillips, D. C. (1966) Sci. Am.215(Nov), 78–90
Catalysis. A Mechanistic Reference, Vol. I, (1995)Biochemistry34, 4202–4210 56. Sanz, J. M., García, P., and García, J. L. (1992)
Academic Press, San Diego, California 29. Zheng, Y.-J., and Bruice, T. C. (1997) J. Am. Biochemistry31, 8495–8499
4. Dixon, J. E., and Bruice, T. C. (1971) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 8137–8145 57. Artymicek, P. J., and Blake, C. C. F. (1981) J.
Chem. Soc.93, 6592–6597 29a. Kahn, K., and Bruice, T. C. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Mol. Biol.152, 737–762
5. Kosower, E. M. (1968) An Introduction to Soc.122, 46–51 58. Harata, K., Muraki, M., and Jigami, Y. (1993) J.
Physical Organic Chemistry, Wiley, New York 30. Kealey, J. T., and Santi, D. V. (1995) Biochemis- Mol. Biol.233, 524–535
(pp. 28 and 81) try34, 2441–2446 59. Harata, K., Muraki, M., Hayashi, Y., and
6. Goldman, P., Milne, G. W. A., and Keister, D. 31. Hrycyna, C. A., Yang, M. C., and Clarke, S. Jigami, Y. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 1447–1453
B. (1968) J. Biol. Chem.243, 428–434 (1994)Biochemistry33, 9806–9812 60. Grütter, M. G., Weaver, L. H., and Matthews,
7. Liu, J.-Q., Kurihara, T., Miyagi, M., Esaki, N., 31a. Cleland, W. W., O’Leary, M. H., and B. W. (1983) Nature (London)303, 828–831
and Soda, K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 18309– Northrop, D. B., eds. (1977) Isotope Effects on 61. Zhang, X.-J., Baase, W. A., and Matthews, B.
18312 Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions, Univ. Park Press, W. (1991) Biochemistry30, 2012–2017
8. Hisano, T., Hata, Y., Fujii, T., Liu, J.-Q., Baltimore, Maryland 62. Dao-pin, S., Sauer, U., Nicholson, H., and
Kurihara, T., Esaki, N., and Soda, K. (1996) J. 31b. Klinman, J. P. (1978) in Transition States of Matthews, B. W. (1991) Biochemistry30, 7142–
Biol. Chem.271, 20322–20330 Biochemical Processes (Gandour, R. D., and 7153
9. Li, Y.-F., Hata, Y., Fujii, T., Hisano, T., Schowen, R. L., eds), pp. 165–200, Plenum, 63. Matsumura, M., Becktel, W. J., Levitt, M., and
Nishihara, M., Kurihara, T., and Esaki, N. New York Matthews, B. W. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 15035–15044 31c. Gandour, R. D., and Schowen, R. L., eds. U.S.A.86, 6562–6566
10. Grimmelikhuijzen, C. J. P., and Schaller, H. C. (1978)Transition States of Biochemical Processes, 64. Parsons, S. M., and Raftery, M. A. (1972)
(1979)Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 265–267 Plenum, New York Biochemistry11, 1623–1628
11. Koonin, E. V., and Tatusov, R. L. (1994) J. Mol. 31d. Schramm, V. L., Horenstein, B. A., and Kline, 65. Maenaka, K., Matsushima, M., Song, H.,
Biol.244, 125–132 P. C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 18259–18262 Sunada, F., Watanabe, K., and Kumagai, I.
11a. Nardini, M., Ridder, I. S., Rozeboom, H. J., 32. Hegazi, M. F., Borchardt, R. T., and Schowen, (1995)J. Mol. Biol.247, 281–293
Kalk, K. H., Rink, R., Janssen, D. B., and R. L. (1979) J. Am. Chem. Soc.101, 4359–4365 66. Matsumura, I., and Kirsch, J. F. (1996)
Dijkstra, B. W. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 14579– 33. Mihel, I., Knipe, J. O., Coward, J. K., and Biochemistry35, 1881–1889
14586 Schowen, R. L. (1979) J. Am. Chem. Soc.101, 67. Kuroki, R., Yamada, H., Moriyama, T., and
12. Verschueren, K. H. G., Seljée, F., Rozeboom, 4349–4351 Imoto, T. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 13571–13574
H. J., Kalk, K. H., and Dijkstra, B. W. (1993) 34. Rodgers, J., Femec, D. A., and Schowen, R. L. 68. Malcolm, B. A., Rosenberg, S., Corey, M. J.,
Nature (London)363, 693–698 (1982)J. Am. Chem. Soc.104, 3263–3268 Allen, J. S., de Baetselier, A., and Kirsch, J. F.
12a. Ridder, I. S., Rozeboom, H. J., Kalk, K. H., and 35. Boyd, R. J., Kim, C.-K., Shi, Z., Weinberg, N., (1989)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.86, 133–137
Dijkstra, B. W. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 30672– and Wolfe, S. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 69. Hadfield, A. T., Harvey, D. J., Archer, D. B.,
30678 10147–10152 MacKenzie, da, Jeenes, D. J., Radford, S. E.,
13. Pries, F., Kingma, J., Krooshof, G. H., 36. Glad, S. S., and Jensen, F. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Lowe, G., Dobson, C. M., and Jonhson, L. N.
Jeronimus-Stratingh, C. M., Bruins, A. P., and Soc.119, 227–232 (1994)J. Mol. Biol.243, 856–872
Janssen, D. B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 10405– 37. Wolfenden, R., Lu, X., and Young, G. (1998) J. 70. Weaver, L. H., Grütter, M. G., and Matthews,
10411 Am. Chem. Soc.120, 6814–6815 B. W. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.245, 54–68
13a. Schindler, J. F., Naranjo, P. A., Honaberger, D. 38. Henrissat, B., and Bairoch, A. (1993) Biochem. 71. Kuroki, R., Ito, Y., Kato, Y., and Imoto, T.
A., Chang, C.-H., Brainard, J. R., Vanderberg, J.293, 781–788 (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 19976–19981
L. A., and Unkefer, C. J. (1999) Biochemistry38, 39. Henrissat, B., and Bairoch, A. (1996) Biochem. 72. Matsumura, I., and Kirsch, J. F. (1996)
5772–5778 J.316, 695–696 Biochemistry35, 1890–1896
14. Lightstone, F. C., Zheng, Y.-J., Maulitz, A. H., 40. Henrissat, B., Callebaut, I., Fabrega, S., Lehn, 73. Dickerson, R. E., and Geis, I. (1969) The
and Bruice, T. C. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. P., Mornon, J.-P., and Davies, G. (1995) Proc. Structure and Action of Proteins, Harper and
U.S.A.94, 8417–8420 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 7090–7094 Row, New York (p. 71)
15. Lightstone, F. C., Zheng, Y.-J., and Bruice, T. 41. Sinnot, M. L. (1990) Chem. Rev.90, 1171– 1202 74. Levitt, M. (1974) in Peptides, Polypeptides and
C. (1998) J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 5611–5621 42. Withers, S. G., and Aebersold, R. (1995) Proteins (Blout, E. R., Bouey, F. A., Goodman,
16. Pries, F., van den Wijngaard, A. J., Bos, R., Protein Sci.4, 361–372 M., and Lotan, N., eds), pp. 99–113, Wiley,
Pentenga, M., and Janssen, D. B. (1994) J. Biol. 43. Silverstein, R., Voet, J., Reed, D., and Abeles, New York
Chem.269, 17490–17494 R. H. (1967) J. Biol. Chem.242, 1338–1346 75. Huang, X., Surry, C., Hiebert, T., and Bennet,
17. Chiang, P. K., Gordon, R. K., Tal, J., Zeng, G. 44. Doudoroff, M., Barker, H. A., and Hassid, W. A. J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 10614–10621
C., Doctor, B. P., Pardhasaradhi, K., and Z. (1947) J. Biol. Chem.168, 725–732 and 733– 76. Matsui, H., Blanchard, J. S., Brewer, C. F., and
McCann, P. P. (1996) FASEB J.10, 471–480 746 Hehre, E. J. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 8714–8716
18. Cornforth, J. W., Reichard, S. A., Talalay, P., 45. LeBrun, E., and van Rapenbusch, R. (1980) J. 77. Banait, N. S., and Jencks, W. P. (1991) J. Am.
Carrell, H. L., and Glusker, J. P. (1977) J. Am. Biol. Chem.255, 12034–12036 Chem. Soc.113, 7951–7958
Chem. Soc.99, 7292–7301 46. McCarter, J. D., and Withers, S. G. (1996) J. 78. Zhang, Y., Bommuswamy, J., and Sinnott, M.
19. Woodard, R. W., Tsai, M.-D., Floss, H. G., Biol. Chem.271, 6889–6894 L. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 7557–7563
Crooks, P. A., and Coward, J. K. (1980) J. Biol. 47. Withers, S. G., Rupitz, K., and Street, I. P. 79. Tanaka, Y., Tao, W., Blanchard, J. S., and Hehre,
Chem.255, 9124–9127 (1988)J. Biol. Chem.17, 7929–7932 E. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 32306–32312
20. Vidgren, J., Svensson, L. A., and Liljas, A. 48. Withers, S. G., and Street, I. P. (1988) J. Am. 80. Knier, B. L., and Jencks, W. P. (1980) J. Am.
(1994)Nature (London)368, 354–357 Chem. Soc.110, 8551–8553 Chem. Soc.102, 6789–6798
49. Miao, S., Ziser, L., Aebersold, R., and Withers, 81. Huang, X., Tanaka, K. S. E., and Bennet, A. J.
S. G. (1994) Biochemistry33, 7027–7032 (1997)J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 11147–11154

--- Page 667 ---

664 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
References
82. Hardy, L. W., and Poteete, A. R. (1991) 111. Juy, M., Amit, A. G., Alzari, P. M., Poljak, R. J., 140. Helmreich, E. J. M., and Klein, H. W. (1980)
Biochemistry30, 9457–9463 Claeyssens, M., Béguin, P., and Aubert, J.-P. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.19, 441–455
82a. Davies, G. J., Mackenzie, L., Varrot, A., (1992)Nature (London)357, 89–91 141. Klein, H. W., Im, M. J., Palm, D., and
Dauter, M., Brzozowski, A. M., Schülein, M., 112. Chen, L., Fincher, G. B., and Hoj, P. B. (1993) J. Helmreich, E. J. M. (1984) Biochemistry23,
and Withers, S. G. (1998) Biochemistry37, Biol. Chem.268, 13318–13326 5853–5861
11707–11713 113. Chen, L., Garrett, T. P. J., Fincher, G. B., and 142. Street, I. P., Rupitz, K., and Withers, S. G.
82b. Vocadlo, D. J., Mayer, C., He, S., and Withers, Hoj, P. B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 8093–8101 (1989)Biochemistry28, 1581–1587
S. G. (2000) Biochemistry39, 117–126 114. Müller, J. J., Thomsen, K. K., and Heinemann, 143. Parrish, R. F., Uhing, R. J., and Graves, D. J.
83. Banerjee, S. K., and Rupley, J. A. (1975) J. Biol. U. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 3438–3446 (1977)Biochemistry16, 4824–4831
Chem.250, 8267–8274 115. Lindley, M. G., Shallenberger, R. S., and 143a.Watson, K. A., McCleverty, C., Geremia, S.,
84. Kelly, J. A., Sielecki, A. R., Sykes, B. D., James, Herbert, S. M. (1976) Food Chemistry1, 149–159 Cottaz, S., Driguez, H., and Johnson, L. N.
M. N. G., and Phillips, D. C. (1979) Nature 116. Krengel, U., and Dijkstra, B. W. (1996) J. Mol. (1999)EMBO J.18, 4619–4632
(London)282, 875–878 Biol.263, 70–78 144. Duke, E. M. H., Wakatsuki, S., Hadfield, A., and
85. Metzler, D. E. (1979) Adv. Enzymol.50, 1–40 117. Kasumi, T., Tsumuraya, Y., Brewer, C. F., Johnson, L. N. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 1178–1196
86. Dao-pin, S., Liao, D.-I., and Remington, S. J. Kersters-Hilderson, H., Claeyssens, M., and 145. Buchbinder, J. L., Luong, C. B. H., Browner,
(1989)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.86, 5361– Hehre, E. J. (1987) Biochemistry26, 3010–3016 M. F., and Fletterick, R. J. (1997) Biochemistry
5365 118. Lawson, S. L., Wakarchuk, W. W., and Withers, 36, 8039–8044
87. Post, C. B., and Karplus, M. (1986) J. Am. S. G. (1996) Biochemistry35, 10110–10118 146. Buchbinder, J. L., and Fletterick, R. J. (1996) J.
Chem. Soc.108, 1317–1319 119. Derewenda, U., Swenson, L., Green, R., Wei, Biol. Chem.271, 22305–22309
88. Fife, T. H., Jaffe, S. H., and Natarajan, R. Y., Morosoli, R., Shareck, F., Kluepfel, D., and 147. Gregoriou, M., Noble, M. E. M., Watson, K.
(1991)J. Am. Chem. Soc.113, 7646–7653 Derewenda, Z. S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, A., Garman, E. F., Krulle, T. M., De La Fuente,
89. Piszkiewicz, D., and Bruice, T. C. (1968) J. Am. 20811–20814 C., Fleet, G. W. J., Oikonomakos, N. G., and
Chem. Soc.90, 2156–2163 120. McIntosh, L. P., Hand, G., Johnson, P. E., Johnson, L. N. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 915–927
90. Lowe, G., and Sheppard, G. (1968) J. Chem. Joshi, M. D., Körner, M., Plesniak, L. A., Ziser, 148. Nakano, K., and Fukui, T. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.
Soc. Chem. Commun., 529–530 L., Wakarchuk, W. W., and Withers, S. G. 261, 8230–8236
91. Capon, B. (1969) Chem. Rev.69, 407–498 (1996)Biochemistry35, 9958–9966 149. Watson, K. A., Schinzel, R., Palm, D., and
92. Hart, P. J., Pfluger, H. D., Monzingo, A. F., 121. He, X. M., and Carter, D. C. (1992) Nature Johnson, L. N. (1997) EMBO J.16, 1–14
Hollis, T., and Robertus, J. D. (1995) J. Mol. (London)358, 209–215 150. Becker, S., Palm, D., and Schinzel, R. (1994) J.
Biol.248, 402–413 122. Braithwaite, K. L., Barna, T., Spurway, T. D., Biol. Chem.269, 2485–2490
93. Terwisscha van Scheltinga, A. C., Armand, S., Charnock, S. J., Black, G. W., Hughes, N., 151. Lin, K., Hwang, P. K., and Fletterick, R. J.
Kalk, K. H., Isogai, A., Henrissat, B., and Dijkstra, Lakey, J. H., Virden, R., Hazlewood, G. P., (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 26833–26839
B. W. (1995) Biochemistry34, 15619–15623 Henrissat, B., and Gilbert, H. J. (1997) 152. Goldsmith, E. J., Fletterick, R. J., and Withers,
94. Tews, I., Terwisscha van Scheltinga, A. C., Biochemistry36, 15489–15500 S. G. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 1449–1455
Perrakis, A., Wilson, K. S., and Dijkstra, B. W. 123. Sanz-Aparicio, J., Hermoso, J. A., Martínez- 153. Robyt, J. F., and French, D. (1970) J. Biol. Chem.
(1997)J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 7954–7959 Ripoll, M., Lequerica, J. L., and Polaina, J. 245, 3917–3927
95. Brameld, K. A., and Goddard, W. A., III (1998) (1998)J. Mol. Biol.275, 491–502 154. Brayer, G. D., Luo, Y., and Withers, S. G.
J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 3571–3580 124. Wang, Q., Trimbur, D., Graham, R., Warren, R. (1995)Protein Sci.4, 1730–1742
96. Klyosov, A. A. (1990) Biochemistry29, 10577– A. J., and Withers, S. G. (1995) Biochemistry34, 155. MacDonald, R. J., Crerar, M. M., Swain, W. F.,
10585 14554–14562 Pictet, R. L., Thomas, G., and Rutter, W. J.
97. Watanabe, H., Noda, H., Tokuda, G., and Lo, 125. Namchuk, M. N., and Withers, S. G. (1995) (1980)Nature (London)287, 117–122
N. (1998) Nature (London)394, 330–331 Biochemistry34, 16194–16202 156. Qian, M., Haser, R., Buisson, G., Duée, E., and
98. Davies, G. J., Tolley, S. P., Henrissat, B., Hjort, 126. Hrmova, M., MacGregor, E. A., Biely, P., Payan, F. (1994) Biochemistry33, 6284–6294
C., and Schülein, M. (1995) Biochemistry34, Stewart, R. J., and Fincher, G. B. (1998) J. Biol. 157. Qian, M., Haser, R., and Payan, F. (1995)
16210–16220 Chem.273, 11134–11143 Protein Sci.4, 747–755
99. Damude, H. G., Withers, S. G., Kilburn, D. G., 127. Febbraio, F., Barone, R., D’Auria, S., Rossi, M., 158. Larson, S. B., Greenwood, A., Cascio, D., Day,
Miller, R. C., Jr., and Warren, R. A. J. (1995) Nucci, R., Piccialli, G., De Napoli, L., Orrù, S., J., and McPherson, A. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.235,
Biochemistry34, 2220–2224 and Pucci, P. (1997) Biochemistry36, 3068–3075 1560–1584
100. Barr, B. K., Wolfgang, D. E., Piens, K., 128. Jacobson, R. H., Zhang, X.-J., DuBose, R. F., 159. Machius, M., Vértesy, L., Huber, R., and
Claeyssens, M., and Wilson, D. B. (1998) and Matthews, B. W. (1994) Nature (London) Wiegand, G. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.260, 409–421
Biochemistry37, 9220–9229 369, 761–766 160. Kadziola, A., Sogaard, M., Svensson, B., and
101. Divne, C., Ståhlberg, J., Teeri, T. T., and Jones, 129. Gebler, J. C., Aebersold, R., and Withers, S. G. Haser, R. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.278, 205–217
T. A. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.275, 309–325 (1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 11126–11130 161. Strobl, S., Maskos, K., Betz, M., Wiegand, G.,
102. Barr, B. K., Hsieh, Y.-L., Ganem, B., and 130. Richard, J. P., Westerfeld, J. G., Lin, S., and Huber, R., Gomis-Rüth, F. X., and Glockshuber,
Wilson, D. B. (1996) Biochemistry35, 586–592 Beard, J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 11713–11724 R. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.278, 617–628
103. Choi, S. K., and Ljungdahl, L. G. (1996) 131. Richard, J. P., Huber, R. E., Lin, S., Heo, C., 162. Fujimoto, Z., Takase, K., Doui, N., Momma,
Biochemistry35, 4906–4910 and Amyes, T. L. (1996) Biochemistry35, M., Matsumoto, T., and Mizuno, H. (1998) J.
104. Tormo, J., Lamed, R., Chirino, A. J., Morag, E., 12377–12386 Mol. Biol.277, 393–407
Bayer, E. A., Shoham, Y., and Steitz, T. A. 132. Roth, N. J., Rob, B., and Huber, R. E. (1998) 163. Feller, G., le Bussy, O., Houssier, C., and Gerday,
(1996)EMBO J.15, 5739–5751 Biochemistry37, 10099–10107 C. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 23836–23841
105. Sulzenbacher, G., Schülein, M., and Davies, G. 133. Mitchell, E. P., Withers, S. G., Ermert, P., 164. Aghajari, N., Feller, G., Gerday, C., and Haser,
J. (1997) Biochemistry36, 5902–5911 Vasella, A. T., Garman, E. F., Oikonomakos, N. R. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 564–572
106. Sulzenbacher, G., Driguez, H., Henrissat, B., G., and Johnson, L. N. (1996) Biochemistry35, 165. Matsuura, Y., Kusunoki, M., Harada, W., and
Schülein, M., and Davies, G. J. (1996) 7341–7355 Kakudo, M. (1984) J. Biochem.95, 697–702
Biochemistry35, 15280–15287 134. Tu, J.-I., Jacobson, G. R., and Graves, D. J. 166. Brzozowski, A. M., and Davies, G. J. (1997)
107. Johnson, P. E., Joshi, M. D., Tomme, P., (1971)Biochemistry10, 1229–1236 Biochemistry36, 10837–10845
Kilburn, D. G., and McIntosh, L. P. (1996) 135. Gold, A. M., Legrand, E., and Sanchez, G. R. 167. Robyt, J. F., and French, D. (1970) Arch.
Biochemistry35, 14381–14394 (1971)J. Biol. Chem.246, 5700–5706 Biochem. Biophys.138, 662–670
108. Fukuda, M., Spooncer, E., Oates, J. E., Dell, A., 136. Levvy, G. A., and Snaith, S. M. (1972) Adv. 168. Robyt, J. F., and French, D. (1967) Arch.
and Klock, J. C. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, Enzymol.36, 151–181 Biochem. Biophys.122, 8–16
10925–10935 137. Barford, D., and Johnson, L. N. (1989) Nature 169. delCardayré, S. B., and Raines, R. T. (1994)
108a.Ponyi, T., Szabó, L., Nagy, T., Orosz, L., (London)340, 609–616 Biochemistry33, 6031–6037
Simpson, P. J., Williamson, M. P., and Gilbert, 138. Oikonomakos, N. G., Johnson, L. N., Acharya, 169a.Dauter, Z., Dauter, M., Brzozowski, A. M.,
H. J. (2000) Biochemistry39, 985–991 K. R., Stuart, D. I., Barford, D., Hajdu, J., Christensen, S., Borchert, T. V., Beier, L.,
109. Domínguez, R., Souchon, H., Lascombe, M.- Varvill, K. M., Melpidou, A. E., Papageor- Wilson, K. S., and Davies, G. J. (1999)
B., and Alzari, P. M. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.257, giou, T., Graves, D. J., and Palm, D. (1987) Biochemistry38, 8385–8392
1042–1051 Biochemistry26, 8381–8389 169b.Park, K. H., Kim, M. J., Lee, H. S., Han, N. S.,
110. Roberge, M., Shareck, F., Morosoli, R., 139. Oikonomakos, N. G., Zographos, S. E., Kim, D., and Robyt, J. F. (1998) Carbohydr. Res.
Kluepfel, D., and Dupont, C. (1997) Tsitsanou, K. E., Johnson, L. N., and Acharya, 313, 235–246
Biochemistry36, 7769–7775 K. R. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 2416–2428

--- Page 668 ---

665
References
170. Hermans, M. M. P., Kroos, M. A., van 192a.Lu, D., Fütterer, K., Korolev, S., Zheng, X., 215. Cromlish, J. A., Seidah, N. G., Marcinkiewicz,
Beeuman, J., Oostra, B. A., and Reuser, A. J. J. Tan, K., Waksman, G., and Sadler, J. E. (1999) M., Hamelin, J., Johnson, D. A., and Chrétien,
(1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 13507–13512 J. Mol. Biol.292, 361–373 M. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 1363–1373
171. Raben, N., Nagaraju, K., Lee, E., Kessler, P., 193. Light, A., and Janska, H. (1989) Trends 216. Schaner, P., Todd, R. B., Seidah, N. G., and
Byrne, B., Lee, L., LaMarca, M., King, C., Biochem. Sci.14, 110–112 Nillni, E. A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 19958–
Ward, J., Sauer, B., and Plotz, P. (1998) 194. Matsushima, M., Ichinose, M., Yahagi, N., 19968
J. Biol. Chem.273, 19086–19092 Kakei, N., Tsukada, S., Miki, K., Kurokawa, 217. Rose, C., Vargas, F., Facchinetti, P., Bourgeat,
172. Howard, S., and Withers, S. G. (1998) K., Tashiro, K., Shiokawa, K., Shinomiya, K., P., Bambal, R. B., Bishop, P. B., Chan, S. M. T.,
Biochemistry37, 3858–3864 Umeyama, H., Inoue, H., Takahashi, T., and Moore, A. N. J., Ganellin, C. R., and Schwartz,
173. Jespersen, H. M., MacGregor, E. A., Henrissat, Takahashi, K. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 19976– J.-C. (1996) Nature (London)380, 403–409
B., Sierks, M. R., and Svensson, B. (1993) 19982 218. Shilton, B. H., Thomas, D. Y., and Cygler, M.
Journal of Protein Chemistry12, 791–805 195. Kitamoto, Y., Veile, R. A., Donis–Keller, H., (1997)Biochemistry36, 9002–9012
174. Liu, W., Madsen, N. B., Fan, B., Zucker, K. A., and Sadler, J. E. (1995) Biochemistry34, 4562– 219. Bullock, T. L., Branchaud, B., and Remington,
Glew, R. H., and Fry, D. E. (1995) Biochemistry 4568 S. J. (1994) Biochemistry33, 11127–11134
34, 7056–7061 196. Khan, A. R., and James, M. N. G. (1998) 220. Mortensen, U. H., Remington, S. J., and
175. Watanabe, K., Hata, Y., Kizaki, H., Katsube, Y., Protein Sci.7, 815–836 Breddam, K. (1994) Biochemistry33, 508–517
and Suzuki, Y. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.269, 142–153 197. Hedstrom, L., Lin, T.-Y., and Fast, W. (1996) 221. Brayer, G. D., Delbaere, L. T. J., and James, M.
176. Knegtel, R. M. A., Strokopytov, B., Penninga, Biochemistry35, 4515–4523 N. G. (1979) J. Mol. Biol.131, 743–775
D., Faber, O. G., Rozeboom, H. J., Kalk, K. H., 197a.Khan, A. R., Khazanovich-Bernstein, N., 222. Plou, F. J., Kowlessur, D., Malthouse, J. P. G.,
Dijkhuizen, L., and Dijkstra, B. W. (1995) Bergman, E. M., and James, M. N. G. (1999) Mellor, G. W., Hartshorn, M. J., Pinitglang, S.,
J. Biol. Chem.270, 29256–29264 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 10968–10975 Patel, H., Topham, C. M., Thomas, E. W.,
177. Schmidt, A. K., Cottaz, S., Driguez, H., and 198. Kramer, K. J., Felsted, R. L., and Law, J. H. Verma, C., and Brocklehurst, K. (1996) J. Mol.
Schulz, G. E. (1998) Biochemistry37, 5909–5915 (1973)J. Biol. Chem.248, 3021–3028 Biol.257, 1088–1111
177a.Uitdehaag, J. C. M., Mosi, R., Kalk, K. H., van 199. Lesk, A. M., and Fordham, W. D. (1996) J. Mol. 223. Wells, J. A., and Estell, D. A. (1988) Trends
der Veen, B. A., Dijkhuizen, L., Withers, S. G., Biol.258, 501–537 Biochem. Sci.13, 291–297
and Dijkstra, B. W. (1999) Nature Struct. Biol. 200. Cygler, M., Schrag, J. D., Sussman, J. L., Harel, 224. Kossiakoff, A. A., Ultsch, M., White, S., and
6, 432–436 M., Silman, I., Gentry, M. K., and Doctor, B. P. Eigenbrot, C. (1991) Biochemistry30, 1211–1221
177b.van der Veen, B. A., Uitdehaag, J. C. M., (1993)Protein Sci.2, 366–382 225. Sorensen, S. B., Bech, L. M., Meldal, M., and
Penninga, D., van Alebeek, G.-J. W. M., Smith, 201. Pereira, P. J. B., Bergner, A., Macedo, R., S, Breddam, K. (1993) Biochemistry32, 8994–8999
L. M., Dijkstra, B. W., and Dijkhuizen, L. Huber, R., Matschiner, G., Fritz, H., 225a.Smith, C. A., Toogood, H. S., Baker, H. M.,
(2000)J. Mol. Biol.296, 1027–1038 Sommerhoff, C. P., and Bode, W. (1998) Nature Daniel, R. M., and Baker, E. N. (1999) J. Mol.
178. Terada, Y., Yanase, M., Takata, H., Takaha, T., (London)392, 306–311 Biol.294, 1027–1040
and Okada, S. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 15729– 201a.Sommerhoff, C. P., Bode, W., Pereira, P. J. B., 226. Koszelak, S., Ng, J. D., Day, J., Ko, T. P.,
15733 Stubbs, M. T., Stürzebecher, J., Piechottka, G. Greenwood, A., and McPherson, A. (1997)
179. Fierobe, H.-P., Clarke, A. J., Tull, D., and P., Matschiner, G., and Bergner, A. (1999) Proc. Biochemistry36, 6597–6604
Svensson, B. (1998) Biochemistry37, 3753–3759 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 10984–10991 227. Delbaere, L. T. J., and Brayer, G. D. (1980) J.
180. Aleshin, A. E., Stoffer, B., Firsov, L. M., 202. Schechter, N. M., Eng, G. Y., Selwood, T., and Mol. Biol.139, 45–51
Svensson, B., and Honzatko, R. B. (1996) McCaslin, D. R. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10628– 228. Blanchard, H., and James, M. N. G. (1994) J.
Biochemistry35, 8319–8328 10638 Mol. Biol.241, 574–587
181. Firsov, L. M., Neustroev, K. N., Aleshin, A. E., 203. Johnson, D. A., and Barton, G. J. (1992) Protein 228a.Tomkinson, B. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24,
Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., Scott, R. D., Sci.1, 370–377 355–359
Stoffer, B., Christensen, T., and Svensson, B. 204. Kido, H., Yokogoshi, Y., Sakai, K., Tashiro, M., 228b.Rose, C., Vargas, F., Facchinetti, P., Bourgeat,
(1994)Eur. J. Biochem.223, 293–302 Kishino, Y., Fukutomi, A., and Katunuma, N. P., Bambal, R. B., Bishop, P. B., Chan, S. M. T.,
182. Natarajan, S. K., and Sierks, M. R. (1997) (1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 13573–13579 Moore, A. N. J., Ganellin, C. R., and Schwartz,
Biochemistry36, 14946–14955 204a.Wong, G. W., Tang, Y., Feyfant, E., Sali, A., Li, J.-C. (1996) Nature (London)380, 403–409
183. Williamson, M. P., Le Gal-Coëffet, M.-F., L., Li, Y., Huang, C., Friend, D. S., Krilis, S. A., 228c.Renn, S. C. P., Tomkinson, B., and Taghert, P.
Sorimachi, K., Furniss, C. S. M., Archer, D. B., and Stevens, R. L. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, H. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 19173–19182
and Williamson, G. (1997) Biochemistry36, 30784–30793 229. Wharton, C. W. (1998) in Comprehensive
7535–7539 205. Remington, S. J., Woodbury, R. G., Reynolds, Biological Catalysis. A Mechanistic Reference,
184. Penninga, D., van der Veen, B. A., Knegtel, R. R. A., Matthews, B. W., and Neurath, H. Vol. I (Sinnott, M., ed), pp. 345–379,
M. A., van Hijum, S. A. F. T., Rozeboom, H. J., (1988)Biochemistry27, 8097–8105 Academic Press, San Diego, California
Kalk, K. H., Dijkstra, B. W., and Dijkhuizen, L. 206. McGrath, M. E., Mirzadegan, T., and Schmidt, 230. Blow, D. M. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22,
(1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 32777–32784 B. F. (1997) Biochemistry36, 14318–14324 405–408
184a.Mikami, B., Adachi, M., Kage, T., Sarikaya, E., 207. Sali, A., Matsumoto, R., McNeil, H. P., 231. Tsukada, H., and Blow, D. M. (1985) J. Mol.
Nanmori, T., Shinke, R., and Utsumi, S. (1999) Karplus, M., and Stevens, R. L. (1993) J. Biol. Biol.184, 703–711
Biochemistry38, 7050–7061 Chem.268, 9023–9034 232. Bode, W., and Schwager, P. (1975) J. Mol. Biol.
185. Mikami, B., Degano, M., Hehre, E. J., and 208. Springman, E. B., Dikov, M. M., and Serafin, 98, 693–717
Sacchettini, J. C. (1994) Biochemistry33, 7779– W. E. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 1300–1307 233. Gaboriaud, C., Serre, L., Guy-Crotte, O.,
7787 209. Hof, P., Mayr, I., Huber, R., Korzus, E., Forest, E., and Fontecilla-Camps, J.-C. (1996)
186. Adachi, M., Mikami, B., Katsube, T., and Utsumi, Potempa, J., Travis, J., Powers, J. C., and Bode, J. Mol. Biol.259, 995–1010
S. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 19859–19865 W. (1996) EMBO J.15, 5481–5491 234. Sawyer, L., Shotten, D. M., Campbell, J. W.,
187. Amado, M., Almeida, R., Carneiro, F., Levery, 210. Rao, N. V., Wehner, N. G., Marshall, B. C., Wendell, P. L., Muirhead, H., and Watson, H.
S. B., Holmes, E. H., Nomoto, M., Hollings- Gray, W. R., Gray, B. H., and Hoidal, J. R. C. (1978) J. Mol. Biol.118, 137–208
worth, M. A., Hassan, H., Schwientek, T., (1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 9540–9548 235. Bode, W., Meyer, E., Jr., and Powers, J. C.
Nielsen, P. A., Bennett, E. P., and Clausen, H. 211. Hershberger, R. J., Gershenfeld, H. K., (1989)Biochemistry28, 1951–1963
(1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 12770–12778 Weissman, I. L., and Su, L. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 236. Stubbs, M. T., and Bode, W. (1995) Trends
188. Baenziger, J. U. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1019–1025 267, 25488–25493 Biochem. Sci.20, 23–28
189. Radzicka, A., and Wolfenden, R. (1996) J. Am. 212. Beresford, P. J., Kam, C.-M., Powers, J. C., and 237. Katz, B. A., Liu, B., Barnes, M., and Springman,
Chem. Soc.118, 6105–6109 Lieberman, J. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. E. B. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 875–885
190. Barrett, A. J., Rawlings, N. D., and Woessner, U.S.A.94, 9285–9290 238. Timm, D. E. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 1418–1425
J. F., eds. (1998) Handbook of Proteolytic 213. Caputo, A., Garner, R. S., Winkler, U., Hudig, 239. Blow, D. M. (1971) in The Enzymes, 3rd ed.,
Enzymes, Academic Press, San Diego, D., and Bleackley, R. C. (1993) J. Biol. Chem. Vol. 3 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 185–212,
California 268, 17672–17675 Academic Press, New York
191. Fushiki, T., and Iwai, K. (1989) FASEB J.3, 213a.Harris, J. L., Peterson, E. P., Hudig, D., 240. Huber, R., and Bode, W. (1977) in NMR in
121–126 Thornberry, N. A., and Craik, C. S. (1998) J. Biology (Dwek, R. A., Campbell, I. D.,
192. Pignol, D., Granon, S., Chapus, C., and Biol. Chem.273, 27364–27373 Richards, R. E., and Williams, R. J. P., eds),
Carlos, J. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.252, 20–24 214. Fuller, R. S., Brake, A. J., and Thorner, J. (1989) pp. 1–31 , Academic Press, New York
Science246, 482–486 241. Bachovchin, W. W., and Roberts, J. D. (1978)
J. Am. Chem. Soc.100, 8041–8047

--- Page 669 ---

666 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
References
242. Smith, S. O., Farr-Jones, S., Griffin, R. G., and 274. Cruickshank, W. H., and Kaplan, H. (1974) J. 303. Ménard, R., Khouri, H. E., Plouffe, C.,
Bachovchin, W. W. (1989) Science244, 961–964 Mol. Biol.83, 267–274 Laflamme, P., Dupras, R., Vernet, T., Tessier,
243. Kossiakoff, A. A., and Spencer, S. A. (1981) 274a.Ash, E. L., Sudmeier, J. L., Day, R. M., Vincent, D. C., Thomas, D. Y., and Storer, A. C. (1991)
Biochemistry20, 6462–6474 M., Torchilin, E. V., Haddad, K. C., Bradshaw, Biochemistry30, 5531–5538
244. Polgár, L. (1989) Mechanisms of Protease Action, E. M., Sanford, D. G., and Bachovchin, W. W. 304. Katerelos, N. A., and Goodenough, P. W.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (2000)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 10371– (1996)Biochemistry35, 14763–14772
245. Warshel, A., Naray-Szabo, G., Sussman, F., 10376 305. Vernet, T., Tessier, D. C., Chatellier, J., Plouffe,
and Hwang, J.-K. (1989) Biochemistry28, 274b.Kidd, R. D., Sears, P., Huang, D.-H., Witte, K., C., Lee, T. S., Thomas, D. Y., Storer, A. C., and
3630–3637 Wong, C.-H., and Farber, G. K. (1999) Protein Ménard, R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 16645–
246. Robillard, G., and Schulman, R. G. (1972) J. Sci.8, 410–417 16652
Mol. Biol.71, 507–511 275. Meyer, E. F., Jr., Clore, G. M., Gronenborn, A. 306. Ménard, R., Carrière, J., Laflamme, P., Plouffe,
247. Markley, J. L., and Westler, W. M. (1996) M., and Hansen, H. A. S. (1988) Biochemistry C., Khouri, H. E., Vernet, T., Tessier, D. C.,
Biochemistry35, 11092–11097 27, 725–730 Thomas, D. Y., and Storer, A. C. (1991)
248. Ash, E. L., Sudmeier, J. L., De Fabo, E. C., 276. Wells, G. B., Mustafi, D., and Makinen, M. W. Biochemistry30, 8924–8928
and Bachovchin, W. W. (1997) Science278, (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 4577–4586 307. Ménard, R., Laflamme, P., Plouffe, C., Vernet,
1128–1132 277. Ding, X., Rasmussen, B. F., Petsko, G. A., and T., Tessier, D. C., Thomas, D. Y., and Storer, A.
249. Halkides, C. J., Wu, Y. Q., and Murray, C. J. Ringe, D. (1994) Biochemistry33, 9285–9293 C. (1995) Biochemistry34, 464–471
(1996)Biochemistry35, 15941–15948 278. Oppenheimer, H. L., Labouesse, B., and Hess, 308. Doran, J. D., Tonge, P. J., Mort, J. S., and Carey,
250. Zhong, S., Haghjoo, K., Kettner, C., and G. P. (1966) J. Biol. Chem.241, 2720–2730 P. R. (1996) Biochemistry35, 12487–12494
Jordan, F. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 7048– 279. Fersht, A. (1985) Enzyme Structure and 309. Gamcsik, M. P., Malthouse, J. P. G., Primrose,
7055 Mechanism, 2nd ed., Freeman, San Francisco, W. U., Mackenzie, N. E., Boyd, A. S. F.,
251. Bachovchin, W. W., Wong, W. Y. L., Farr-Jones, California Russell, R. A., and Scott, A. I. (1983) J. Am.
S., Shenvi, A. B., and Kettner, C. A. (1988) 280. Perona, J. J., Hedstrom, L., Rutter, W. J., and Chem. Soc.105, 6324–6325
Biochemistry27, 7689–7697 Fletterick, R. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 1489–1499 310. Zheng, Y.-J., and Bruice, T. C. (1997) Proc.
252. Cassidy, C. S., Lin, J., and Frey, P. A. (1997) 281. Graf, L., Craik, C. S., Patthy, A., Roczniak, S., Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 4285–4288
Biochemistry36, 4576–4584 Fletterick, R. J., and Rutter, W. J. (1987) 311. Arad, D., Langridge, R., and Kollman, P. A.
253. Tsilikounas, E., Rao, T., Gutheil, W. G., and Biochemistry26, 2616–2623 (1990)J. Am. Chem. Soc.112, 491–502
Bachovchin, W. W. (1996) Biochemistry35, 282. Schellenberger, V., Turck, C. W., and Rutter, 312. Brocklehurst, K., Watts, A. B., Patel, M.,
2437–2444 W. J. (1994) Biochemistry33, 4251–4257 Verma, C., and Thomas, E. W. (1998) in
254. Tobin, J. B., Whitt, S. A., Cassidy, C. S., and 283. Kurth, T., Ullmann, D., Jakubke, H.-D., and Comprehensive Biological Catalysis. A
Frey, P. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 6919–6924 Hedstrom, L. (1997) Biochemistry36, 10098– Mechanistic Reference, Vol. I (Sinnott, M., ed),
255. Singer, P. T., Smalås, A., Carty, R. P., Mangel, 10104 Academic Press, San Diego, California
W. F., and Sweet, R. M. (1993) Science259, 284. Le Bonniec, B. F., Myles, T., Johnson, T., 313. Bond, J. S., and Butler, P. E. (1987) Ann. Rev.
669–673 Knight, C. G., Tapparelli, C., and Stone, S. R. Biochem.56, 333–364
256. Shieh, H.-S., Kurumbail, R. G., Stevens, A. M., (1996)Biochemistry35, 7114–7122 314. Takahashi, T., Dehdarani, A. H., and Tang, J.
Stegeman, R. A., Sturman, E. J., Pak, J. Y., 285. Wangikar, P. P., Rich, J. O., Clark, D. S., and (1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 10952–10957
Wittwer, A. J., Palmier, M. O., Wiegand, R. C., Dordick, J. S. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12302– 315. Coulombe, R., Grochulski, P., Sivaraman, J.,
Holwerda, B. C., and Stallings, W. C. (1996) 12310 Ménard, R., Mort, J. S., and Cygler, M. (1996)
Nature (London)383, 279–282 286. Perona, J. J., and Craik, C. S. (1995) Protein Sci. EMBO J.15, 5492–5503
257. Tong, L., Quin, C., Massariol, M.-J., Bonneau, 4, 337–360 316. Jia, Z., Hasnain, S., Hirama, T., Lee, X., Mort,
P. R., Cordingley, M. G., and Lagacé, L. (1996) 287. Davis, J. H., and Agard, D. A. (1998) J. S., To, R., and Huber, C. P. (1995) J. Biol.
Nature (London)383, 272–275 Biochemistry37, 7696–7707 Chem.270, 5527–5533
258. Carter, P., and Wells, J. A. (1988) Nature 288. Baumann, W. K., Bizzozero, S. A., and Dutler, 317. Taralp, A., Kaplan, H., Sytwu, I.-I., Vlattas, I.,
(London)332, 564–568 H. (1970) FEBS Letters8, 257–260 Bohacek, R., Knap, A. K., Hirama, T., Huber,
259. Corey, D. R., and Craik, C. S. (1992) J. Am. 289. Baumann, W. K., Bizzozero, S. A., and Dutler, C. P., and Hasnain, S. (1995)
Chem. Soc.114, 1784–1790 H. (1973) Eur. J. Biochem.39, 381–387 J. Biol. Chem.270, 18036–18043
260. Sprang, S., Standing, T., Fletterick, R. J., 290. Stein, R. L., Elrod, J. P., and Schowen, R. L. 318. McGrath, M. E., Palmer, J. T., Brömme, D., and
Stroud, R. M., Finer-Moore, J., Xuong, N.-H., (1983)J. Am. Chem. Soc.105, 2446–2452 Somoza, J. R. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 1294–1302
Hamlin, R., Rutter, W. J., and Craik, C. S. 291. Chang, T. K., Chiang, Y., Guo, H.-X., Kresge, 319. Shi, G.-P., Webb, A. C., Foster, K. E., Knoll, J.
(1987)Science237, 905–909 A. J., Mathew, L., Powell, M. F., and Wells, J. H. M., Lemere, C. A., Munger, J. S., and
261. McGrath, M. E., Vásquez, J. R., Craik, C. S., A. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 8802–8807 Chapman, H. A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269,
Yang, A. S., Honig, B., and Fletterick, R. J. 292. Stein, R. L., and Stimpler, A. M. (1987) J. Am. 11530–11536
(1992)Biochemistry31, 3059–3064 Chem. Soc.109, 4387–4390 320. Gelb, B. D., Shi, G.-P., Chapman, H. A., and
262. Robertus, J. D., Kraut, J., Alden, R. A., and 293. Baker, E. N. (1980) J. Mol. Biol.141, 441–484 Desnick, R. J. (1996) Science273, 1236–1238
Birktoft, J. J. (1972) Biochemistry11, 4293–4303 294. Maes, D., Bouckaert, J., Poortmans, F., Wyns, 321. Ishidoh, K., Muno, D., Sato, N., and Kominami,
263. Whiting, A. K., and Peticolas, W. L. (1994) L., and Looze, Y. (1996) Biochemistry35, E. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 16312–16317
Biochemistry33, 552–561 16292–16298 322. Wolters, P. J., Raymond, W. W., Blount, J. L.,
264. Bryan, P., Pantoliano, M. W., Quill, S. G., 295. O’Hara, B. P., Hemmings, A. M., Buttle, D. J., and Caughey, G. H. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273,
Hsiao, H.-Y., and Poulos, T. (1986) Proc. Natl. and Pearl, L. H. (1995) Biochemistry34, 15514–15520
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 3743–3745 13190–13195 323. Schiller, M. R., Mende-Mueller, L., Moran, K.,
265. Asbóth, B., and Polgár, L. (1983) Biochemistry 296. Berti, P. J., and Storer, A. C. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. Meng, M., Miller, K. W., and Hook, V. Y. H.
22, 117–122 246, 273–283 (1995)Biochemistry34, 7988–7995
266. Ortiz, C., Tellier, C., Williams, H., Stolowich, 297. Drenth, J., Jansonius, J. N., Koekoek, R., and 324. Friedman, T. C., Kline, T. B., and Wilk, S.
N. J., and Scott, A. I. (1991) Biochemistry30, Wolthers, B. G. (1971) Adv. Prot. Chem.25, (1985)Biochemistry24, 3907–3913
10026–10034 79–115 325. Matsui, S.-I., Sandberg, A. A., Negoro, S.,
267. Bullock, T. L., Breddam, K., and Remington, 298. Lewis, S. D., Johnson, F. A., and Shafer, J. A. Seon, B. K., and Goldstein, G. (1982) Proc.
S. J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 714–725 (1981)Biochemistry20, 48–51 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.79, 1535–1539
268. Tonge, P. J., and Carey, P. R. (1989) Biochemis- 299. Roberts, D. D., Lewis, S. D., Ballou, D. P., 326. Joshua-Tor, L., Xu, H. E., Johnston, S. A., and
try28, 6701–6709 Olson, S. T., and Shafer, J. A. (1986) Rees, D. C. (1995) Science269, 945–950
269. Tonge, P. J., and Carey, P. R. (1992) Biochemistry Biochemistry25, 5595–5601 327. Richards, F. M. (1991) Sci. Am.264(Jan), 54–63
31, 9122–9125 300. Johnson, F. A., Lewis, S. D., and Shafer, J. A. 328. Ohno, S., Emori, Y., Imajoh, S., Kawasaki, H.,
270. Birktoft, J. J., Kraut, J., and Freer, S. T. (1976) (1981)Biochemistry20, 44–48 Kisaragi, M., and Suzuki, K. (1984) Nature
Biochemistry15, 4481–4485 301. Keillor, J. W., and Brown, R. S. (1992) J. Am. (London)312, 566–570
271. Brünger, A. T., Huber, R., and Karplus, M. Chem. Soc.114, 7983–7989 329. Saido, T. C., Sorimachi, H., and Suzuki, K.
(1987)Biochemistry26, 5153 –5162 302. Pinitglang, S., Watts, A. B., Patel, M., Reid, J. (1994)FASEB J.8, 814–822
272. Polgár, L., and Halász, R. (1982) Biochem. J. D., Noble, M. A., Gul, S., Bokth, A., Naeem, 330. Chian, H.-L., and Dice, J. F. (1988) J. Biol.
207, 1–10 A., Patel, H., Thomas, E. W., Sreedharan, S. Chem.263, 6797–6805
273. Bizzozero, S. A., and Dutler, H. (1981) Bioorg. K., Verma, C., and Brocklehurst, K. (1997) 331. Tompa, P., Baki, A., Schád,É., and Friedrich,
Chem.10, 46–62 Biochemistry36, 9968–9982 P. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 33161–33164

--- Page 670 ---

667
References
332. Stabach, P. R., Cianci, C. D., Glantz, S. B., 356. Tschantz, W. R., Sung, M., Delgado-Partin, V. 385. Blundell, T. L., Lapatto, R., Wilderspin, A. F.,
Zhang, Z., and Morrow, J. S. (1997) Biochemistry M., and Dalbey, R. E. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, Hemmings, A. M., Hobart, P. M., Danley, D.
36, 57–65 27349–27354 E., and Whittle, P. J. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.
332a.Hosfield, C. M., Elce, J. S., Davies, P. L., and 357. Dalbey, R. E., Lively, M. O., Bron, S., and Van 15, 425–430
Jia, Z. (1999) EMBO J.18, 6880–6889 Dijl, J. M. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 1129–1138 386. Katz, R. A., and Skalka, A. M. (1994) Ann. Rev.
333. Nicholson, D. W., and Thornberry, N. A. 358. Fenteany, G., and Schreiber, S. L. (1998) J. Biol. Biochem.63, 133–173
(1997)Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 299–306 Chem.273, 8545–8548 387. Wlodawer, A., Miller, M., Jaskólski, M.,
334. Villa, P., Kaufmann, S. H., and Earnshaw, W. 359. Bogyo, M., McMaster, J. S., Gaczynska, M., Sathyanarayana, B. K., Baldwin, E., Weber, I.
C. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 388–393 Tortorella, D., Goldberg, A. L., and Ploegh, H. T., Selk, L. M., Clawson, L., Schneider, J., and
335. Munday, N. A., Vaillancourt, J. P., Ali, A., (1997)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 6629–6634 Kent, S. B. H. (1989) Science245, 616–620
Casano, F. J., Miller, D. K., Molineaux, S. M., 360. Schmidtke, G., Kraft, R., Kostka, S., Henklein, 388. Rose, R. B., Craik, C. S., Douglas, N. L., and
Yamin, T.-T., Yu, V. L., and Nicholson, D. W. P., Frömmel, C., Löwe, J., Huber, R., Kloetzel, Stroud, R. M. (1996) Biochemistry35, 12933–12944
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 15870–15876 P. M., and Schmidt, M. (1996) EMBO J.15, 389. Chatfield, D. C., and Brooks, B. R. (1995) J.
336. McGrath, M. E., Eakin, A. E., Engel, J. C., 6887–6898 Am. Chem. Soc.117, 5561–5572
McKerrow, J. H., Craik, C. S., and Fletterick, 361. Heinemeyer, W., Fischer, M., Krimmer, T., 390. Rodriguez, E. J., Angeles, T. S., and Meek, T.
R. J. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.247, 251–259 Stachon, U., and Wolf, D. H. (1997) J. Biol. D. (1993) Biochemistry32, 12380–12385
337. Gillmor, S. A., Craik, C. S., and Fletterick, R. J. Chem.272, 25200–25209 391. Liu, H., Müller-Plathe, F., and van Gunsteren,
(1997)Protein Sci.6, 1603–1611 362. Ditzel, L., Huber, R., Mann, K., Heinemeyer, W. F. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.261, 454–469
338. Porter, W. H., Cunningham, L. W., and Mitchell, W., Wolf, D. H., and Groll, M. (1998) J. Mol. 392. Silva, A. M., Cachau, R. E., Sham, H. L., and
W. M. (1971) J. Biol. Chem.246, 7675–7682 Biol.279, 1187–1191 Erickson, J. W. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 321–346
339. Pavloff, N., Pemberton, P. A., Potempa, J., 363. Andreeva, N. S., Zdanov, A. S., Gustchina, A. 393. Reverter, D., Ventura, S., Villegas, V., Vendrell,
Chen, W.-C. A., Pike, R. N., Prochazka, V., E., and Fedorov, A. A. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, J., and Avilés, F. X. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273,
Kiefer, M. C., Travis, J., and Barr, P. J. (1997) 11353–11365 3535–3541
J. Biol. Chem.272, 1595–1600 364. Fusek, M., and Vetvicka, V., eds. (1995) 394. Varlamov, O., Leiter, E. H., and Fricker, L.
339a.Nelson, D., Potempa, J., Kordula, T., and Travis, Aspartic Proteinases: Physiology and Pathology, (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 13981–13986
J. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 12245–12251 CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 395. Rodríguez, C., Brayton, K. A., Brownstein, M.,
340. Malcolm, B. A. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 1439–1445 365. Moore, S. A., Sielecki, A. R., Chernaia, M. M., and Dixon, J. E. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264,
341. Mosimann, S. C., Cherney, M. M., Sia, S., Tarasova, N. I., and James, M. N. G. (1995) J. 5988–5995
Plotch, S., and James, M. N. G. (1997) J. Mol. Mol. Biol.247, 466–485 396. Tan, F., Chan, S. J., Steiner, D. F., Schilling, J.
Biol.273, 1032–1047 366. Strop, P., Sedlacek, J., Stys, J., Kaderabkova, W., and Skidgel, R. A. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264,
342. Ding, J., McGrath, W. J., Sweet, R. M., and Z., Blaha, I., Pavlickova, L., Pohl, J., Fabry, M., 13165–13170
Mangel, W. F. (1996) EMBO J.15, 1778–1783 Kostka, V., Newman, M., Frazao, C., Shearer, 397. Tan, F., Weerasinghe, D. K., Skidgel, R. A.,
343. Fox, T., de Miguel, E., Mort, J. S., and Storer, A., Tickle, I. J., and Blundell, T. L. (1990) Tamei, H., Kaul, R. K., Roninson, I. B.,
A. C. (1992) Biochemistry31, 12571–12576 Biochemistry29, 9863–9871 Schilling, J. W., and Erdös, E. G. (1990) J. Biol.
344. Podobnik, M., Kuhelj, R., Turk, V., and Turk, 367. Vance, J. E., LeBlanc, D. A., and London, R. E. Chem.265, 13–19
D. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.271, 774–788 (1997)Biochemistry36, 13232–13240 398. Ehlers, M. R. W., and Riordan, J. F. (1989)
345. Seemüller, E., Lupas, A., Stock, D., Löwe, J., 368. Majer, P., Collins, J. R., Gulnik, S. V., and Biochemistry28, 5311–5318
Huber, R., and Baumeister, W. (1995) Science Erickson, J. W. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 1458–1466 399. Dideberg, O., Charlier, P., Dive, G., Joris, B.,
268, 579–582 369. Krieger, T. J., and Hook, V. Y. H. (1992) Frere, J. M., and Ghuysen, J. M. (1982) Nature
346. Paetzel, M., and Dalbey, R. E. (1997) Trends Biochemistry31, 4223–4231 (London)299, 469–470
Biochem. Sci.22, 28–31 370. Fineschi, B., and Miller, J. (1997) Trends 400. Weaver, L. H., Kester, W. R., and Matthews, B.
346a.Kisselev, A. F., Songyang, Z., and Goldberg, Biochem. Sci.22, 377–382 W. (1977) J. Mol. Biol.114, 119–132
A. L. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 14831–14837 371. Wilk, S., Wilk, E., and Magnusson, R. P. (1998) 401. Hausrath, A. C., and Matthews, B. W. (1994) J.
347. Eleuteri, A. M., Kohanski, R. A., Cardozo, C., J. Biol. Chem.273, 15961–15970 Biol. Chem.269, 18839–18842
and Orlowski, M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 372. Tong, L., Pav, S., Lamarre, D., Pilote, L., 402. Holland, D. R., Hausrath, A. C., Juers, D., and
11824–11831 LaPlante, S., Anderson, P. C., and Jung, G. Matthews, B. W. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 1955–1965
348. Kopp, F., Kristensen, P., Hendil, K. B., (1995)J. Mol. Biol.250, 211–222 403. Holden, H. M., Tronrud, D. E., Monzingo, A.
Johnsen, A., Sobek, A., and Dahlmann, B. 373. Yang, J., Teplyakov, A., and Quail, J. W. (1997) F., Weaver, L. H., and Matthews, B. W. (1987)
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.248, 264–272 J. Mol. Biol.268, 449–459 Biochemistry26, 8542–8553
349. Cardozo, C., Michaud, C., and Orlowski, M. 374. Gómez, J., and Freire, E. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 404. Mock, W. L., and Stanford, D. J. (1996)
(1999)Biochemistry38, 9768–9777 252, 337–350 Biochemistry35, 7369–7377
349a.Groll, M., Heinemeyer, W., Jäger, S., Ullrich, 375. Symersky, J., Monod, M., and Foundling, S. I. 405. Marie-Claire, C., Ruffet, E., Antonczak, S.,
T., Bochtler, M., Wolf, D. H., and Huber, R. (1997)Biochemistry36, 12700–12710 Beaumont, A., O’Donohue, M., Roques, B. P.,
(1999)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 10976– 376. Green, D. W., Aykent, S., Gierse, J. K., and and Fournié-Zaluski, M.-C. (1997) Biochemis-
10983 Zupec, M. E. (1990) Biochemistry29, 3126–3133 try36, 13938–13945
349b.Witt, E., Zantopf, D., Schmidt, M., Kraft, R., 377. Baldwin, E. T., Bhat, T. N., Gulnik, S., Hosur, 406. Lipman, M. L., Panda, D., Bennett, H. P. J.,
Kloetzel, P.-M., and Krüger, E. (2000) J. Mol. M. V., Sowder, R. C., Cachau, R. E., Collins, J., Henderson, J. E., Shane, E., Shen, Y.,
Biol.301, 1–9 Silva, A. M., and Erickson, J. W. (1993) Proc. Goltzman, D., and Karaplis, A. C. (1998) J.
349c.Orlowski, M., and Wilk, S. (2000) Arch. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 6796–6800 Biol. Chem.273, 13729–13737
Biochem. Biophys. 383, 1–16 378. Goldblum, A. (1988) Biochemistry27, 1653–1658 407. Ogishima, T., Niidome, T., Shimokata, K.,
350. Tikkanen, R., Riikonen, A., Oinonen, C., 379. Subramanian, E. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, Kitada, S., and Ito, A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
Rouvinen, J., and Peltonen, L. (1996) EMBO J. 1–3 30322–30326
15, 2954–2960 380. Andreeva, N. S., Zdanov, A. S., Gustchina, A. 408. Luciano, P., Tokatlidis, K., Chambre, I.,
351. Xuan, J., Tarentino, A. L., Grimwood, B. G., E., and Fedorev, A. A. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, Germanique, J.-C., and Géli, V. (1998) J. Mol.
Plummer, T. H., Jr., Cui, T., Guan, C., and Van 11353–11365 Biol.280, 193–199
Roey, P. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 774–781 381. James, M. N. G., Sielecki, A. R., Hayakawa, 409. Christianson, D. W., and Lipscomb, W. N. (1986)
352. Liu, Y., Guan, C., and Aronson, N. N., Jr. K., and Gelb, M. H. (1992) Biochemistry31, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 7568–7572
(1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 9688–9694 3872–3886 410. Mock, W. L. (1998) in Comprehensive Biological
353. Guan, C., Liu, Y., Shao, Y., Cui, T., Liao, W., 382. Meek, T. D. (1998) in Comprehensive Biological Catalysis. A Mechanistic Reference, Vol. I
Ewel, A., and Whitaker, R. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. Catalysis. A Mechanistic Reference, Vol. I (Sinnott, M., ed), pp. 425–453, Academic
273, 9695–9702 (Sinnott, M., ed), pp. 327–344, Academic Press, San Diego, California
354. Brannigan, J. A., Dodson, G., Duggleby, H. J., Press, San Diego, California 411. Campbell, P., and Nashed, N. T. (1982) J. Am.
Moody, P. C. E., Smith, J. L., Tomchick, D. R., 383. Blum, M., Cunningham, A., Pang, H., and Chem. Soc.104, 5221–5226
and Murzin, A. G. (1995) Nature (London)378, Hofmann, T. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 9501– 412. Makinen, M. W., Fukuyama, J. M., and Kuo,
416–419 9507 L. C. (1982) J. Am. Chem. Soc.104, 2667–2669
355. Dalbey, R. E., and Wickner, W. (1988) J. Biol. 384. James, M. N. G., and Sielecki, A. R. (1986) 413. Sander, M. E., and Witzel, H. (1985) Biochem.
Chem.263, 404–408 Nature (London)319, 33–38 Biophys. Res. Commun.132, 681–687
414. Kuo, L. C., Fukuyama, J. M., and Makinen, M.
W. (1983) J. Mol. Biol.163, 63–105

--- Page 671 ---

668 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
References
415. Suh, J., Hong, S.-B., and Chung, S. (1986) J. 442. Wilce, M. C. J., Bond, C. S., Dixon, N. E., 465. Ypma-Wong, M. F., Filman, D. J., Hogle, J. M.,
Biol. Chem.261, 7112–7114 Freeman, H. C., Guss, J. M., Lilley, P. E., and and Semler, B. L. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263,
416. Mustafi, D., and Makinen, M. W. (1994) J. Biol. Wilce, J. A. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 17846–17856
Chem.269, 4587–4595 95, 3472–3477 466. López-Otín, C., Simón-Mateo, C., Martínez,
417. Kuo, L. C., and Makinen, M. W. (1985) J. Am. 443. Chan, M. K., Gong, W., Rajagopalan, P. T. R., L., and Vinuela, E. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264,
Chem. Soc.107, 5255–5261 Hao, B., Tsai, C. M., and Pei, D. (1997) 9107–9110
418. Cleland, W. W. (1977) Adv. Enzymol.45, 273–286 Biochemistry36, 13904–13909 466a.Wu, Z., Yao, N., Le, H. V., and Weber, P. C.
419. Kim, H., and Lipscomb, W. N. (1990) 444. Dardel, F., Ragusa, S., Lazennec, C., Blanquet, (1998)Trends Biochem. Sci.23, 92–93
Biochemistry29, 5546–5555 S., and Meinnel, T. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.280, 466b.Barbato, G., Cicero, D. O., Cordier, F., Narjes,
420. Osumi, A., Rahmo, A., King, S. W., Przystas, 501–513 F., Gerlach, B., Sambucini, S., Grzesiek, S.,
T. J., and Fife, T. H. (1994) Biochemistry33, 445. Becker, A., Schlichting, I., Kabsch, W., Schultz, Matassa, V. G., De Francesco, R., and Bazzo,
14750–14757 S., and Wagner, A. F. V. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. R. (2000) EMBO J.19, 1195–1206
421. Mock, W. L., and Zhang, J. Z. (1991) J. Biol. 273, 11413–11416 467. Roseman, J. E., and Levine, R. L. (1987) J. Biol.
Chem.266, 6393–6400 446. Andrews, D. W., and Johnson, A. E. (1996) Chem.262, 2101–2110
422. Zhang, K., and Auld, D. S. (1995) Biochemistry Trends Biochem. Sci.21, 365–369 468. Grune, T., Reinheckel, T., and Davies, K. J. A.
34, 16306–16312 446a.Fabunmi, R. P., Wigley, W. C., Thomas, P. J., (1997)FASEB J.11, 526–534
423. Hilver, D., Gardell, S. J., Rutter, W. J., and and DeMartino, G. N. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 469. Erdös, E. G., and Skidgel, R. A. (1989) FASEB
Kaiser, E. T. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc.108, 409–413 J.3, 145–151
5298–5304 447. Sommer, T., and Wolf, D. H. (1997) FASEB J. 470. Hui, K.-S. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 6613–6618
424. Kam, C.-M., Nishino, N., and Powers, J. C. 11, 1227–1233 471. Zisfein, J. B., Graham, R. M., Dreskin, S. V.,
(1979)Biochemistry18, 3032–3038 448. Ciechanover, A., and Schwartz, A. L. (1998) Wildey, G. M., Fischman, A. J., and Honey, C.
425. Bartlett, P. A., and Marlowe, C. K. (1983) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 2727–2730 J. (1987) Biochemistry26, 8690–8697
Biochemistry22, 4618–4624 449. Rubin, D. M., Glickman, M. H., Larsen, C. N., 471a.Loew, D., Perrault, C., Morales, M., Moog, S.,
426. Holden, H. M., and Matthews, B. W. (1988) J. Dhruvakumar, S., and Finley, D. (1998) EMBO Ravanat, C., Schuhler, S., Arcone, R., Pietropa-
Biol. Chem.263, 3256–3260 J.17, 4909–4919 olo, C., Cazenave, J.-P., van Dorsselaer, A.,
427. Massova, I., Kotra, L. P., Fridman, R., and 450. Lee, Y. S., Park, S. C., Goldberg, A. L., and and Lanza, F. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10812–
Mobashery, S. (1998) FASEB J.12, 1075–1095 Chung, C. H. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 6643– 10822
428. Bond, J. S., and Beynon, R. J. (1995) Protein Sci. 6646 472. Lobe, C. G., Finlay, B. B., Paranchych, W.,
4, 1247–1261 451. Shin, D. H., Lee, C. S., Chung, C. H., and Suh, Paetkau, V. H., and Bleackley, R. C. (1986)
429. Stöcker, W., Grams, F., Baumann, U., S. W. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.262, 71–76 Science232, 858–861
Reinemer, P., Gomis-Rüth, F.-X., McKay, D. B., 452. Chin, D. T., Goff, S. A., Webster, T., Smith, T., 473. Melloni, E., Pontremoki, S., Salamino, F.,
and Bode, W. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 823–840 and Goldberg, A. L. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, Sparatore, B., Michetti, M., Sacco, O., and
429a.Morgunova, E., Tuuttila, A., Bergmann, U., 11718–11728 Horecker, B. L. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261,
Isupov, M., Lindqvist, Y., Schneider, G., and 453. Flanagan, J. M., Wall, J. S., Capel, M. S., 11437–11439
Tryggvason, K. (1999) Science284, 1667–1670 Schneider, D. K., and Shanklin, J. (1995) 474. Pohlner, J., Halter, R., Beyreuther, K., and
429b.Tortorella, M. D., and 27 other authors. (1999) Biochemistry34, 10910–10917 Meyer, T. F. (1987) Nature (London)325, 458–462
Science284, 1664–1666 454. Kessel, M., Maurizi, M. R., Kim, B., Kocsis, E., 475. Newport, G. R., McKerrow, J. H., Hedstrom,
429c.Nagase, H., and Woessner, J. F., Jr. (1999) J. Trus, B. L., Singh, S. K., and Steven, A. C. R., Petitt, M., McGarrigle, L., Barr, D. J., and
Biol. Chem.274, 21491–21494 (1995)J. Mol. Biol.250, 587–594 Agabian, N. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 13179–
430. Becker, J. W., Marcy, A. I., Rokosz, L. L., Axel, 455. Suzuki, C. K., Rep, M., Maarten van Dijl, J., 13184
M. G., Burbaum, J. J., Fitzgerald, P. M. D., Suda, K., Grivell, L. A., and Schatz, G. (1997) 476. Folk, J. E. (1980) Ann. Rev. Biochem.49, 517–531
Cameron, P. M., Esser, C. K., Hagmann, W. K., Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 118–123 477. McGrath, M. E., Gillmor, S. A., and Fletterick,
Hermes, J. D., and Springer, J. P. (1995) Protein 456. Roudiak, S. G., and Shrader, T. E. (1998) R. J. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 141– 148
Sci.4, 1966–1976 Biochemistry37, 11255–11263 478. Salier, J.-P. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 435–
431. Wetmore, D. R., and Hardman, K. D. (1996) 457. Wang, N., Maurizi, M. R., Emmert-Buck, L., 439
Biochemistry35, 6549–6558 and Gottesman, M. M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 479. Laskowski, M., Jr., and Kato, I. (1980) Ann.
432. Arumugam, S., Hemme, C. L., Yoshida, N., 269, 29308–29313 Rev. Biochem.49, 593–626
Suzuki, K., Nagase, H., Berjanskii, M., Wu, B., 458. Savel’ev, A. S., Novikova, L. A., Kovaleva, I. 480. Barrett, A. J. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12,
and Van Doren, S. R. (1998) Biochemistry37, E., Luzikov, V. N., Neupert, W., and Langer, T. 193–196
9650–9657 (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 20596–20602 481. Freije, J. P., Balbín, M., Abrahamson, M.,
433. Gomis-Rüth, F. X., Stöcker, W., Huber, R., 459. Singh, S. K., Guo, F., and Maurizi, M. R. Velasco, G., Dalboge, H., Grubb, A., and
Zwilling, R., and Bode, W. (1993) J. Mol. Biol. (1999)Biochemistry38, 14906–14915 López-Otín, C. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268,
229, 945–968 460. Kihara, A., Akiyama, Y., and Ito, K. (1998) J. 15737–15744
434. Gomis-Rüth, F. X., Kress, L. F., Kellermann, J., Mol. Biol.279, 175–188 482. Martin, J. R., Craven, C. J., Jerala, R., Kroon-
Mayr, I., Lee, X., Huber, R., and Bode, W. 461. Lupas, A., Flanagan, J. M., Tamura, T., and Zitko, L., Zerovnik, E., Turk, V., and Waltho, J.
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.239, 513–544 Baumeister, W. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22, P. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.246, 331–343
435. Llano, E., Pendás, A. M., Knäuper, V., Sorsa, 399–404 483. Brown, W. M., and Dziegielewska, K. M.
T., Salo, T., Salido, E., Murphy, G., Simmer, J. 461a.de Sagarra, M. R., Mayo, I., Marco, S., (1997)Protein Sci.6, 5–12
P., Bartlett, J. D., and López-Otín, C. (1997) Rodríguez-Vilarino, S., Oliva, J., Carrascosa, J. 484. Williamson, R. A., Carr, M. D., Frenkiel, T. A.,
Biochemistry36, 15101–15108 L., and Castano, J. G. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.292, Feeney, J., and Freedman, R. B. (1997)
436. Gomis-Rüth, F. X., Gohlke, U., Betz, M., 819–825 Biochemistry36, 13882–13889
Knäuper, V., Murphy, G., López-Otín, C., and 461b.Kim, K. I., Cheong, G.-W., Park, S.-C., Ha, J.- 485. Apte, S. S., Olsen, B. R., and Murphy, G.
Bode, W. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.264, 556–566 S., Woo, K. M., Choi, S. J., and Chung, C. H. (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 14313–14318
437. Taylor, A. (1993) FASEB J.7, 290–298 (2000)J. Mol. Biol.303, 655-666 486. Baumann, U., Bauer, M., Létoffé, S.,
438. Sträter, N., and Lipscomb, W. N. (1995) 462. Rohrwild, M., Coux, O., Huang, H.-C., Delepelaire, P., and Wandersman, C. (1995)
Biochemistry34, 14792–14800 Moerschell, R. P., Yoo, S. J., Seol, J. H., Chung, J. Mol. Biol.248, 653–661
438a.Sträter, N., Sun, L., Kantrowitz, E. R., and C. H., and Goldberg, A. L. (1996) Proc. Natl. 487. Martzen, M. R., McMullen, B. A., Smith, N. E.,
Lipscomb, W. N. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 5808–5813 Fujikawa, K., and Peanasky, R. J. (1990)
U.S.A.96, 11151–11155 463. Missiakas, D., Schwager, F., Betton, J.-M., Biochemistry29, 7366–7372
439. Chen, G., Edwards, T., D’souza, V. M., and Georgopoulos, C., and Raina, S. (1996) EMBO 488. Huang, K., Lu, W., Anderson, S., Laskowski,
Holz, R. C. (1997) Biochemistry36, 4278–4286 J.15, 6899–6909 M., Jr., and James, M. N. G. (1995) Protein Sci.
440. Lowther, W. T., Orville, A. M., Madden, D. T., 463a.Bochtler, M., Hartmann, C., Song, H. K., 4, 1985–1997
Lim, S., Rich, D. H., and Matthews, B. W. Bourenkov, G. P., Bartunik, H. D., and Huber, 489. Lu, W., Qasim, M. A., and Kent, S. B. H. (1996)
(1999)Biochemistry38, 7678–7688 R. (2000) Nature (London)403, 800–805 J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 8518–8523
441. Bradshaw, R. A., Brickey, W. W., and Walker, 463b.Shotland, Y., Teff, D., Koby, S., Kobiler, O., 490. Huber, R., Kukla, D., Bode, W., Schwager, P.,
K. W. (1998) Trends Biochem. Sci.23, 263–267 and Oppenheim, A. B. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.299, Bartels, K., Diesenhofer, J., and Steigemann,
953–964 W. (1974) J. Mol. Biol.89, 73–101
464. Kräusslich, H.-G., and Wimmer, E. (1988)
Ann. Rev. Biochem.57, 701–754

--- Page 672 ---

669
References
491. Mer, G., Hietter, H., Kellenberger, C., Renatus, 520. Harlos, K., Martin, D. M. A., O’Brien, D. P., 543. Everse, S. J., Spraggon, G., Veerapandian, L.,
M., Luu, B., and Lefèvre, J.-F. (1996) J. Mol. Jones, E. Y., Stuart, D. I., Polikarpov, I., Miller, Riley, M., and Doolittle, R. F. (1998)
Biol.258, 158–171 A., Tuddenham, E. G. D., and Boys, C. W. G. Biochemistry37, 8637–8642
492. Conconi, A., and Ryan, C. A. (1993) J. Biol. (1994)Nature (London)370, 662–666 544. Spraggon, G., Everse, S. J., and Doolittle, R. F.
Chem.268, 430–435 521. Martin, D. M. A., Boys, C. W. G., and Ruf, W. (1997)Nature (London)389, 455–462
493. Werner, M. H., and Wemmer, D. E. (1991) (1995)FASEB J.9, 852–859 545. Murthy, S. N. P., Wilson, J. H., Lukas, T. J.,
Biochemistry30, 3356–3364 522. Ruf, W., Kelly, C. R., Schullek, J. R., Martin, D. Veklich, Y., Weisel, J. W., and Lorand, L. (2000)
494. McBride, J. D., Brauer, A. B. E., Nievo, M., and M. A., Polikarpov, I., Boys, C. W. G., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 44–48
Leatherbarrow, R. J. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.282, Tuddenham, E. G. D., and Edgington, T. S. 546. Pedersen, L. C., Yee, V. C., Bishop, P. D., Le
447–457 (1995)Biochemistry34, 6310–6315 Trong, I., Teller, D. C., and Stenkamp, R. E.
495. Song, H. K., and Suh, S. W. (1998) J. Mol. Biol. 523. Muller, Y. A., Ultsch, M. H., and de Vos, A. M. (1994)Protein Sci.3, 1131–1135
275, 347–363 (1996)J. Mol. Biol.256, 144–159 547. Bernardo, M. M., Day, D. E., Olson, S. T., and
496. Brandt, P., and Woodward, C. (1987) 524. Doolittle, R. F. (1981) Sci. Am.245(Dec), 126– Shore, J. D. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 12468–
Biochemistry26, 3156–3162 135 12476
497. Huber, R., and Bode, W. (1978) Acc. Chem. Res. 525. Fu, Y., Weissbach, L., Plant, P. W., Oddoux, C., 548. Beaubien, G., Rosinski-Chupin, I., Mattei, M.
11, 114–122 Cao, Y., Liang, T. J., Roy, S. N., Redman, C. M., G., Mbikay, M., Chrétien, M., and Seidah, N.
498. Potempa, J., Korzus, E., and Travis, J. (1994) J. and Grieninger, G. (1992) Biochemistry31, G. (1991) Biochemistry30, 1628–1635
Biol. Chem.269, 15957–15960 11968–11972 549. Herwald, H., Renné, T., Meijers, J. C. M.,
499. Whisstock, J., Skinner, R., and Lesk, A. M. 526. Hunziker, E. B., Straub, P. W., and Haeberli, Chung, D. W., Page, J. D., Colman, R. W., and
(1998)Trends Biochem. Sci.23, 63–67 A. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 7455–7463 Müller-Esterl, W. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
500. Lukacs, C. M., Rubin, H., and Christianson, 527. Banner, D. W., D’Arcy, A., Chène, C., Winkler, 13061–13067
D. W. (1998) Biochemistry37, 3297–3304 F. K., Guha, A., Konigsberg, W. H., Nemerson, 550. Baglia, F. A., Jameson, B. A., and Walsh, P. N.
500a.Whisstock, J. C., Skinner, R., Carrell, R. W., and Y., and Kirchhofer, D. (1996) Nature (London) (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 3838–3844
Lesk, A. M. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.296, 685–699 380, 41–46 551. Hamaguchi, N., Charifson, P. S., Pedersen, L.
501. Lawrence, D. A., Ginsburg, D., Day, D. E., 527a.Banner, D. W. (2000) Nature (London)404, G., Brayer, G. D., Smith, K. J., and Stafford, D.
Berkenpas, M. B., Verhamme, I. M., Kvassman, 449–450 W. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 15213–15220
J.-O., and Shore, J. D. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 527b.Chang, Y.-J., Hamaguchi, N., Chang, S.-C., 552. Kurachi, S., Hitomi, Y., Furukawa, M., and
25309–25312 Ruf, W., Shen, M.-C., and Lin, S.-W. (1999) Kurachi, K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 5276–5281
502. Kaslik, G., Kardos, J., Szabó, E., Szilágyi, L., Biochemistry38, 10940–10948 552a.Kurachi, S., Deyashiki, Y., Takeshita, J., and
Závodszky, P., Westler, W. M., Markley, J. L., 528. Muranyi, A., Finn, B. E., Gippert, G. P., Kurachi, K. (1999) Science285, 739–743
and Gráf, L. (1997) Biochemistry36, 5455–5464 Forsén, S., Stenflo, J., and Drakenberg, T. 553. Freedman, S. J., Furie, B. C., Furie, B., and
503. Bode, W., Wei, A.-Z., Huber, R., Meyer, E., (1998)Biochemistry37, 10605–10615 Baleja, J. D. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12126–12137
Travis, J., and Neumann, S. (1986) EMBO J.5, 529. Andrews, B. S. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 554. Freedman, S. J., Blostein, M. D., Baleja, J. D.,
2453–2458 31–36 Jacobs, M., Furie, B. C., and Furie, B. (1996) J.
504. Boswell, D. R., and Carrell, R. (1986) Trends 530. Neuenschwander, P. F., and Morrissey, J. H. Biol. Chem.271, 16227–16236
Biochem. Sci.11, 102–103 (1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 14477–14482 555. Lenting, P. J., Christophe, O. D., ter Maat, H.,
505. Curiel, D. T., Holmes, M. D., Okayama, H., 531. Altieri, D. C. (1995) FASEB J.9, 860–865 Rees, D. J. G., and Mertens, K. (1996) J. Biol.
Brantly, M. L., Vogelmeier, C., Travis, W. D., 532. Brandstetter, H., Kühne, A., Bode, W., Huber, Chem.271, 25332–25337
Stier, L. E., Perks, W. H., and Crystal, R. G. R., von der Saal, W., Wirthensohn, K., and Engh, 556. Tagliavacca, L., Moon, N., Dunham, W. R.,
(1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 13938–13945 R. A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 29988–29992 and Kaufman, R. J. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
506. Lomas, D. A., Finch, J. T., Seyama, K., 533. Sabharwal, A. K., Padmanabhan, K., Tulinsky, 27428–27434
Nukiwa, T., and Carrell, R. W. (1993) J. Biol. A., Mathur, A., Gorka, J., and Bajaj, S. P. (1997) 557. Pittman, D. D., Wang, J. H., and Kaufman, R.
Chem.268, 15333–15335 J. Biol. Chem.272, 22037–22045 J. (1992) Biochemistry31, 3315–3325
507. Carrell, R. W., Jeppsson, J.-O., Laurell, C.-B., 534. Dharmawardana, K. R., and Bock, P. E. (1998) 558. Gilbert, G. E., and Baleja, J. D. (1995)
Brennan, S. O., Owen, M. C., Vaughan, L., and Biochemistry37, 13143–13152 Biochemistry34, 3022–3031
Boswell, D. R. (1982) Nature (London)298, 534a.Macedo-Ribeiro, S., Bode, W., Huber, R., 559. Gilbert, G. E., and Drinkwater, D. (1993)
329–334 Quinn-Allen, M. A., Kim, S. W., Ortel, T. L., Biochemistry32, 9577–9585
508. Carp, H., Miller, F., Hoidal, J. R., and Janoff, Bourenkov, G. P., Bartunik, H. D., Stubbs, M. 560. Leyte, A., van Schijndel, H. B., Niehrs, C.,
A. (1982) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.79, 2041– T., Kane, W. H., and Fuentes-Prior, P. (1999) Huttner, W. B., Verbeet, M. P., Mertens, K.,
2045 Nature (London)402, 434–439 and van Mourik, J. A. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266,
509. Radinsky, L. (1983) Science221, 1187–1191 535. Xue, J., Kalafatis, M., Silveira, J. R., Kung, C., 740–746
510. Culliton, B. J. (1989) Science246, 750–751 and Mann, K. G. (1994) Biochemistry33, 561. Gitschier, J., Wood, W. I., Shuman, M. A., and
511. Matheson, N. R., Gibson, H. E., Hallewell, R. 13109–13116 Lawn, R. M. (1986) Science232, 1415 – 1416
A., Barr, P. J., and Travis, J. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. 536. Comfurius, P., Smeets, E. F., Willems, G. M., 562. Titani, K., and Walsh, K. A. (1988) Trends
261, 10404–10409 Bevers, E. M., and Zwaal, R. F. A. (1994) Biochem. Sci.13, 94–97
512. Rosenfeld, M. A., Siegfried, W., Yoshimura, Biochemistry33, 10319–10324 563. Sadler, J. E. (1998) Ann. Rev. Biochem.67, 395–
K., Yoneyama, K., Fukayama, M., Stier, L. E., 537. Betz, A., and Krishnaswamy, S. (1998) J. Biol. 424
Pääkkö, P. K., Gilardi, P., Stratford- Chem.273, 10709–10718 564. Ruggeri, Z. M., and Ware, J. (1993) FASEB J.7,
Perricaudet, L. D., Perricaudet, M., Jallat, S., 538. Bottenus, R. E., Ichinose, A., and Davie, E. W. 308–316
Pavirani, A., Lecocq, J.-P., and Crystal, R. G. (1990)Biochemistry29, 11195–11209 565. Huizinga, E. G., van der Plas, R. M., Kroon, J.,
(1991)Science252, 431–434 539. Slon-Usakiewicz, J. J., Purisima, E., Tsuda, Y., Sixma, J. J., and Gros, P. (1997) Structure5,
513. Owen, M. C., Brennan, S. O., Lewis, J. H., and Sulea, T., Pedyczak, A., Féthière, J., Cygler, 1147–1156
Carrell, R. W. (1983) N. Engl. J. Med.309, 694– M., and Konishi, Y. (1997) Biochemistry36, 566. Emsley, J., Cruz, M., Handin, R., and
698 13494–13502 Liddington, R. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273,
514. Davie, E. W., Fujikawa, K., and Kisiel, W. 540. Hughes, P. E., Morgan, G., Rooney, E. K., 10396–10401
(1991)Biochemistry30, 10364–10370 Brownlee, G. G., and Handford, P. (1993) J. 567. Sugimoto, M., Dent, J., McClintock, R., Ware,
515. Smith, E. L., Hill, R. L., Lehman, I. R., Biol. Chem.268, 17727–17733 J., and Ruggeri, Z. M. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268,
Lefkowitz, R. J., Handler, P., and White, A. 540a.Mathur, A., and Bajaj, S. P. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 12185–12192
(1983) in Principles of Biochemistry, Mammalian 274, 18477– 18486 568. George, J. N., Nurden, A. T., and Phillips, D.
Biochemistry, 7th ed., pp. 17–37, McGraw-Hill, 540b.Tolkatchev, D., Ng, A., Zhu, B., and Ni, F. R. (1984) N. Engl. J. Med.311, 1084–1098
New York (2000)Biochemistry39, 10365–10372 569. Cruz, M. A., Yuan, H., Lee, J. R., Wise, R. J.,
516. Mann, K. G., Jenny, R. J., and Krishnaswamy, 541. Xu, W.-f, Chung, D. W., and Davie, E. W. and Handin, R. I. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
S. (1988) Ann. Rev. Biochem.57, 915–956 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 27948–27953 10822–10827
517. Zucker, M. B. (1980) Sci. Am.242(Jun), 86–103 541a.Brown, J. H., Volkmann, N., Jun, G., Hen- 570. Beacham, D. A., Wise, R. J., Turci, S. M., and
518. Gibbs, C. S., McCurdy, S. N., Leung, L. L. K., schen-Edman, A. H., and Cohen, C. (2000) Handin, R. I. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 3409–
and Paborsky, L. R. (1994) Biochemistry33, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 85–90 3415
14003–14010 542. Doolittle, R. F., Everse, S. J., and Spraggon, G. 571. Zhang, Z. P., Blombäck, M., Nyman, D., and
519. Muller, Y. A., Ultsch, M. H., Kelley, R. F., and de (1996)FASEB J.10, 1464–1470 Anvret, M. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
Vos, A. M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 10864–10870 90, 7937–7940

--- Page 673 ---

670 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
References
572. Kaufman, R. J. (1989) Nature (London)342, 596. Vitali, J., Martin, P. D., Malkowski, M. G., 623. Egloff, M.-P., Marguet, F., Buono, G., Verger,
207–208 Robertson, W. D., Lazar, J. B., Winant, R. C., R., Cambillau, C., and van Tilbeurgh, H.
573. Dwarki, V. J., Belloni, P., Nijjar, T., Smith, J., Johnson, P. H., and Edwards, B. F. P. (1992) J. (1995)Biochemistry34, 2751–2762
Couto, L., Rabier, M., Clift, S., Berns, A., and Biol. Chem.267, 17670–17678 624. Dahim, M., and Brockman, H. (1998)
Cohen, L. K. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 597. van de Locht, A., Lamba, D., Bauer, M., Huber, Biochemistry37, 8369–8377
U.S.A.92, 1023–1027 R., Friedrich, T., Kröger, B., Höffken, W., and 625. Jentoft, N. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 291–294
574. Kay, M. A., Rothenberg, S., Landen, C. N., Bode, W. (1995) EMBO J.14, 5149–5157 626. Chen, J. C.-H., Miercke, L. J. W., Krucinski, J.,
Bellinger, D. A., Leland, F., Toman, C., 598. Stark, K. R., and James, A. A. (1998) J. Biol. Starr, J. R., Saenz, G., Wang, X., Spilburg, C.
Finegold, M., Thompson, A. R., Read, M. S., Chem.273, 20802–20809 A., Lange, L. G., Ellsworth, J. L., and Stroud,
Brinkhous, K. M., and Woo, S. L. C. (1993) 599. Lim-Wilby, M. S. L., Hallenga, K., De Maeyer, R. M. (1998) Biochemistry37, 5107–5117
Science262, 117–119 M., Lasters, I., Vlasuk, G. P., and Brunck, T. K. 627. Gargouri, Y., Moreau, H., Pieroni, G., and
575. Jesty, J., Wun, T.-C., and Lorenz, A. (1994) (1995)Protein Sci.4, 178–186 Verger, R. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 2159–2162
Biochemistry33, 12686–12694 600. van de Locht, A., Stubbs, M. T., Bode, W., 628. Warner, T. G., Dambach, L. M., Shin, J. H., and
576. Hajjar, K. A. (1994) N. Engl. J. Med.331, 1585– Friedrich, T., Bollschweiler, C., Höffken, W., O’Brien, J. S. (1981) J. Biol. Chem.256, 2952–2957
1587 and Huber, R. (1996) EMBO J.15, 6011–6017 629. Emmerich, J., Beg, O. U., Peterson, J.,
577. Björk, I., Nordling, K., and Olson, S. T. (1993) 601. Tabernero, L., Chang, C. Y. Y., Ohringer, S. L., Previato, L., Brunzell, J. D., Brewer, J., HB,
Biochemistry32, 6501–6505 Lau, W. F., Iwanowicz, E. J., Han, W.-C., and Santamarina-Fojo, S. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.
578. Streusand, V. J., Björk, I., Gettins, P. G. W., Wang, T. C., Seiler, S. M., Roberts, D. G. M., 267, 4161–4165
Petitou, M., and Olson, S. T. (1995) J. Biol. and Sack, J. S. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.246, 14–20 630. Kobayashi, J., Applebaum-Bowden, D., Dugi,
Chem.270, 9043–9051 602. Cheng, Y., Slon-Usakiewicz, J. J., Wang, J., K. A., Brown, D. R., Kashyap, V. S., Parrott, C.,
578a.Whisstock, J. C., Pike, R. N., Jin, L., Skinner, Purisima, E. O., and Konishi, Y. (1996) Duarte, C., Maeda, N., and Santamarina-Fojo,
R., Pei, X. Y., Carrell, R. W., and Lesk, A. M. Biochemistry35, 13021–13029 S. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 26296–26301
(2000)J. Mol. Biol.301, 1287–1305 603. Krishnan, R., Tulinsky, A., Vlasuk, G. P., 631. Shen, W.-J., Patel, S., Natu, V., and Kraemer, F.
579. Di Cera, E., Guinto, E. R., Vindigni, A., Dang, Pearson, D., Vallar, P., Bergum, P., Brunck, T. K., B. (1998) Biochemistry37, 8973–8979
Q. D., Ayala, Y. M., Wuyi, M., and Tulinsky, A. and Ripka, W. C. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 422–433 632. Nicolas, A., Egmond, M., Verrips, C. T., de
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 22089–22092 604. Kamata, K., Kawamoto, H., Honma, T., Vlieg, J., Longhi, S., Cambillau, C., and
580. Weisel, J. W., Nagaswami, C., Young, T. A., Iwama, T., and Kim, S.-H. (1998) Proc. Natl. Martinez, C. (1996) Biochemistry35, 398–410
and Light, D. R. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 6630–6635 633. Grochulski, P., Bouthillier, F., Kazlauskas, R.
31485–31490 605. Lu, D., Bovill, E. G., and Long, G. L. (1994) J. J., Serreqi, A. N., Schrag, J. D., Ziomek, E., and
580a.Fuentes-Prior, P., Iwanaga, Y., Huber, R., Biol. Chem.269, 29032–29038 Cygler, M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 3494–3500
Pagila, R., Rumennik, G., Seto, M., Morser, J., 606. Ichinose, A. (1992) Biochemistry31, 3113–3118 634. Lang, D., Hofmann, B., Haalck, L., Hecht, H.-
Light, D. R., and Bode, W. (2000) Nature 607. Olds, R. J., Lane, D. A., Chowdhury, V., De J., Spener, F., Schmid, R. D., and Schomburg,
(London)404, 518–525 Stefano, V., Leone, G., and Thein, S. L. (1993) D. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, 704–717
580b.Baerga-Ortiz, A., Rezaie, A. R., and Komives, Biochemistry32, 4216–4224 635. Uppenberg, J., Öhrner, N., Norin, M., Hult,
E. A. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.296, 651–658 608. Watton, J., Longstaff, C., Lane, D. A., and K., Kleywegt, G. J., Patkar, S., Waagen, V.,
581. Esmon, C. T. (1995) FASEB J.9, 946 – 955 Barrowcliffe, T. W. (1993) Biochemistry32, Anthonsen, T., and Jones, T. A. (1995)
582. Colpitts, T. L., Prorok, M., and Castellino, F. J. 7286–7293 Biochemistry34, 16838–16851
(1995)Biochemistry34, 2424–2430 609. Taylor, P. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 4025–4028 636. Brocca, S., Schmidt-Dannert, C., Lotti, M.,
582a.Shen, L., Dahlbäck, B., and Villoutreix, B. O. 610. Sussman, J. L., Harel, M., Frolow, F., Oefner, Alberghina, L., and Schmid, R. D. (1998)
(2000)Biochemistry39, 2853–2860 C., Goldman, A., Toker, L., and Silman, I. Protein Sci.7, 1415–1422
583. Öhlin, A., Landes, G., Bourden, P., (1991)Science253, 872–879 637. Ordentlich, A., Barak, D., Kronman, C., Ariel,
Oppenheimer, C., Wydro, R., and Stenflo, J. 611. Maelicke, A. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, N., Segall, Y., Velan, B., and Shafferman, A.
(1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 19240–19248 355–356 (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 19509–19517
584. Plow, E. F., Herren, T., Redlitz, A., Miles, L. A., 611a.Koellner, G., Kryger, G., Millard, C. B., 638. Axelsen, P. H., Harel, M., Silman, I., and
and Hoover-Plow, J. L. (1995) FASEB J.9, 939– Silman, I., Sussman, J. L., and Steiner, T. Sussman, J. L. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 188–197
945 (2000)J. Mol. Biol.296, 713–735 639. Brady, L., Brzozowski, A. M., Derewenda, Z.
585. Menhart, N., Hoover, G. J., McCance, S. G., 612. Vellom, D. C., Radic’, Z., Li, Y., Pickering, N. S., Dodson, E., Dodson, G., Tolley, S.,
and Castellino, F. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, A., Camp, S., and Taylor, P. (1993) Biochemistry Turkenburg, J. P., Christiansen, L., Huge-
1482–1488 32, 12–17 Jensen, B., Norskov, L., Thim, L., and Menge,
586. Bendixen, E., Harpel, P. C., and Sottrup-Jensen, 613. Kovach, I. M., Huber, J. H.-A., and Schowen, U. (1990) Nature (London)343, 767–770
L. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 17929–17933 R. L. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.110, 590–593 640. Dennis, E. A. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 1–2
587. Pirie-Shepherd, S. R., Jett, E. A., Andon, N. L., 614. Radic, Z., Kirchhoff, P. D., Quinn, D. M., 641. Balsinde, J., and Dennis, E. A. (1997) J. Biol.
and Pizzo, S. V. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 5877– McCammon, J. A., and Taylor, P. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 16069–16072
5881 Chem.272, 23265–23277 642. Leslie, C. C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 16709–
588. Marti, D. N., Hu, C.-K., An, S. S. A., von 615. Wlodek, S. T., Antosiewicz, J., and Briggs, J. 16712
Haller, P., Schaller, J., and Llinás, M. (1997) M. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 8159–8165 643. Scott, D. L., White, S. P., Otwinowski, Z.,
Biochemistry36, 11591–11604 616. Haas, R., Marshall, T. L., and Rosenberry, T. L. Yuan, W., Gelb, M. H., and Sigler, P. B. (1990)
589. Bogusky, M. J., Dobson, C. M., and Smith, R. (1988)Biochemistry27, 6453–6457 Science250, 1541–1546
A. G. (1989) Biochemistry28, 6728–6735 617. Krejci, E., Thomine, S., Boschetti, N., Legay, 644. Brunie, S., Bolin, J., Gewirth, D., and Sigler, P.
590. Byeon, I.-J. L., Kelley, R. F., Mulkerrin, M. G., C., Sketelj, J., and Massoulié, J. (1997) J. Biol. B. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 9742–9749
An, S. S. A., and Llinás, M. (1995) Biochemistry Chem.272, 22840–22847 645. Scott, D. L., Achari, A., Vidal, J. C., and Sigler,
34, 2739–2750 618. Pindel, E. V., Kedishvili, N. Y., Abraham, T. L., P. B. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 22645–22657
591. Parry, M. A. A., Zhang, X. C., and Bode, W. Brzezinski, M. R., Zhang, J., Dean, R. A., and 646. van den Berg, B., Tessari, M., de Haas, G. H.,
(2000)Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 53–59 Bosron, W. F. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 14769– Verheij, H. M., Boelens, R., and Kaptein, R.
592. Oates, J. A., Wood, A. J. J., Loscalzo, J., and 14775 (1995)EMBO J.14, 4123–4131
Braunwald, E. (1988) N. Engl. J. Med.319, 619. Li, J., Szittner, R., Derewenda, Z. S., and 647. Gelb, M. H., Jain, M. K., Hanel, A. M., and
925–931 Meighen, E. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 9967– Berg, O. G. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, 653–
593. Mottonen, J., Strand, A., Symersky, J., Sweet, 9973 688
R. M., Danley, D. E., Geoghegan, K. F., 620. Derewenda, Z. S., and Sharp, A. M. (1993) 648. Thuren, T., Tulkki, A.-P., Virtanen, J. A., and
Gerard, R. D., and Goldsmith, E. J. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 20–25 Kinnunen, P. K. J. (1987) Biochemistry26,
Nature (London)355, 270–273 621. Quinn, D. M., and Feaster, S. R. (1998) in 4907–4910
594. Szyperski, T., Antuch, W., Schick, M., Betz, A., Comprehensive Biological Catalysis. A 649. Huber, M., Yee, V. C., Burri, N., Vikerfors, E.,
Stone, S. R., and Wüthrich, K. (1994) Mechanistic Reference, Vol. I (Sinnott, M., ed), Lavrijsen, A. P. M., Paller, A. S., and Hohl, D.
Biochemistry33, 9303–9310 pp. 455–482, Academic Press, San Diego, (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 21018–21026
595. Betz, A., Hofsteenge, J., and Stone, S. R. (1992) California 650. Yee, V. C., Pedersen, L. C., Le Trong, I.,
Biochemistry31, 4557–4562 622. Bourne, Y., Martinez, C., Kerfelec, B., Bishop, P. D., Stenkamp, R. E., and Teller, D.
Lombardo, D., Chapus, C., and Cambillau, C. C. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91,
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.238, 709–732 7296–7300

--- Page 674 ---

671
References
651. Kulkarni, M. S., and Sherman, F. (1994) J. Biol. 685. Nageswara Rao, B. D., Kayne, F. J., and Cohn, 718. Buchwald, S. L., Saini, M. S., Knowles, J. R.,
Chem.269, 13141–13147 M. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 2689–2696 and Van Etten, R. L. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259,
652. Wu, D., and Hersh, L. B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 686. Stackhouse, J., Nambiar, K. P., Burbaum, J. J., 2208–2213
270, 29111–29116 Stauffer, D. M., and Benner, S. A. (1985) J. Am. 719. Ma, L., and Kantrowitz, E. R. (1996)
653. Schwartz, B., and Drueckhammer, D. G. Chem. Soc.107, 2757–2763 Biochemistry35, 2394–2402
(1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 9826–9830 687. Rao, B. D. N., and Cohn, M. (1981) J. Biol. 720. Sugiura, Y., Kawabe, H., Tanaka, H.,
654. Ellis, J., Bagshaw, C. R., and Shaw, W. V. Chem.256, 1716–1721 Fujimoto, S., and Ohara, A. (1981) J. Biol.
(1995)Biochemistry34, 16852–16859 688. Gadian, D. G., Radda, G. K., Brown, T. R., Chem.256, 10664–10670
655. Murray, I. A., Cann, P. A., Day, P. J., Derrick, J. Chance, E. M., Dawson, M. J., and Wilke, D. 721. Hong, S.-B., Kuo, J. M., Mullins, L. S., and
P., Sutcliffe, M. J., Shaw, W. V., and Leslie, A. R. (1981) Biochem. J.194, 215–228 Raushel, F. M. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117,
G. W. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.254, 993–1005 689. Mendz, G. L., Robinson, G., and Kuchel, P. W. 7580–7581
656. Guillaume, G., Vanhove, M., Lamotte- (1986)J. Am. Chem. Soc.108, 169–173 722. Benning, M. M., Kuo, J. M., Raushel, F. M.,
Brasseur, J., Ledent, P., Jamin, M., Joris, B., 690. Midelfort, C. F., and Rose, I. A. (1976) J. Biol. and Holden, H. M. (1995) Biochemistry34,
and Frère, J.-M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, Chem.251, 5881–5887 7973–7978
5438–5444 691. Lowe, G., and Tuck, S. P. (1986) J. Am. Chem. 723. Vanhooke, J. L., Benning, M. M., Raushel, F.
657. Maveyraud, L., Pratt, R. F., and Samama, J.-P. Soc.108, 1300–1301 M., and Holden, H. M. (1996) Biochemistry35,
(1998)Biochemistry37, 2622–2628 692. Abbott, S. J., Jones, S. R., Weinman, S. A., 6020–6025
658. Crowder, M. W., Wang, Z., Franklin, S. L., Bockhoff, F. M., McLafferty, F. W., and 723a.Benning, M. M., Hong, S.-B., Raushel, F. M.,
Zovinka, E. P., and Benkovic, S. J. (1996) Knowles, J. R. (1979) J. Am. Chem. Soc.101, and Holden, H. M. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275,
Biochemistry35, 12126–12132 4323–4332 30556–30560
659. Orellano, E. G., Girardini, J. E., Cricco, J. A., 693. Pliura, D. H., Schomburg, D., Richard, J. P., 724. Kuo, J. M., Chae, M. Y., and Raushel, F. M.
Ceccarelli, E. A., and Vila, A. J. (1998) Frey, P. A., and Knowles, J. R. (1980) (1997)Biochemistry36, 1982–1988
Biochemistry37, 10173–10180 Biochemistry19, 325–329 724a.Shim, H., and Raushel, F. M. (2000)
660. Lubkowski, J., Wlodawer, A., Ammon, H. L., 694. Sammons, R. D., and Frey, P. A. (1982) J. Biol. Biochemistry39, 7357–7364
Copeland, T. D., and Swain, A. L. (1994) Chem.257, 1138–1141 725. Williams, N. H. (1998) in Comprehensive
Biochemistry33, 10257–10265 695. Eckstein, F. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 157– Biological Catalysis. A Mechanistic Reference,
661. Stewart, A. E., Arfin, S. M., and Bradshaw, R. 159 Vol. I (Sinnott, M., ed), pp. 543–561,
A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 25–28 696. Baraniak, J., and Frey, P. A. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Academic Press, San Diego, California
662. Nakamura, N., Inoue, N., Watanabe, R., Soc.110, 4059–4060 726. Villeret, V., Huang, S., Zhang, Y., and
Takahashi, M., Takeda, J., Stevens, V. L., and 697. Richard, J. P., and Frey, P. A. (1982) J. Am. Lipscomb, W. N. (1995) Biochemistry34,
Kinoshita, T. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 15834 – Chem. Soc.104, 3476–3481 4307–4315
15840 698. Hassett, A., Blättler, W., and Knowles, J. R. 727. Kurbanov, F. T., Choe, J.-y, Honzatko, R. B.,
663. Knowles, J. R. (1980) Ann. Rev. Biochem.49, (1982)Biochemistry21, 6335–6340 and Fromm, H. J. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273,
877–919 699. Mehdi, S., and Gerlt, J. A. (1984) Biochemistry 17511–17516
664. Westheimer, F. H. (1968) Acc. Chem. Res.1, 23, 4844–4852 728. Choe, J.-Y., Fromm, H. J., and Honzatko, R. B.
70–78 700. Sammons, R. D., Frey, P. A., Bruzik, K., and (2000)Biochemistry39, 8565–8574
665. Westheimer, F. H. (1987) Science235, 1173–1178 Tsai, M.-D. (1983) J. Am. Chem. Soc.105, 5455– 728a.Lee, Y.-H., Ogata, C., Pflugrath, J. W., Levitt,
666. Hengge, A. C. (1998) in Comprehensive 5461 D. G., Sarma, R., Banaszak, L. J., and Pilkis, S.
Biological Catalysis. A Mechanistic Reference, 701. Buchwald, S. L., and Knowles, J. R. (1980) J. J. (1996) Biochemistry35, 6010–6019
Vol. I (Sinnott, M., ed), pp. 517–542, Am. Chem. Soc.102, 6602–6604 729. Lu, G., Giroux, E. L., and Kantrowitz, E. R.
Academic Press, San Diego, California 702. Cornelius, R. D., and Cleland, W. W. (1978) (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 5076–5081
667. Vincent, J. B., Crowder, M. W., and Averill, B. Biochemistry17, 3279–3286 730. Villeret, V., Huang, S., Zhang, Y., Xue, Y., and
A. (1992) Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 105–110 703. Dunaway-Mariano, D., and Cleland, W. W. Lipscomb, W. N. (1995) Biochemistry34, 4299–
668. Mislow, K. (1970) Acc. Chem. Res.3, 321–331 (1980)Biochemistry19, 1506–1515 4306
669. Bunton, C. A. (1970) Acc. Chem. Res.3, 257–265 704. Speckhard, D. C., Pecoraro, V. L., Knight, W. 731. Lei, K.-J., Pan, C.-J., Liu, J.-L., Shelly, L. L.,
670. Gorenstein, D. G., Luxon, B. A., and Findlay, J. B., and Cleland, W. W. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc. and Chou, J. Y. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270,
B. (1979) J. Am. Chem. Soc.101, 5869–5875 108, 4167–4171 11882–11886
671. Taira, K., Mock, W. L., and Gorenstein, D. G. 705. Lin, I., and Dunaway-Mariano, D. (1988) J. 732. Clottes, E., and Burchell, A. (1998) J. Biol.
(1984)J. Am. Chem. Soc.106, 7831–7835 Am. Chem. Soc.110, 950–956 Chem.273, 19391–19397
672. Calvo, K. C., and Westheimer, F. H. (1984) J. 706. Burgers, P. M. J., and Eckstein, F. (1980) J. Biol. 733. Josse, J., and Wong, S. C. K. (1971) in The
Am. Chem. Soc.106, 4205–4210 Chem.255, 8229–8233 Enzymes, 3rd ed., Vol. 4 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp.
673. Friedman, J. M., Freeman, S., and Knowles, J. 707. Lester, L. M., Rusch, L. A., Robinson, G. J., 499– 541, Academic Press, New York
R. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.110, 1268–1275 and Speckhard, D. C. (1998) Biochemistry37, 734. Harutyunyan, E. H., Oganessyan, V. Y.,
674. Wu, Y.-D., and Houk, K. N. (1993) J. Am. 5349–5355 Oganessyan, N. N., Avaeva, S. M., Nazarova,
Chem. Soc.115, 11997–12002 708. Matlin, A. R., Kendall, D. A., Carano, K. S., T. I., Vorobyeva, N. N., Kurilova, S. A., Huber,
675. Buchwald, S. L., Friedman, J. M., and Banzon, J. A., Klecka, S. B., and Solomon, N. R., and Mather, T. (1997) Biochemistry36,
Knowles, J. R. (1984) J. Am. Chem. Soc.106, M. (1992) Biochemistry31, 8196–8200 7754–7760
4911–4916 709. Simopoulos, T. T., and Jencks, W. P. (1994) 735. Salminen, A., Efimova, I. S., Parfenyev, A. N.,
676. Herschlag, D., and Jencks, W. P. (1989) J. Am. Biochemistry33, 10375–10380 Magretova, N. N., Mikalahti, K., Goldman, A.,
Chem. Soc.111, 7579–7586 710. Han, R., and Coleman, J. E. (1995) Biochemistry Baykov, A. A., and Lahti, R. (1999) J. Biol.
677. Hengge, A. C., Edens, W. A., and Elsing, H. 34, 4238–4245 Chem.274, 33898–33904
(1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 5045–5049 711. Craig, D. B., Arriaga, E. A., Wong, J. C. Y., Lu, 736. Pohjanjoki, P., Lahti, R., Goldman, A., and
678. Jankowski, S., Quin, L. D., Paneth, P., and H., and Dovichi, N. J. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc. Cooperman, B. S. (1998) Biochemistry37,
O’Leary, M. H. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 118, 5245–5253 1754–1761
11675–11677 712. Kimura, E., Kodama, Y., Koike, T., and Shiro, 736a.Lappänen, V.-M., Nummelin, H., Hansen, T.,
679. Herschlag, D., and Jencks, W. P. (1990) M. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 8304–8311 Lahti, R., Schäfer, G., and Goldman, A. (1999)
Biochemistry29, 5172–5179 713. Stec, B., Hehir, M. J., Brennan, C., Nolte, M., Protein Sci.8, 1218–1231
680. Admiraal, S. J., and Herschlag, D. (1999) J. and Kantrowitz, E. R. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.277, 736b.Baykov, A. A., Fabrichniy, I. P., Pohjanjoki, P.,
Am. Chem. Soc.121, 5837–5845 647–662 Zyryanov, A. B., and Lahti, R. (2000)
681. Cohn, M., and Reed, G. H. (1982) Ann. Rev. 713a.Stec, B., Holtz, K. M., and Kantrowitz, E. R. Biochemistry39, 11939–11947
Biochem.51, 365–394 (2000)J. Mol. Biol. 299, 1303–1311 737. Barford, D. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21,
682. Villafranca, J. J., and Raushel, F. M. (1980) 714. Florián, J., and Warshel, A. (1997) J. Am. Chem. 407–412
Annu Rev Biophys Bioeng.9, 363–392 Soc.119, 5473–5474 738. Goldberg, J., Huang, H., Kwon, Y., Greengard,
683. McLaughlin, A. C., Leigh, J. S., Jr., and Cohn, 715. Herschman, H. R. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, P., Nairn, A. C., and Kuriyan, J. (1995) Nature
M. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.251, 2777–2787 82–84 (London)376, 745–753
684. Leyh, T. S., Goodhart, P. J., Nguyen, A. C., 716. Ostanin, K., and Van Etten, R. L. (1993) J. Biol. 739. Egloff, M.-P., Cohen, P. T. W., Reinemer, P., and
Kenyon, G. L., and Reed, G. H. (1985) Chem.268, 20778–20784 Barford, D. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.254, 942–959
Biochemistry24, 308–316 717. VanEtten, R. L., Waymack, P. P., and Rehkop, 740. Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Brew, K., and Lee, E. Y.
D. M. (1974) J. Am. Chem. Soc.96, 6783–6785 C. (1996) Biochemistry35, 6276–6282

--- Page 675 ---

672 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
References
741. Zhang, M., Zhou, M., Van Etten, R. L., and 773. Lequin, O., Albaret, C., Bontems, F., Spik, G., 800. Grasby, J. A. (1998) in Comprehensive Biological
Stauffacher, C. V. (1997) Biochemistry36, 15–23 and Lallemand, J.-Y. (1996) Biochemistry35, Catalysis. A Mechanistic Reference, Vol. I
742. Hengge, A. C., Sowa, G. A., Wu, L., and Zhang, 8870–8880 (Sinnott, M., ed), pp. 563–571, Academic
Z.-Y. (1995) Biochemistry34, 13982–13987 774. Shapiro, R. (1998) Biochemistry37, 6847–6856 Press, San Diego, California
743. Yuvaniyama, J., Denu, J. M., Dixon, J. E., and 775. Rosenberg, H. F., Tenen, D. G., and 801. Hampel, K. J., Walter, N. G., and Burke, J. M.
Saper, M. A. (1996) Science272, 1328–1331 Ackerman, S. J. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (1998)Biochemistry37, 14672–14682
744. D’Alessio, G., and Riordan, J. F., eds. (1997) U.S.A.86, 4460–4464 802. Pan, T., and Uhlenbeck, O. C. (1992) Nature
Ribonuclease Structure and Functions, Academic 776. Leland, P. A., Schultz, L. W., Kim, B.-M., and (London)358, 560–563
Press, San Diego, California Raines, R. T. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 803. Chartrand, P., Usman, N., and Cedergren, R.
745. Moore, S., and Stein, W. H. (1973) Science180, 95, 10407–10412 (1997)Biochemistry36, 3145–3150
458–464 777. D’Alessio, G., Di Donato, A., Parente, A., and 804. Santoro, S. W., and Joyce, G. F. (1998)
746. Wlodawer, A., Svensson, L. A., Sjölin, L., and Piccoli, R. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 104– Biochemistry37, 13330–13342
Gilliland, G. L. (1988) Biochemistry27, 2705– 106 805. Beebe, J. A., Kurz, J. C., and Fierke, C. A.
2717 778. Hofsteenge, J., Kieffer, B., Matthies, R., (1996)Biochemistry35, 10493–10505
747. Santoro, J., González, C., Bruix, M., Neira, J. Hemmings, B. A., and Stone, S. R. (1988) 806. Torres, R. A., and Bruice, T. C. (1998) Proc.
L., Nieto, J. L., Herranz, J., and Rico, M. (1993) Biochemistry27, 8537–8544 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 11077–11082
J. Mol. Biol.229, 722–734 779. Kole, R., and Altman, S. (1981) Biochemistry 807. Pyle, A. M. (1993) Science261, 709–714
748. Tilton, R. F., Jr., Dewan, J. C., and Petsko, G. 20, 1902–1906 808. Peracchi, A., Beigelman, L., Scott, E. C.,
A. (1992) Biochemistry31, 2469–2481 780. Altman, S., Baer, M., Guerrier-Takada, C., and Uhlenbeck, O. C., and Herschlag, D. (1997) J.
749. Fedorov, A. A., Joseph-McCarthy, D., Fedorov, Vioque, A. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 515– Biol. Chem.272, 26822–26826
E., Sirakova, D., Graf, I., and Almo, S. C. 518 809. Pontius, B. W., Lott, W. B., and von Hippel, P.
(1996)Biochemistry35, 15962–15979 781. Altman, S., Kirsebom, L., and Talbot, S. (1993) H. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94,
750. Boix, E., Nogués, M. V., Schein, C. H., Benner, FASEB J.7, 7–14 2290–2294
S. A., and Cuchillo, C. M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 782. Yuan, Y., and Altman, S. (1995) EMBO J.14, 810. Bruice, T. C., Tsubouchi, A., Dempcy, R. O.,
269, 2529–2534 159–168 and Olson, L. P. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118,
751. Schultz, L. W., Quirk, D. J., and Raines, R. T. 782a.Massire, C., Jaeger, L., and Westhof, E. (1998) 9867–9875
(1998)Biochemistry37, 8886–8898 J. Mol. Biol.279, 773–793 811. Weinstein, L. B., Jones, B. C. N. M., Cosstick,
752. Jackson, D. Y., Burnier, J., Quan, C., Stanley, 783. Waugh, D. S., Green, C. J., and Pace, N. R. R., and Cech, T. R. (1997) Nature (London)388,
M., Tom, J., and Wells, J. A. (1994) Science266, (1989)Science244, 1569–1571 805–808
243–247 784. True, H. L., and Celander, D. W. (1998) J. Biol. 812. Christian, E. L., and Yarus, M. (1993)
753. Gutte, B. (1977) J. Biol. Chem.252, 663 – 670 Chem.273, 7193–7196 Biochemistry32, 4475–4480
754. Breslow, R., Dong, S. D., Webb, Y., and Xu, R. 785. Cech, T. R. (1987) Science236, 1532–1539 813. Orita, M., Vinayak, R., Andrus, A., Warashina,
(1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 6588–6600 786. Zaug, A. J., and Cech, T. R. (1986) Science231, M., Chiba, A., Kaniwa, H., Nishikawa, F.,
755. Martin, P. D., Coscha, M. S., and Edwards, B. 470–475 Nishikawa, S., and Taira, K. (1996)
F. P. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 15930–15938 787. Cech, T. R. (1986) Sci. Am.255(Nov), 64–75 J. Biol. Chem.271, 9447–9454
756. Wladkowski, B. D., Svensson, L. A., Sjolin, L., 788. Brown, J. W., Haas, E. S., Gilbert, D. G., and 814. Hertel, K. J., Peracchi, A., Uhlenbeck, O. C.,
Ladner, J. E., and Gilliland, G. L. (1998) J. Am. Pace, N. R. (1994) Nucleic Acids Res.22, and Herschlag, D. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
Chem. Soc.120, 5488–5498 3660–3662 U.S.A.94, 8497–8502
757. Eckstein, F. (1979) Acc. Chem. Res.12, 204–210 789. Pan, T. (1995) Biochemistry34, 902–909 815. Peracchi, A., Karpeisky, A., Maloney, L.,
758. Matta, M. S., and Vo, D. T. (1986) J. Am. Chem. 790. Golden, B. L., Gooding, A. R., Podell, E. R., Beigelman, L., and Herschlag, D. (1998)
Soc.108, 5316–5318 and Cech, T. R. (1998) Science282, 259–264 Biochemistry37, 14765–14775
759. Herschlag, D. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 791. Cate, J. H., Gooding, A. R., Podell, E., Zhou, 816. Joyce, G. F. (1992) Sci. Am.267(Dec), 90–97
11631–11635 K., Golden, B. L., Kundrot, C. E., Cech, T. R., 817. Ekland, E. H., Szostak, J. W., and Bartel, D. P.
760. Breslow, R., and Chapman, W. H., Jr. (1996) and Doudna, J. A. (1996) Science273, 1678–1685 (1995)Science269, 364–370
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 10018–10021 792. Ferré-D’Amaré, A. R., Zhou, K., and Doudna, 818. Wilson, C., and Szostak, J. W. (1995) Nature
761. Sowa, G. A., Hengge, A. C., and Cleland, W. J. A. (1998) Nature (London)395, 567–574 (London)374, 777–782
W. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 2319–2320 793. Baidya, N., and Uhlenbeck, O. C. (1997) 819. Wright, M. C., and Joyce, G. F. (1997) Science
762. Kawata, Y., Sakiyama, F., Hayashi, F., and Biochemistry36, 1108–1114 276, 614–617
Kyogoku, Y. (1990) Eur. J. Biochem.187, 255–262 794. Pley, H. W., Flaherty, K. M., and McKay, D. B. 820. Ohmichi, T., and Sugimoto, N. (1997)
763. Pletinckx, J., Steyaert, J., Zegers, I., Choe, H.- (1994)Nature (London)372, 68–74 Biochemistry36, 3514–3521
W., Heinemann, U., and Wyns, L. (1994) 795. Scott, W. G., Murray, J. B., Arnold, J. R. P., 821. Suga, H., Cowan, J. A., and Szostak, J. W.
Biochemistry33, 1654–1662 Stoddard, B. L., and Klug, A. (1996) Science (1998)Biochemistry37, 10118–10125
764. Kurihara, H., Nonaka, T., Mitsui, Y., Ohgi, K., 274, 2065–2069 822. Tsang, J., and Joyce, G. F. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.
Irie, M., and Nakamura, K. T. (1996) J. Mol. 796. Bevers, S., Xiang, G., and McLaughlin, L. W. 262, 31–42
Biol.255, 310–320 (1996)Biochemistry35, 6483–6490 823. Geyer, C. R., and Sen, D. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.
764a.Noguchi, S., Satow, Y., Uchida, T., Sasaki, C., 796a.Bevers, S., Ha, S. B., and McLaughlin, L. W. 275, 483–489
and Matsuzaki, T. (1995) Biochemistry34, (1999)Biochemistry38, 7710–7718 824. Ceska, T. A., and Sayers, J. R. (1998) Trends
15583–15591 796b.Kore, A. R., and Eckstein, F. (1999) Biochemis- Biochem. Sci.23, 331–336
765. Cordes, F., Starikov, E. B., and Saenger, W. try38, 10915–10918 825. Weber, D. J., Libson, A. M., Gittis, A. G.,
(1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 10365–10372 796c.Lyne, P. D., and Karplus, M. (2000) J. Am. Lebowitz, M. S., and Mildvan, A. S. (1994)
766. Buckle, A. M., and Fersht, A. R. (1994) Chem. Soc.122, 166–167 Biochemistry33, 8017–8028
Biochemistry33, 1644–1653 796d.Torres, R. A., and Bruice, T. C. (2000) J. Am. 826. Libson, A. M., Gittis, A. G., and Lattman, E. E.
767. Deutscher, M. P. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, Chem. Soc. 122, 781–791 (1994)Biochemistry33, 8007–8016
136–139 797. Simorre, J.-P., Legault, P., Baidya, N., 827. Hale, S. P., Poole, L. B., and Gerlt, J. A. (1993)
768. Benner, S. A., and Alleman, R. K. (1989) Trends Uhlenbeck, O. C., Maloney, L., Wincott, F., Biochemistry32, 7479–7487
Biochem. Sci.14, 396–397 Usman, N., Beigelman, L., and Pardi, A. 828. Grissom, C. B., and Markley, J. L. (1989)
769. Davies, J. F., II, Hostomska, Z., Hostomsky, Z., (1998)Biochemistry37, 4034–4044 Biochemistry28, 2116–2124
Jordan, S. R., and Matthews, D. A. (1991) 798. Sargueil, B., Pecchia, D. B., and Burke, J. M. 829. Serpersu, E. H., Hibler, D. W., Gerlt, J. A., and
Science252, 88–95 (1995)Biochemistry34, 7739–7748 Mildvan, A. S. (1989) Biochemistry28, 1539–
770. Katayanagi, K., Miyagawa, M., Matsushima, 798a.Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Ban, N., Moore, P. B., 1548
M., Ishikawa, M., Kanaya, S., Ikehara, M., and Steitz, T. A. (2000) Science289, 920–930 830. Suck, D., Lahm, A., and Oefner, C. (1988)
Matsuzaki, T., and Morikawa, K. (1990) 798b.Muth, G. W., Ortoleva-Donnelly, L., and Nature (London)332, 464–468
Nature (London)347, 306–309 Strobel, S. A. (2000) Science289, 947–950 831. Jones, S. J., Worrall, A. F., and Connolly, B. A.
771. Yang, W., Hendrickson, W. A., Crouch, R. J., 798c.Nakano, S.-i, Chadalavada, D. M., and (1996)J. Mol. Biol.264, 1154–1163
and Satow, Y. (1990) Science249, 1398–1405 Bevilacqua, P. C. (2000) Science287, 1493–1497 832. Frederick, C. A., Grable, J., Melia, M.,
772. Acharya, K. R., Shapiro, R., Riordan, J. F., and 799. Scott, W. G., and Klug, A. (1996) Trends Samudzi, C., Jen-Jacobson, L., Wang, B.-C.,
Vallee, B. L. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. Biochem. Sci.21, 220–224 Greene, P., Boyer, H. W., and Rosenberg, J. M.
92, 2949–2953 (1984)Nature (London)309, 327–331

--- Page 676 ---

673
References
833. McClarin, J. A., Frederick, C. A., Wang, B.-C., 866. Müller-Dieckmann, H.-J., and Schulz, G. E. 895. Hunter, T., and Plowman, G. D. (1997) Trends
Greene, P., Boyer, H. W., Grable, J., and (1995)J. Mol. Biol.246, 522–530 Biochem. Sci.22, 18–22
Rosenberg, J. M. (1986) Science234, 1526–1541 867. Schlichting, I., and Reinstein, J. (1997) 896. Grant, B. D., Hemmer, W., Tsigelny, I., Adams,
834. McCarthy, A. D., and Hardie, D. G. (1984) Biochemistry36, 9290–9296 J. A., and Taylor, S. S. (1998) Biochemistry37,
Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 60–63 868. Runquist, J. A., Harrison, D. H. T., and Miziorko, 7708–7715
835. Kostrewa, D., and Winkler, F. K. (1995) H. M. (1998) Biochemistry37, 1221–1226 897. Cheng, X., Shaltiel, S., and Taylor, S. S. (1998)
Biochemistry34, 683–696 869. Moréra, S., Chiadmi, M., LeBras, G., Lascu, I., Biochemistry37, 14005–14013
836. Newman, M., Strzelecka, T., Dorner, L. F., and Janin, J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 11062–11070 898. Engh, R. A., Girod, A., Kinzel, V., Huber, R.,
Schildkraut, I., and Aggarwal, A. K. (1995) 870. Webb, P. A., Perisic, O., Mendola, C. E., and Bossemeyer, D. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
Science269, 656–663 Backer, J. M., and Williams, R. L. (1995) J. Mol. 26157–26164
837. Bozic, D., Grazulis, S., Siksnys, V., and Huber, Biol.251, 574–587 899. Herberg, F. W., Zimmermann, B., McGlone,
R. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 176–186 871. Abdulaev, N. G., Karaschuk, G. N., Ladner, J. M., and Taylor, S. S. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 569–
838. Connolly, B. A., Echstein, F., and Pingoud, A. E., Kakuev, D. L., Yakhyaev, A. V., Tordova, 579
(1984)J. Biol. Chem.259, 10760–10763 M., Gaidarov, I. O., Popov, V. I., Fujiwara, J. 900. Su, Y., Dostmann, W. R. G., Herberg, F. W.,
839. Corey, D. R., Pei, D., and Schultz, P. G. (1989) H., Chinchilla, D., Eisenstrein, E., Gilliland, G. Durick, K., Xuong, N.-h, Eyck, L. T., Taylor, S.
Biochemistry28, 8277–8786 L., and Ridge, K. D. (1998) Biochemistry37, S., and Varughese, K. I. (1995) Science269,
840. Ray, W. J., Jr., Hermodsen, M. A., Puvathingal, 13958–13967 807–813
J. M., and Mahoney, W. C. (1983) J. Biol. Chem. 872. Mesnildrey, S., Agou, F., Karlsson, A., Bonne, 901. Lohmann, S. M., Vaandrager, A. B.,
258, 9166–9174 D. D., and Véron, M. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, Smolenski, A., Walter, U., and DeJonge, H. R.
841. Percival, M. D., and Withers, S. G. (1992) 4436–4442 (1997)Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 307–312
Biochemistry31, 505–512 873. Turano, A., Furey, W., Pletcher, J., Sax, M., 902. Xu, W., Harrison, S. C., and Eck, M. J. (1997)
842. Dai, J.-B., Liu, Y., Ray, W. J., Jr., and Konno, M. Pike, D., and Kluger, R. (1982) J. Am. Chem. Nature (London)385, 595–602
(1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 6322–6337 Soc.104, 3089–3095 903. Sicheri, F., Moarefi, I., and Kuriyan, J. (1997)
843. Rose, Z. B. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 253– 874. Aleshin, A. E., Zeng, C., Bourenkov, G. P., Nature (London)385, 602–609
255 Bartunik, H. D., Fromm, H. J., and Honzatko, 904. Adams, J. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 10949–
844. Shanske, S., Sakoda, S., Hermodson, M. A., R. B. (1998) Structure6, 39–50 10956
DiMauro, S., and Schon, E. A. (1987) J. Biol. 875. Aleshin, A. E., Zeng, C., Bartunik, H. D., 905. Tesmer, J. J. G., Sunahara, R. K., Gilman, A.
Chem.262, 14612–14617 Fromm, H. J., and Honzatko, R. B. (1998) J. G., and Sprang, S. R. (1997) Science278, 1907–
845. Rigden, D. J., Alexeev, D., Phillips, S. E. V., Mol. Biol.282, 345–357 1916
and Fothergill-Gilmore, L. A. (1998) J. Mol. 876. Lundblad, V. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 906. Tesmer, J. J. G., Sunahara, R. K., Johnson, R.
Biol.276, 449–459 U.S.A.95, 8415–8416 A., Gosselin, G., Gilman, A. G., and Sprang, S.
846. Ravel, P., Craescu, C. T., Arous, N., Rosa, J., 877. Behlke, J., Heidrich, K., Naumann, M., Müller, R. (1999) Science285, 756–760
and Garel, M. C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, E.-C., Otto, A., Reuter, R., and Kriegel, T. 907. Sunahara, R. K., Tesmer, J. J. G., Gilman, A. G.,
14045–14050 (1998)Biochemistry37, 11989–11995 and Sprang, S. R. (1997) Science278, 1943–1947
847. Collet, J.-F., Stroobant, V., Pirard, M., 878. Anderson, C. M., Stenkamp, R. E., and Steitz, 908. Zhao, Y., Schelvis, J. P. M., Babcock, G. T., and
Delpierre, G., and Van Schaftingen, E. (1998) J. T. A. (1978) J. Mol. Biol.123, 15–23 Marletta, M. A. (1998) Biochemistry37, 4502–
Biol. Chem.273, 14107–14112 879. Schwab, D. A., and Wilson, J. E. (1989) Proc. 4509
848. Kalckar, H. M. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.86, 2563–2567 908a.Zhao, Y., Brandish, P. E., DiValentin, M.,
291–293 880. Schirmer, T., and Evans, P. R. (1990) Nature Schelvis, J. P. M., Babcock, G. T., and Marletta,
849. Reed, G. H., and Leyh, T. S. (1980) Biochemis- (London)343, 140–145 M. A. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10848–10854
try19, 5472–5480 881. Auzat, I., Le Bras, G., and Garel, J.-R. (1995) J. 909. Joyce, C. M., and Steitz, T. A. (1994) Ann. Rev.
850. Schulz, G. E., and Schirmer, R. H. (1979) Mol. Biol.246, 248–253 Biochem.63, 777–822
Principles of Protein Structure, Springer-Verlag, 882. Blake, C. C. F., and Evans, P. R. (1974) J. Mol. 910. Kim, Y., Eom, S. H., Wang, J., Lee, D.-S., Suh,
New York (pp. 222–226) Biol.484, 585–601 S. W., and Steitz, T. A. (1995) Nature (London)
851. Gerstein, M., Schulz, G., and Chothia, C. 883. Berger, S. A., and Evans, P. R. (1992) 376, 612–616
(1993)J. Mol. Biol.229, 494–501 Biochemistry31, 9237–9242 911. Doublié, S., Tabor, S., Long, A. M.,
852. Bernstein, B. E., and Hol, W. G. J. (1998) 884. Mizuguchi, H., Cook, P. F., Hasemann, C. A., Richardson, C. C., and Ellenberger, T. (1998)
Biochemistry37, 4429–4436 and Uyeda, K. (1997) Biochemistry36, 8775– Nature (London)391, 251–258
853. Matte, A., Tari, L. W., and Delbaere, L. T. J. 8784 912. Patel, P. H., Jacobo-Molina, A., Ding, J.,
(1998)Structure6, 413–419 885. Fujii, H., Krietsch, W. K. G., and Yoshida, A. Tantillo, C., Clark, A. D., Jr., Raag, R., Nanni,
854. Vonrhein, C., Bönisch, H., Schäfer, G., and (1980)J. Biol. Chem.255, 6421–6423 R. G., Hughes, S. H., and Arnold, E. (1995)
Schulz, G. E. (1998) 886. Tanaka, K. R., and Paglia, D. E. (1995) in The Biochemistry34, 5351–5363
J. Mol. Biol.282, 167–179 Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited 913. Bartlett, P. A., and Eckstein, F. (1988) J. Biol.
855. Bernstein, B. E., Michels, P. A. M., and Hol, W. Disease (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. Chem.257, 8879–8884
G. J. (1997) Nature (London)385, 275–278 S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 3485–3511, 913a.Stivers, J. T., Nawrot, B., Jagadeesh, G. J., Stec,
856. Yount, R. G., Babcock, D., Ballantyne, W., and McGraw-Hill, New York W. J., and Shuman, S. (2000) Biochemistry39,
Ojala, D. (1971) Biochemistry10, 2484–2489 887. Mas, M. T., Bailey, J. M., and Resplandor, Z. E. 5561–5572
857. Yount, R. G. (1975) Adv. Enzymol.43, 1–56 (1988)Biochemistry27, 1168–1172 914. Smith, C. A., and Rayment, I. (1996) Biophys. J.
858. McPhillips, T. M., Hsu, B. T., Sherman, M. A., 888. Forstner, M., Müller, A., Stolz, M., and 70, 1590–1602
Mas, M. T., and Rees, D. C. (1996) Biochemistry Wallimann, T. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 331–339 915. Wittinghofer, A., and Pai, E. F. (1991) Trends
35, 4118–4127 889. Fritz-Wolf, K., Schnyder, T., Wallimann, T., Biochem. Sci.16, 382–387
859. Schlauderer, G. J., Proba, K., and Schulz, G. E. and Kabsch, W. (1996) Nature (London)381, 916. Coleman, D. E., and Sprang, S. R. (1998)
(1996)J. Mol. Biol.256, 223–227 341–345 Biochemistry37, 14376–14385
860. Byeon, I.-J. L., Shi, Z., and Tsai, M.-D. (1995) 890. Zhou, G., Somasundaram, T., Blanc, E., 917. Falany, C. N. (1997) FASEB J.11, 206–216
Biochemistry34, 3172–3182 Parthasarathy, G., Ellington, W. R., and 918. Varin, L., Marsolais, F., Richard, M., and
861. Ray, B. D., Chau, M. H., Fife, W. K., Jarori, G. Chapman, M. S. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Rouleau, M. (1997) FASEB J.11, 517– 525
K., and Nageswara Rao, B. D. (1996) U.S.A.95, 8449–8454 919. Kakuta, Y., Petrotchenko, E. V., Pedersen, L.
Biochemistry35, 7239–7246 891. Larsen, T. M., Benning, M. M., Rayment, I., C., and Negishi, M. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273,
862. Schlauderer, G. J., and Schulz, G. E. (1996) and Reed, G. H. (1998) Biochemistry37, 6247– 27325–27330
Protein Sci.5, 434–441 6255 920. Zhang, H., Varmalova, O., Vargas, F. M.,
863. Schricker, R., Magdolen, V., Strobel, G., 892. Loria, J. P., and Nowak, T. (1998) Biochemistry Falany, C. N., and Leyh, T. S. (1998) J. Biol.
Bogengruber, E., Breitenbach, M., and Bandlow, 37, 6967–6974 Chem.273, 10888–10892
W. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 31103–31110 893. Lovell, S. C., Mullick, A. H., and Muirhead, 920a.Hiraoka, N., Nakagawa, H., Ong, E., Akama,
864. Teplyakov, A., Sebastiao, P., Obmolova, G., H. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.276, 839–851 T. O., Fukuda, M. N., and Fukuda, M. (2000) J.
Perrakis, A., Brush, G. S., Bessman, M. J., and 894. Cheng, X., Friesen, R. H. E., and Lee, J. C. Biol. Chem.275, 20188 –20196
Wilson, K. S. (1996) EMBO J.15, 3487–3497 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 6313–6321 921. Klaassen, C. D., and Boles, J. W. (1997) FASEB
865. Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Wu, Y., and Yan, H. (1997) J. 894a.Valentini, G., Chiarelli, L., Fortin, R., J.11, 404–418
Biol. Chem.272, 29343–29350 Speranza, M. L., Galizzi, A., and Mattevi, A.
(2000)J. Biol. Chem.275, 18145–18152

--- Page 677 ---

674 Chapter 12. Transferring Groups by Displacement Reactions
References
922. Neufeld, E. F., and Muenzer, J. (1995) in The
Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited
Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 2 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet,
A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 2465–
2494, McGraw-Hill, New York
923. Lukatela, G., Krauss, N., Theis, K., Selmer, T.,
Gieselmann, V., von Figura, K., and Saenger,
W. (1998) Biochemistry37, 3654–3664
923a.Dierks, T., Lecca, M. R., Schlotterhose, P.,
Schmidt, B., and von Figura, K. (1999) EMBO
J.18, 2084–2091
924. Waldow, A., Schmidt, B., Dierks, T., von
Bülow, R., and von Figura, K. (1999) J. Biol.
Chem.274, 12284–12288
924a.Szameit, C., Miech, C., Balleininger, M.,
Schmidt, B., von Figura, K., and Dierks, T.
(1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 15375–15381
925. Fox, D. K., and Roseman, S. (1986) J. Biol.
Chem.261, 13487–13497
926. Joyce, M. A., Fraser, M. E., James, M. N. G.,
Bridger, W. A., and Wolodko, W. T. (2000)
Biochemistry39, 17–25
927. Johnson, J. D., Muhonen, W. W., and
Lambeth, D. O. (1998)
J. Biol. Chem.273, 27573–27579
928. Liaw, S.-H., and Eisenberg, D. (1994)
Biochemistry33, 675–681
929. Alibhai, M., and Villafranca, J. J. (1994)
Biochemistry33, 682–686
930. Meister, A. (1968) Adv. Enzymol.31, 183 – 218
931. Meister, A. (1974) in The Enzymes, 3rd ed., Vol.
10 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 669–754, Academic
Press, New York
932. Whitty, A., Fierke, C. A., and Jencks, W. P.
(1995)Biochemistry34, 11678–11689
933. Rochet, J.-C., and Bridger, W. A. (1994) Protein
Sci.3, 975–981
934. Selmer, T., and Buckel, W. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.
274, 20772–20778

--- Page 678 ---

675
Study Questions
1. Outline the reactions by which glyceraldehyde 3- 5. Write out step-by-step chemical mechanisms for
phosphateis converted to 3-phosphoglycerate the following enzymatic reaction. Use small
with coupled synthesis of ATPin the glycolysis arrows to indicate directions of electron flow.
pathway. Show important mechanistic details. Remember to have all electrons move in the same
direction in any single structure.
2. Papain is a protein-hydrolyzing (proteolytic)
enzyme with an – SH group and an imidazole Amino acid + tRNA + ATP →
group at the active site. Write a reasonable Aminoacyl-tRNA + AMP + PPi
structure for a “tetrahedral intermediate” that
would be expected to arise during formation of an 6. Trypsin in which Asp 102 has been replaced by
acyl enzyme intermediate. Asn has 104 times less catalytic activity than
natural trypsin at neutral pH. From the crystal
3. Adenylate kinase catalyzes the interconversion of structure of the mutant enzyme it appears that the
ATP, AMP, and ADP. imidazole group of His 57 is held by the Asn side
a) Draw a reasonable structure for a penta- chain in the wrong tautomeric form for catalysis.
covalent intermediate derived from ATP and Explain. Compare this incorrect tautomeric form
AMP. with that in the initial structure shown in Fig. 12-11.
b) Draw a reasonable structure for the transition
state leading from ATP + AMP to two molecules 7. A recent discovery in biochemistry is that RNA
of ADP in an SN2-like reaction. can act as an enzyme in chemical reactions,
usually reactions involving RNA hydrolysis.
4. Penicillin inhibits a D-alanyl-D-alanine Discuss the features of RNA structure that might
transpeptidase that catalyzes the reaction favor evolution of enzymes composed entirely of
a single polyribonucleotide chain, and describe a
proposed mechanism for RNA-catalyzed hydroly-
O H H
sis of RNA molecules.
S
R C N C C CH3
H C N CH3
CH
O
–
COO
Penicillin
R’-D-alanyl-D-alanine + H2N-R→
R’-D-alanyl-NH-R + D-alanine
where R and R’ are different parts of a bacterial
peptidoglycan. Write a step-by-step mechanism
for this reaction and indicate how penicillin may
inhibit the enzyme by combining with it irrevers-
ibly. See Strynodka et al.,Nature359, 700 – 705,
1992, for related reaction of penicillin with a
penicillinase.

--- Page 679 ---

676 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
N244 E117 H96 N N N T1 N 99 H Z 11 n 9 H N 94 N Q92 D568 R644 + S O e O R r – – 58 + 0 O O O H – – O C C O C H O 2 C– R C H + 452 O O H HO H H N Fe S H N S 1 S + 0 H 1 F F e F e O e S S – O S C S 424 C D 3 C 5 1 8 4 0 2 0 1 N H27 N R 4 42H1 N 2 H N H R H C 40 + O 1 – N NH – H O C O H N C O + H H C – C C C C N S o H H A O O H O H C O H H N H + N H C D3 N 75 H R329 r a F d i O d a n e c e n e i n m o i 4 r t h d e S x h i o v y 4 i e c o d v e d c y f a d i e l r c n t u c a l h t f t g e s o s r i e t . v o e a e f s e m o T r ( w i l m r s h a e m i a a t e f t p c t t e t e , H e l h c e o r F t a e 2 y s f i m r O t g l a b c - b . c o i C o t t 1 t i l h n o i o r e 3 v a i a c A c - c e t h 1 t u e a i ) a e s l s e c i m d a s t i r s e f d d y e i r c H s n , m o a a w s m t t C l o o h i h a v O n a i t d i e s h d s c 3 o d d h – e e i . c c i w c t i ( a i t A i s r a t o r i i e r r a g l c n b d l e t o h e l o b r n e t b , e n e , a y i a a c y F t s n c o a l e t i t g h m d s g i i o . n e e r e f 1 n o t b r ( e 3 b s u o c l r - a o e m p i m 9 s c n n ) k o e t t d t t e h f d h o H e r e o e i , d i a 2 x n F h z O t t a e i i y i o t g n l . i d o c . a a c A o a r 1 t - n a m c e c 3 n t e o i - i t r p t 4 n o e h o a ) o n n t e t n a u i e o s c o i a n l n t i a f s t t o d i o h t r c n e i f a m o i c g o n r a w r a b c n o t m c n o a h i f i o n r d e h t c n b h i e c c o t e i r y r t n e a r c i i t l c c e e.
Contents
677 A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH , and R–SH to 698 C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation
2
Polarized Double Bonds 698 1. Displacement on a Carbonyl Group
677 1. Carbonic Anhydrase 699 2. Addition of an Enolate Anion to a Carbonyl
679 2. Imines (Schiff Bases) Group or an Imine; Aldolases
680 3. Stereochemistry of Addition to Trigonal Carbon 700 Polycarboxylic acid synthases
Atoms 703 Citrate cleaving enzymes
681 4. Addition of Carbon–Carbon Double Bonds, Often 704 3. Chiral Acetates and Their Use in Stereochemical
Reversible Reactions Studies
681 Enoyl-CoA hydratase 705 4. Addition of an Enolate Ion to Carbon Dioxide and
682 Glutathione S-transferases Decarboxylation
682 Chlorobenzoyl-CoA dehalogenase 705 Decarboxylation of β-oxoacids
683 5. Addition to Double Bonds Adjacent to Carboxylate 705 Linked oxidation and decarboxylation
Groups 705 Phosphoenolpyruvate, a key metabolic intermediate
683 Fumarate hydratase 706 Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase
685 Some other fumarate-forming reactions 710 Carbon dioxide or bicarbonate ion?
685 Enolase 711 5. Incorporation of Bicarbonate into Carboxyl Groups
686 Pectate lyase and related enzymes 711 PEP mutase and the synthesis of phosphonates
686 6. Aconitase and Related Iron–Sulfur Proteins 712 D. Some Isomerization and Rearrangement
688 7. Addition to or Formation of Isolated Double Bonds Reactions
689 8. Conjugative and Decarboxylative Elimination
Reactions 713 References
690 9. Isomerization Assisted by Addition 717 Study Questions
690 10. Reversibility of Addition and Elimination
Reactions Boxes
691 B. Enolic Intermediates in Enzymatic Reactions 680 Box 13-A Zinc
691 1. Mandelate Racemase and Related Enzymes 687 Box 13-B EPSP Synthase and the Herbicide
692 2. Isomerases Glyphosate
692 Aldose–ketose interconversions
693 Catalysis of ring opening by isomerases Tables
693 Triose phosphate isomerase 701 Table 13-1 Products Arising from Reactions of
695 Xylose isomerase and the hydride shift mechanism Acetyl-CoA with a Second Substrate
696 3-Oxosteroid isomerases with Catalysis by a Polycarboxylate
697 4-Oxalocrotonate tautomerase Synthase
697 3. Internal Oxidation–Reduction by Dehydration
of Dihydroxyacids
697 4. Formation and Metabolism of Methylglyoxal
(Pyruvaldehyde)

--- Page 680 ---

677
13
Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization:
Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
R452 R401
H
N
O
T199 D568 – + S C424 C H
N244 O H N + N
H96 N N N N Zn H N 94 N R644 + S O er – O O H – – C C O C H O 2 C – C H O O H H O H H N Fe S S S F F e F e e S S S C3 C 58 421 N N R42 H 1 N 2N H C + O N H – H C O H O H – C C C H H O O H H N H + N H C N H R329
H119 Q92 + O N+ H O H –O C H O
E117 H101 – S O C
R580 O H274 D375
D100 CoA
In Chapter 12 we considered reactions by which exist in water as an equilibrium mixture with a cova-
living cells are able to transfer groups from one mole- lent hydrate (Eq. 13-1). For example, acetaldehyde in
cule to another using nucleophilic displacements. We aqueous solution consists of a mixture of about 50%
also showed how transfer reactions can be utilized by free aldehyde and 50% hydrate in rapidly reversible
ligases to join two molecules together with the Gibbs equilibrium1,2 and formaldehyde is over 99.9%
energy of cleavage of ATP or of a related molecule hydrated.3
driving the reaction. In this chapter we will examine
addition reactions, which provide a simple way of
joining two molecules by means of C–O, C–N, C–S, or O OH
C–C bonds. Among these are the aldol and Claisen- CH3 C + H2O CH3 C OH
type condensations by which C–C bonds are formed. H H
(13-1)
We will also consider elimination reactions and decar-
boxylations, which are the reverse of addition and
condensation reactions, as well as mechanistically Addition reactions often occur as parts of more
related isomerizations. Many reactions of these types complex reactions. For example, a thiol group of
occur in the major pathways of metabolism. glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase reacts
with the aldehyde substrate to form a hemimercaptal,
which is subsequently oxidized to a thioester (see Fig.
A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH , and R–SH to 15-6).
2
Polarized Double Bonds
Next to nucleophilic displacement, the commonest 1. Carbonic Anhydrase
mechanistic processes in enzymatic catalysis are addi-
tion to double bonds and elimination to form double Another simple addition reaction is the hydration
bonds. These often involve addition of a nucleophile of CO to form the bicarbonate ion. Without catalysis
2
together with a proton to a highly polarized double the reaction may require several seconds,4,5 the appar-
bond such as C=O or C=N–. In other reactions, which ent first-order rate constant being ~ 0.03 s–1 at 25°C.
are discussed in Section C,2, the nucleophile attacks one Cells must often hasten the process. The specific catalyst
end of a C=C bond that is polarized by conjugation carbonic anhydrase is widespread in its distribution
with C=O or C=N.
Alcohols, amines, and thiols add readily to the
electrophilic carbon of the carbonyl group to form H2O
O
H+
O
hemiacetals,carbinolamines, hemiketals, and
O C O HO C HO C
hemimercaptals. An example is the formation of ring
OH O–
structures of sugars (Eq. 4-1). Water can also add to
carbonyl groups and most aliphatic carbonyl compounds (13-2)

--- Page 681 ---

678 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
and is especially active in tissues (e.g., red blood cells, enzymes known, with the turnover number at 25°C
and lungs) that are involved in respiration. One liter for hydration of CO being ~ 106 s–1. The same enzyme
2
of mammalian blood contains 1– 2 g of this enzyme, catalyzes hydration of acetaldehyde (Eq. 13-1) but at a
a monomeric 30-kDa protein containing ~ 260 amino 1000-fold slower rate. A pK of ~ 7 controls the activity.
a
acids and one tightly bound ion of Zn2+. Erythrocytes This appears to represent the loss of H+ from the Zn2+–
contain two isoenzymes (I and II) of carbonic anhydrase OH complex18 to give Zn+– OH. The latter is in effect
2
and the human body contains at least eight distinct a stabilized hydroxide ion existing at a pH at which
isoenzymes (I – VIII).5 – 8 They are found wherever there OH– is normally not present in quantity. It is this
is a high demand for CO or bicarbonate. Isoenzyme I, hydroxide ion that adds to the CO or to the aldehyde
2 2
II, III, and VII are cytosolic. Carbonic anhydrase I is substrate (Eq. 13-3, step a).18 – 20 In step b a water molecule
specific to erythrocytes, while isoenzyme II is present replaces the departing bicarbonate.17 A variety of data
in most cells. Hereditary lack of carbonic anhydrase II
is associated with osteopetrosis (marble bone disease),
Thr
a condition involving failure of bone resorption and
O
the calcification of other tissues.9 The generation of
H
acidity according to Eq. 13-2 is presumably required
for dissolution of bone by the osteoclasts. O
Isoenzymes III and VII have a more specialized 2+ –
Zn O
C
distribution. Carbonic anhydrase III is abundant in H
adipocytes which use bicarbonate in fatty acid syn- a O
H –
thesis.7 Isoenzyme V is present in the mitochondrial O
Zn2+·O
C
matrix and is also abundant in both adipocytes and
O
liver.7,8 Isoenzyme IV is a larger membrane-associated H+
form, while VI is secreted into the saliva.10 Carbonic H 2 O b
–
anhydrase has also been identified in E. coli.,11 in a HCO 3
methanobacterium,12 and in green plants.13,13a A 60-kDa 2+
Zn OH2
carbonic anhydrase called nacrein is found in the
organic matrix of the nacreous layer of the pearl oyster, c
t
c
h
a
e
rb
l
o
ay
n
e
a
r
te
t
)
h
i
a
n
t
t
f
h
o
e
rm
sh
s
e
a
l
r
l
a
a
g
n
o
d
n
i
i
n
te
p
(
e
o
a
rt
r
h
ls
o
.1
r
4
hombic calcium slow via shuttle H+
(13-3)
X-ray studies of carbonic anhydrases I and II, from
human blood, revealed that both have an ellipsoidal indicate that proton transfers mediated by the enzyme
shape of dimensions ~ 4.1 x 4.1 x 4.7 nm.15,16 The zinc are essential parts of the carbonic anhydrase mecha-
atom in each molecule lies in a deep pocket ~ 1.2 nm nism.18 – 19b,21 – 23 One proposal is that the nearby imida-
from the surface and is surrounded by three histidine zole group of His 64 (not shown in Fig. 13-1) deproto-
side chains and one H O or OH – ion, the four ligands nates the bound H O via a hydrogen-bonded network
2 2
forming a distorted tetrahedron (Fig. 13-1). The coor- of bound water molecules (Eq. 13-3, step c). The side
dinating imidazole group from His 119 is hydrogen chain of Thr 199 may function in a cyclic proton trans-
bonded to a carboxylate group of Glu 117, a feature fer in step c.19 The proton generated in step c is released
reminiscent of the charge-relay system of serine pro- to the solvent in a process that is catalyzed by buffer
tease. This carboxylate group is also bound into a anions or by amines such as histamine. The latter
more extended hydrogen-bonded network, part of binds at the edge of the active site and forms an addi-
which is indicated in Fig. 13-1. The other imidazole tional hydrogen-bonded pathway to the zinc-bound
groups also form hydrogen bonds to protein groups H O.24 A different proton shuttle pathway has been
2
and the zinc-bound H O is involved in an extensive proposed for the slower carbonic anhydrase III.25
2
hydrogen-bonded network with several other bound Related to the reaction catalyzed by carbonic
water molecules and protein side chains.17a Most of anhydrase is the addition of an amino group to CO
2
these structural features are conserved in the other (Eq. 2-21) to form a carbamino group (– NH – COO –).
mammalian isoenzymes.5 However, from X-ray absorp- This reaction is essential to the functioning of hemo-
tionspectroscopy (EXAFS) it appears that spinach globin, which must carry large amounts of CO , as
2
carbonic anhydrase contains one or more sulfur ligands carbamino groups, from tissues to the lungs, (Eq. 7-47)
to the zinc,13 while the enzymes from the archaeon and to some enzymes such as ribulose bisphosphate
Methanosarcina thermophila have a left-handed β helix carboxylase (Figs. 13-10, 13-11).
structure (see Figs. 2-17 and 13-3).12 Nevertheless, this
enzyme has the same three-histidine Zn– OH structure
found in the mammalian enzymes.
Carbonic anhydrase II is among the most rapid

--- Page 682 ---

A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH, and R–SH to Polarized Double Bonds 679
2
A
Figure 13-1 (A) Stereoscopic
view showing the binding pocket
for HCO – in the active site of
3
human carbonic acid anhydrase I.
Also shown are the hydrogen-
bonded pairs E117 – H119 and
E106 – T199. ZNC, zinc ion; HCO,
bicarbonate. From Kumar and B
Kannan.16 (B) View of the active T199
site of carbonic anhydrase II. The N244
orientation is a little different than
in (A). The location of HO or –OH
2 N
bound to the zinc ion is marked X.
Hydrogen bonds from the three N Zn
histidines that form coordinate N
H96
bonds to the zinc, Q92, E117, the N
N
backbone carbonyl of N244, and
N H94
the hydrogen bond from the zinc-
bound hydroxyl to the T199 side Q92
H119
chain are shown as dashed lines.
From Kiefer et al.17 E117
bases (Fig. 14-4). Indeed, the groups C = O and H N–are
2. Imines (Schiff Bases) 2
inherently complementary and their interaction through
imine formation is extremely common.
As we have seen already, many enzymatic reac-
Schiff bases often form within a fraction of a sec-
tions depend upon formation of imines, which are
ond, but one or both steps of Eq. 13-4 may require
commonly called Schiff bases. The two-step formation
catalysis to achieve enzymatic velocities.27 The reac-
of Schiff bases consists of addition of an amino group
tion is usually completely reversible and formation
to a carbonyl group to form a carbinolamine followed
constants are often low enough that a carbonyl com-
by elimination of water (Eq. 13-4).26 One group of
pound present in small amounts will not react exten-
aldolases (Section D) have, at their active centers,
sively with an amine unless the two are brought
together on an enzyme surface. If the amino group
is hydrogen bonded to the enzyme, the proton may
H2N R'
H H remain on the Schiff base nitrogen, enhancing the
H a N R' electron-accepting properties of the C=N group. The
R C R C
pK values of Schiff bases with aliphatic aldehydes are
O H+ OH a
usually 1– 2 units lower than those of the corresponding
Carbinolamine
primary amines. However, the local environment may
b sometimes cause the pK to be increased. Most Schiff
a
H2O
bases are reduced readily by sodium borohydride or
H sodium cyanoborohydride to form secondary amines
R C
in which the original aldehydes are bound covalently
N R'
to the original amino groups (Eq. 3-34). This provides
Imine or Schiff base
(13-4) a method for locating sites of Schiff base formation in
enzymes. An isotopically substituted aldehyde or
amine can be employed, or an isotopic label can be
lysine side chains which form Schiff bases with the
introduced, by using 2H- or 3H-containing sodium
ketone substrates prior to the principal reaction of break-
borohydride in the reduction.
ing or forming a C – C bond. Similarly, the initial reac-
tion of the aldehyde coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate
with amino acid substrates is the formation of Schiff

--- Page 683 ---

680 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
addition of an amino group to the “front” side of the
3. Stereochemistry of Addition to Trigonal
carbonyl carbon in Eq. 13-5 (the si face as defined in
Carbon Atoms
Chapter 9) creates a carbinolamine of the S configura-
tion. Addition of the amino group from behind the
Adducts formed by enzymatic addition of nucleo-
plane of the paper (the re face) would lead to a carbinol-
philes to carbonyl groups are usually chiral. For example,
amine of the R configuration.
BOX 13-A ZINC
The average human ingests 10 – 15 mg of zinc a Since zinc ions have no color their presence has
day.a Although it is poorly absorbed, the concentra- often been overlooked. Zinc ions will doubtless be
tions of zinc in tissues are relatively high and the found in many more places within cells. Zinc is
metal plays an essential role in a multitude of en- usually the major component of the bound metals in
zymes. The total zinc content of a 70-kg person is themetallothioneins (Box 6-E). These small 6.6-kDa
1.4 – 2.3 g. A typical tissue concentration of Zn2+ is proteins which contain ~ 33% cysteine and bind as
0.3 – 0.5 mM; an unusually high content of ~15 mM many as six ions of Cd2+, Hg2+, Cu2+, or Zn2+ per
is found in the prostate gland. molecule are present in all animal tissues as well
Zinc ion is much more tightly bound to most as in plants and some bacteria.j
organic ligands than is Mg2+ (Table 6-9). It has a From a nutritional viewpoint, Cu2+ competes
filled 3dshell and tends to form four ionic bonds with zinc ion, as does the very toxic Cd2+. The latter
with a tetrahedral geometry, often with nitrogen- accumulates in the cortex of the kidney. Dietary
or sulfur-containing ligands.b Unlike Mg2+, which cadmium in concentrations less than those found in
interacts rapidly and reversibly with enzymes, Zn2+ human kidneys shortens the lives of rats and mice.
tends to be tightly bound within over 300 metallo- However, some marine diatoms contain a cadmium-
enzymes.c – e A common feature is the surrounding dependent carbonic anhydrase.n Although zinc
of the Zn2+ at the active center by three imidazole deficiency was once regarded as unlikely in humans,
groups, the fourth coordination position being free it is now recognized as occurring under a variety
for interaction with substrate. The second nitrogen of circumstanceso,p and is well-known in domestic
of the imidazole ring in many instances is hydrogen animals.q Consumption of excessive amounts of
bonded to a main chain carbonyl group of the pep- protein as well as alcoholism, malabsorption, sickle
tide, a feature that is also shared by histidines in cell anemia, and chronic kidney disease can all be
other metalloproteins. accompanied by zinc deficiency.
The most important chemical function of Zn2+
in enzymes is probably that of a Lewis acid providing a O’Dell, B. L., and Campbell, B. J. (1971) Comprehensive
a concentrated center of positive charge at a nucleo- Biochemistry21, 179–216
b Bock, C. W., Katz, A. K., and Glusker, J. P. (1995) J. Am. Chem.
philic site on the substrate.f This role for Zn2+is
Soc.117, 3754–3765
discussed for carboxypeptidases (Fig.12-16) and c Berg, J. M., and Shi, Y. (1996) Science271, 1081–1085
thermolysin,g alkaline phosphatase (Fig. 12-23),h dVallee, B. L., and Auld, D. S. (1993) Biochemistry32, 6493–6500
RNA polymerases, DNA polymerases, carbonic e Coleman, J. E. (1992) Ann. Rev. Biochem.61, 897–946
f Mildvan, A. S. (1974) Ann. Rev. Biochem.43, 357–399
anhydrase (Fig. 13-1),i class II aldolases (Fig. 13-7),
g Holland, D. R., Hausrath, A. C., Juers, D., and Matthews, B. W.
some alcohol dehydrogenases (Fig. 15-5), and super- (1995)Protein Sci.4, 1955–1965
oxide dismutases (Fig.16-22). Zinc ions in enzymes h Kimura, E., Kodama, Y., Koike, T., and Shiro, M. (1995) J. Am.
can often be replaced by Mn2+, Co2+, and other ions Chem. Soc.117, 8304–8311
i Lesburg, C. A., and Christianson, D. W. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
with substantial retention of catalytic activity.f,j
117, 6838–6844
In addition to its function in catalysis, zinc often j Kagi, J. H. R., Himmelhoch, S. R., Whanger, P. D., Bethune, J. L.,
plays an important structural role, e.g., in the zinc and Vallee, B. L. (1974) J. Biol. Chem.249, 3537–3542
finger transcriptional regulators (Fig. 5-38).k Zinc k Berg, J. M. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 6513–6516
l Hill, C. P., Dauter, Z., Dodson, E. J., Dodson, G. G., and Dunn,
ions bind to insulin and stabilize its hexameric
M. F. (1991) Biochemistry30, 917–924
structure (Fig. 7-18).l Six Zn2+ ions are present in mKozloff, L. M., and Lute, M. (1977) J. Biol. Chem.252, 7715–7724
the hexagonal tail plate of the T-even bacteriophage n Lane, T. W., and Morel, F. M. M. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(Box 7-C) and appear to be essential for invasion of U.S.A.97, 4627–4631
o Prasad, A. S. (1984) Fed. Proc.43, 2829–2834
bacteria.m In carnivores, the tapetum, the reflecting
p Day, H. G. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2315–2316
layer behind the retina of the eye of many animals, q Luecke, R. W. (1984) Fed. Proc.43, 2823–2828
contains crystals of the Zn2+–cysteine complex.

--- Page 684 ---

A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH, and R–SH to Polarized Double Bonds 681
2
NH2
R C C C O
a
R C C C O–
C H C H
C C HO– HO
N (Nu)
HO (Nu)
O H
Addition from “front” S configuration
(re face of the carbonyl carbon)
(13-5)
R C C C O
–
HO
Enolate anion
4. Addition to Carbon–Carbon Double Bonds, H+
Often Reversible Reactions b
Most of the reactions that we will consider in this
chapter involve addition of a proton to a carbon atom
or removal of a proton attached to a carbon atom. A R C C C O
H
frequent metabolic reaction is addition of water to a
HO
carbon–carbon double bond that is conjugated with a (Nu) (13-6)
carbonyl group. This transmits the polarization of the
carbonyl group to a position located two carbon atoms
further along the chain. facilitate elimination or addition at adjacent carbon atoms.
The carbonyl may be formed by oxidation of a hydroxyl
group or it may be provided by a thioester formed
with coenzyme A or with an acyl carrier protein
+
C C C C (Chapter 14).
R C O R C O–
Enoyl-CoA hydratase. A specific example of
the reaction in Eq. 13-6 is the addition of water to
trans-α,β-unsaturated CoA derivatives (Eq. 13-7). It
is catalyzed by enoyl–CoA hydratase (crotonase) from
C C
R + C O– mitochondria and is a step in the β oxidation of fatty
acids (Fig. 10-4 ).
H O
Because of this effect bases can add to a carbon–carbon
double bond in a position β to the carbonyl group as C C
in Eq. 13-6, step a. The product of addition of HO – is R C S CoA
the anion of an enol in which the negative charge is
H
distributed by resonance between the oxygen of the Enoyl-CoA hydratase
carbonyl group and the carbon adjacent to the carbonyl. H2O
A stable product results if a proton adds to the latter
H O
position (Eq. 13-6, step b). Many nucleophilic groups HO
(Nu in Eq. 13-6) other than HO –, may add, the reaction C C
being known as a Michael addition. If a neutral
R CH2 S CoA
nucleophile Nu adds, the product may lose a proton, l-β-Hydroxyacyl-CoA (13-7)
or transfer it to the adjacent carbon in Eq. 13-6, step b,
to give a neutral end product. The reverse of an
addition reaction of this type is also known as an The enzyme is a hexamer, actually a dimer of trimers
elimination reaction. made up of 291-residue polypeptide chains.28 Aceto-
Enzymatic reactions involving addition to a C = C acetyl-CoA is a competitive inhibitor which binds into
bond adjacent to a carbonyl group (or in which elimi- the active site and locates it. From the X-ray structure
nation occurs α,β to a carbonyl) are numerous. Except of the enzyme–inhibitor complex it can be deduced
for some enzymes acting by free radical mechanisms, that the carboxylate group of E144 abstracts a proton
the nucleophilic group always adds at the β position from a water molecule to provide the hydroxyl ion
suggesting that the mechanism portrayed by Eq. 13-7 that binds to the β position (Eq. 13-6, step a) and that
is probable. It is noteworthy that frequently in a meta- the E164 carboxyl group donates a proton to the inter-
bolic sequence a carbonyl group is deliberately introduced to mediate enolate anion in step b.28 The hydroxyl group

--- Page 685 ---

682 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
and the proton enter from the same side of the double H
O N
bond in a syn addition. The X-ray structure shows
C C CH2 C
that the E144 and E164 side chains are on the same S C CH3
side of the double bond, accounting for this stereo-
O
chemistry.28,28a
O
H
N
E144 H C
C C C S C CH3
O C H
– O
O G141
N
H H
N O
O
H
H O N (13-8)
H
C C
R 3 C 2 S CoA
N
H
H
O O H
S209
Y6 O
E164 H S – CH3 CH2
Glutathione O O
H H
Cinnamoyl-CoA thiol esters (R = phenyl in the foregoing H + O
structure) contain a good light-absorbing group (chro-
mophore). Binding to the protein induces distinct
shifts in the ultraviolet absorption spectrum and also
in13C NMR and Raman spectra. These shifts suggest
that binding induces an enhanced positive charge at
C-3 and formation of a strong hydrogen bond to the Y115
carbonyl group.29 The X-ray studies indicate that this
Glutathione S CH3
bond is to the G141 peptide nitrogen as shown. These O
Soluble product (13-9)
results favor an enolate anion intermediate as in Eq.
13-6. However, kinetic isotope effects30 as well as studies
of proton exchange have suggested a concerted mech- eukayotic glutathione S-transferases–one membrane-
anism with water adding at the same time that a pro- associated microsomal35 and five cytosolic.36 – 40 They
ton binds at C-2.30–31a play an important role in detoxifying many xenobiotics
A closely related E. coli protein is a 79-kDa multi- and other relatively hydrophobic compounds by con-
functional enzyme that catalyzes four different reac- verting them to more soluble compounds that can be
tions of fatty acid oxidation (Chapter 17). The amino- degraded and excreted easily (see Box 11-B). A pair of
terminal region contains the enoyl hydratase activity.32 tyrosines appear to participate in catalysis, as is indi-
A quite different enzyme catalyzes dehydration of cated in Eq. 13-9.38,41 Glutathione S-transferases have
thioesters of β-hydroxyacids such as 3-hydroxydecanoyl- attracted attention because of their role in detoxifying
acyl carrier protein (see Eq. 21-2) to both form and anticancer drugs. Cancer cells can become resistant to
isomerize enoyl-ACP derivatives during synthesis of drugs as a result of excessive synthesis of these detoxi-
unsaturated fatty acids by E. coli. Again, a glutamate fying enzymes. At the same time glutathione trans-
side chain is the catalytic base but an imidazole group ferases protect human patients from drugs. In plants
of histidine has also been implicated.33 This enzyme these enzymes may provide protection from insecti-
is inhibited irreversibly by the N-acetylcysteamine cides and herbicides.41a Glutathione transferases of
thioester of 3-decynoic acids (Eq. 13-8). This was one pathogenic organisms such as schistosomes are appro-
of the first enzyme-activated inhibitors to be studied.34 priate targets for new drugs as well as for vaccines.42
Nonenzymatic Michael addition of glutathione to such
Glutathione S-transferases. Addition of gluta- compounds as 4-hydroxynonenal, a product of per-
thione (Box 11-B) to a large variety of different sub- oxidation of the polyunsaturated arachidonate (see Eq.
strates containing electrophilic centers, such as that at 21-15) are also biochemically important.
theβ position in an α,β-unsaturated ketone (Eq. 13-9),
is catalyzed by the ubiquitous group of enzymes called Chlorobenzoyl-CoA dehalogenase. The enzymatic
glutathioneS-transferases. There are six classes of release of chloride ion from 4-chloroxybenzoyl-CoA

--- Page 686 ---

A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH, and R–SH to Polarized Double Bonds 683
2
would be hard to explain by a simple nucleophilic
5. Addition to Double Bonds Adjacent to
displacement by HO –. However, addition of HO –,
Carboxylate Groups
followed by elimination of Cl –, would be chemically
reasonable. Nevertheless, single-turnover studies
Biochemical reactions often involve addition to
revealed a more complex mechanism involving forma-
C=C bonds that are not conjugated with a true carbonyl
tion of a covalent adduct with the enzyme.43,44 A car-
group but with the poorer electron acceptor –COO–.
boxylate group adds and Cl – is eliminated to form of
While held on an enzyme a carboxylate group may
an oxygen ester, which is then hydrolyzed to the final
be protonated, making it a better electron acceptor.
product (Eq. 13-10). Studies of mutant enzymes45
Nevertheless, there has been some doubt as to whether
together with X-ray crystallography46 support this
the carbanion mechanism of Eq. 13-6 holds for these
mechanism. As with enoyl-CoA hydratase, binding of
enzymes. Some experimental data suggested a quite
substrate to chlorobenzoyl-CoA dehalogenase causes
different mechanism, one that has been established for
alterations in ultraviolet, NMR, and Raman spectra
the nonenzymatic hydration of alkenes. An example
that can be interpreted as indicating enhanced polar-
is the hydration of ethylene by hot water with dilute
ization of the benzoyl group.47,48 For example, changes
sulfuric acid as a catalyst (Eq. 13-11), an industrial
in the C=O stretching frequency suggest that the bond
method of preparation of ethanol. The electrons of the
is elongated, presumably as a result of hydrogen
double bond form the point of attack by a proton, and
bonding to the N–H of G114, which lies at the N ter-
the resulting carbocation readily abstracts a hydroxyl
minus of an α helix and experiences the additional
polarizing effect of the helix dipole (Fig. 2-20).48,49
+
This effect can be compared with that mentioned H H H H
+
previously for enoyl-CoA hydratase. C C H3C C
H H H
Carbocation
D145
H2O
+
Cl Cl C H
–
–O O H3C CH2OH (13-11)
CoA—S
ion from water. Direct addition of OH– to ethylene to
form a carbanion is not favored, because there is no
ATP ADP + Pi
adjacent carbonyl group to stabilize the negative
C C charge.
–
O O O S CoA
Fumarate hydratase.The most studied enzyme
of this group is probably the porcine mitochondrial
D145 D145 fumarate hydratase (fumarase; see also Chapter 9),
a tetramer of 48.5-kDa subunits50 with a turnover
C C number of ~ 2 x 103 s–1. It accelerates the hydration
Cl O O O O OH reaction more than 1015-fold.51 A similar enzyme, the
467-residue fumarase C whose three-dimensional
H2O structure is known,52,53 is found in cells of E. coli when
grown aerobically. The product of the fumarate hydra-
Cl
– tase reaction is L-malate (S-malate). The stereospecificity
is extremely high. If the reaction is carried out in 2H O
2
C C C an atom of 2H is incorporated into the pro-R position,
–
O S CoA O S CoA O S CoA i.e., the proton is added strictly from the re face of the
(13-10)
trigonal carbon (Eq. 13-12). To obtain L-malate the
hydroxyl must have been added from the opposite
In fact, close sequence and structural homologies show
side of the double bond. Such anti(trans) addition is
that chlorobenzoyl-CoA dehalogenase, enoyl-CoA
much more common in both nonenzymatic and enzy-
hydratase, and a variety of other hydratases, isomerases,
matic reactions than is addition of both H and OH
synthases, lyases, and hydrolases belong to a large
(or – Y) from the same side (syn,cis, or adjacent addi-
family of related proteins.49a,49b,49c
tion).54 For concerted addition it is a natural result of
stereoelectronic control. Almost all enzymatic addition
and elimination reactions involving free carboxylic
acids are anti with the proton entering from the re face,

--- Page 687 ---

684 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
Hydroxyl added l-Malate
in front
–OH
–
H COO
(si face)
a
C C – OH
–
OOC H –
+ H COO
Fumarate *H Proton added + b
from behind C C Fumarate
HO H (re fa C ce O ) O– – OOC H *H +
*H
C C Carbocation (13-14)
–OOC H
*H
l-Malate (13-12) mechanism for the reasons considered in Chapter 12
and suggested that step b of Eq. 13-14 is rate limiting.
suggesting that there has been conservation through- The relative values of V for hydration of fumarate,
max
out evolution of a single basically similar mecha- fluorofumarate, and difluorofumarate (104, 410, and 86
nism.54,55 mol ml–1 min–1 mg–1) also seemed to support the car-
The pH dependence of the action of fumarate bocation mechanism.58
hydratase indicates participation of both an acidic and However, it has become clear that protons removed
a basic group with pK values of 5.8 and 7.1.56 See from a substrate to a basic group in a protein need not
a
Chapter 9 for additional information. However, either exchange rapidly with solvent (see Eq. 9-102). In fact,
anion or carbocation mechanisms might be possible. the proton removed by fumarate hydratase from malate
That the cleavage of the C – H bond is not rate limiting is held by the enzyme for relatively long periods of
is suggested by the observation that malate containing time. Its rate of exchange between malate and solvent
2H in the pro-R position is dehydrated at the same rate is slower than the exchange of a bound fumarate ion
as ordinary malate. If the anion mechanism (Eq. 13-13) on the enzyme surface with another substrate molecule
is correct, the 2H from the pro-R position of specifically from the medium.59 Thus, the overall rate is deter-
labeled malate might be removed rapidly, while the mined by the speed of dissociation of products from the
loss of OH – could be slower. If so, the 2H would be enzyme and we cannot yet decide whether removal of
“washed out” of L-malate faster than could happen a proton precedes or follows loss of OH –.
by conversion to fumarate followed by rehydration Two new lines of evidence suggest that proton
to malate. In fact, the opposite was observed. abstraction comes first. A careful study of both 18O
and2H isotope effects60 supports the carbanion inter-
mediate, as does the strong inhibition by anions of
l-Malate
3-nitropropionate and 3-nitro-2-hydroxypropionate.61
+ To provide a good electron sink the carboxylate group
H
+ O adjacent to the proton that is removed by fumarate
H
H – hydratase must either be actually protonated in the
HO C O enzyme–substrate (ES) complex or paired with and
C C Fumarate
– OOC – H hydrogen bonded to a positively charged group.
H2O
Carbanion
Y
– or
M2+
O
H H
H
–
HO C O
R O H N
C C
–
OOC H C C – + C NH Protein
–
aci-Carboxylate
H O H N
resonance form (13-13)
H
Carbanion Guanidinium
The hydroxyl group was lost rapidly and the 2H more group
slowly. This result suggested the carbocation ion
H
mechanism of Eq. 13-14.
While no primary isotope rate effect was observed, R O – H N
when the hydrogen at C-2 or the pro-S hydrogen at C-3
C C + C NH Protein
of malate was replaced by 2H or 3H distinct secondary
–
isotope effects were seen. Thus, k(1H) / k(2H) = 1.09 H O H N
for both the pro-S and the C-3 hydrogen atoms.57
H
These findings appeared to support the carbocation aci-Carboxylate
resonance form

--- Page 688 ---

A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH, and R–SH to Polarized Double Bonds 685
2
The anion formed by removal of the 3-H is analogous Enolase. A key reaction in the metabolism of
to the enolate anion of Eq. 13-6 and has a strong struc- sugars is the dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate to
tural similarity to the readily formed anions of organic formphosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), the phospho
nitro compounds. The nitronate anions may, perhaps, derivative of the enolic form of pyruvic acid:
be regarded as transition state inhibitors.
–
HO COO
–
O O
H2C C H
N O – N O – O PO3 2–
R C R C 2-Phosphoglycerate
–
H H
Nitronate anion Mg2+ or Mn2+
H2O
COO–
There is still a third possible mechanism for the H2C C
fumarate hydratase reaction. The proton and hydroxyl OPO3
2–
groups may be added simultaneously in a concerted Phosphoenolpyruvate (13-15)
reaction.62 However, observed kinetic isotope effects
are not consistent with this mechanism.60 In 1997 the
structure of fumarase C of E. coli was reported.52,53 A carbanionic intermediate has often been suggested
Each active site of the tetrameric enzyme is formed for this enzyme.67,68 However, despite measurements
using side chains from three different subunits. The of kinetic isotope effects and many other experiments
H188 imidazole is hydrogen bonded to an active site it has been difficult to establish a detailed mecha-
water molecule and is backed up by the E331 carboxy- nism.68
late which forms a familiar catalytic pair. However, Enolase has a complex metal ion requirement,68a,69
these results have not clarified the exact mode of usually met by Mg2+ and Mn2+. From NMR studies of
substrate binding nor the details of the catalytic mech- the relaxation of water protons, it was concluded that
anism. Structural studies of fumarate hydratase from a Mn2+ ion coordinates two rapidly exchangeable
yeast53a and the pig53b are also in progress. water molecules in the free enzyme. When substrate
binds, one of these water molecules may be immobi-
Some other fumarate-forming reactions. lized and may participate in an addition reaction that
Other enzymes that catalyze elimination reactions forms phosphoenolpyruvate (reverse of reaction 13-15).
that produce fumarate are aspartate ammonia-lyase A tightly bound “conformational” metal ion is located
(aspartase),63argininosuccinate lyase (Fig. 24-10, in the known three-dimensional structure in such a
reaction g),64,65 and adenylosuccinate lyase
(Fig. 25-15). In every case it is NH or an
3
amine, rather than an OH group, that is
eliminated. However, the mechanisms 2-PGA
probably resemble that of fumarate hydra- O O
tase. Sequence analysis indicated that all of O D320 O P H159 H
these enzymes belong to a single fumarase- O – O O N
2+
aspartase family.64,65 The three-dimensional Metal site I M – H N
structure of aspartate ammonia-lyase resem- O
O–
bles that of fumarate hydratase, but the H+
H
O
O
H O
Loop L2
catalytic site lacks the essential H188 of E295 H –
N –
fumarate hydratase. However, the pK a val- O O
O
ues deduced from the pH dependence of
V are similar to those for fumarase.64 E168 E211
max
3-Methylaspartate lyase catalyzes the same K396
kind of reaction to produce ammonia plus
cis-mesaconate.63 Its sequence is not related
to that of fumarase and it may contain a
dehydroalanine residue (Chapter 14).66
Figure 13-2 View of the active site of yeast enolase containing a
bound molecule of 2-phospho-D-glycerate. The catalytic magnesium
–
H COO ion is at the left but the “conformational” metal is not visible here.
C C The imidazole group of His 159 serves as the catalytic base and the
– OOC CH3 –
a n
N
d
H
N
3 +
o
o
w
f
a
L
k
y
.6
s
9
396 or Lys 34573b as the catalytic acid. From Vinarov
cis-Mesaconate

--- Page 689 ---

686 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
way that it might function in this manner. A more
loosely bound “catalytic” metal ion is also essential.69 – 72
Figure 13-2 shows a view of the active site of yeast
enolase occupied by a molecule of bound 2-phospho-
glycerate. Histidine 159 is probably the catalytic base
that removes the α-proton to form an aci-anion which
is stabilized by interaction with the catalytic Mg2+ ion.
A protonated lysine 396 amino group may be the
catalytic acid.68a,69 The active site is surrounded by a
complex hydrogen-bonded network.73 As is discussed
in Section B, a large number of other enzymes belong
to an enolase superfamily of enzymes. Among them
isglucarate dehydratase, which initiates a pathway
for catabolism of D-glucarate and galactarate in E.
coli.73a
Pectate lyase and related enzymes. A group of
polysaccharide lyases cleave the chains of polymers
of uronic acids with 1,4 linkages such as pectins, hyal-
uronan, heparin,74,75 and dermatan sulfate (Fig. 4-11).
These bacterial enzymes also employ an elimination
mechanism.76 The geometry of the β-linked galactur-
onic acid units of pectin is favorable for anti elimina-
tion of the 5-H and the O-glycosyl group in the 4
Figure 13-3 The three-dimensional structure of pectate
position (Eq. 13-16). However, the corresponding
lyase C showing locations of amino acids substituted by
hyaluronate lyase (hyaluronidase) acting on glucu-
oligonucleotide-directed mutation of the cloned gene.
ronic acid residues causes a syn elimination. These The green dot labeled Ca is the Ca2+-binding site.79 Courtesy
results suggest the formation of anionic intermediates of Frances Jurnak.
which can eliminate a substituent from either the
equatorial or axial position of the sugar ring. Hyal-
uronate lyase from the pathogenic Streptococcus pneu-
moniae apparently utilizes an imidazole group as the obvious from the structure but on the basis of the
catalytic base and a tyrosine side chain as the proton effects of a large number of mutations, it is thought
donor in the reaction.76a,76b to be near the Ca2+- binding site labeled in Fig. 13-3.
Pectate lyase C from the plant pathogen Erwinia, Replacement of any of three Asp or Glu and three Lys
which causes soft-rot in many different plants, has a residues in this region leads to loss of or reduction in
parallelβ barrel structure (Fig. 13-3)77 which is similar catalytic activity.79
to that of the tailspike protein shown in Fig. 2-17 and
represents what may be a very large structural family
of proteins.78 The location of the active site is not 6. Aconitase and Related Iron – Sulfur Proteins
Two consecutive reactions of the citric acid cycle
+
H (Fig. 10-6), the dehydration of citrate to form cis-aconi-
tate and the rehydration in a different way to form
O O OH
O isocitrate (Eq. 13-17), are catalyzed by aconitase (aconi-
C
4 5 O tate hydratase). Both reactions are completely stereo-
specific. In the first (Eq. 13-17, step a), the pro-R proton
H O
HO from C-4 (stereochemical numbering) of citrate is
OH removed and in step cisocitrate is formed. Proton
Galacturonic acid unit of pectin
addition is to the re face in both cases.
O OH As with fumarate hydratase, the enzyme holds the
C abstracted proton (for up to 7 x 10–5 s) long enough so
that a cis-aconitate molecule sometimes diffuses from
O
the enzyme and (if excess cis-aconitate is present) is
OH
O O replaced by another. The result is that the new cis-
HO aconitate molecule sometimes receives the proton
OH (13-16)
(intermolecular proton transfer). The proton removed

--- Page 690 ---

A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH, and R–SH to Polarized Double Bonds 687
2
BOX 13-B EPSP SYNTHASE AND THE HERBICIDE GLYPHOSATE
The reversible reaction of phosphoenolpyruvate product.f – h Glyphosate was for many years viewed
(PEP) with shikimate 3-phosphate is a step in the as a transition-state analog but more recently has
synthesis of the aromatic amino acids (see Fig. 25-1). been shown to be a tight-binding noncompetitive
The chemical mechanism indicated inhibitor.i
3
HO
–
COO
O P
H O
Shikimate 3-phosphate
+
H O P a
HO
H2C C
COO
–
COO – H O O P
PEP
H C C
O P
H COO – b HO
–
COO
Adduct O P
O
P
i
H2C C
–
COO
5-Enolpyruvoylshikimate-3-phosphate (EPSP)
was proposed by Leaven and Sprinson in 1964.a A related mechanism is utilized in the biosyn-
Stepa is unusualb because it involves protonation thesis of UDP-muramic acid (Eq. 20-6).j There is an
on the methylene carbon of PEP and addition of a enolpyruvoyl adduct analogous to that of EPSP
nucleophile at C-2, the opposite of the addition in synthase; a proposed enolpyruvoyl-enzyme adduct
the enolase reaction (Eq. 13-15, reverse). It is likely with Cys 115 is not on the major path.k,l However,
that formation of a cationic intermediate precedes this enzyme is not inhibited by glyphosate.i
that of the adduct shown. However, the structure
of the adduct has been confirmed by isolation from a Levin, J. G., and Sprinson, D. B. (1964) J. Biol. Chem.239, 1142–
the active site and by synthesisc and it has been 1150
observed in the active site by NMR spectroscopy.d b Barlow, P. N., Appleyard, R. J., Wilson, B. J. O., and Evans, J.
N. S. (1989) Biochemistry28, 7985–7991
The three-dimensional structure of EPSP synthase is c Anderson, K. S., Sikorski, J. A., Benesi, A. J., and Johnson, K.
known.e,m It is inhibited by the commercial herbi- A. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.110, 6577–6579
cideglyphosate [N-(phosphonomethyl) glycine] d Appleyard, R. J., Shuttleworth, W. A., and Evans, J. N. S.
(1994)Biochemistry33, 6812–6821
whose structure is somewhat similar to that of the
e Stallings, W. C., Abdel-Meguid, S. S., Lim, L. W., Shieh, H.-S.,
proposed carbocation that arises from PEP. The
Dayringer, H. E., Leimgruber, N. K., Stegeman, R. A.,
inhibitor (Z)-3-fluorophosphoenolpyruvate is a Anderson, K. S., Sikorski, J. A., Padgette, S. R., and Kishore,
pseudosubstrate that reacts in step a to give a stable G. M. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.88, 5046–5050
f Alberg, D. G., Lauhon, C. T., Nyfeler, R., Fässler, A., and
adduct unable to go through step b to form a
Bartlett, P. A. (1992) J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 3535–3546
g Walker, M. C., Jones, C. R., Somerville, R. L., and Sikorski, J.
A. (1992) J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 7601–7603
+
O PO3
2–
+
CH2 PO3
2– h R
(1
e
9
a
9
m
2)
,
B
J.
i o
E
c
.
h
,
e
Y
m
u
i
e
s
n
tr
,
y
H
3
.
1
K
, 5
.,
5
F
2
r
8
a
–
zi
5
e
5
r
3
,
4
R. B., and Sikorski, J. A.
H3C C H2N i Sammons, R. D., Gruys, K. J., Anderson, K. S., Johnson, K. A.,
COO – CH2 COO – and Sikorski, J. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 6433–6440
Carbocation j Samland, A. K., Amrhein, N., and Macheroux, P. (1999)
Glyphosate
Biochemistry38, 13162–13169
k Skarzynski, T., Kim, D. H., Lees, W. J., Walsh, C. T., and
H O PO3
2–
Duncan, K. (1998) Biochemistry37, 2572–2577
C C l Jia, Y., Lu, Z., Huang, K., Herzberg, O., and Dunaway-Mariano,
D. (1999) Biochemistry38, 14165–14173
–
F COO mLewis, J., Johnson, K. A., and Anderson, K. S. (1999) Biochemistry
(Z)-3-Fluorophosphonoenolypyruvate 38, 7372–7379

--- Page 691 ---

688 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
from citrate is often returned to the molecule O – O O – O
in Eq. 13-17, stepb, but the position of C C
r A e p en p t a r r y e n is t l d y, i f a f f e t r e e r n t t h f e r o in m it i t a h l a p t r o o f t o re n m re o m va o l v . al, B HR C C 3 O H Fe a – O C 5,1 C C C H H O 2 H Fe
t s h o e th ci a s t - a it c o ca n n it a b t e e r t e h h a y t d is r a fo te r d m ( e E d q “ . f 1 l 3 ip -1 s 7 o , v s e te r p ” O 5 C HS H + B O H C 1,5
c) with participation of the same groups – O C 1 BH O – O
involved in dehydration but with formation O – O cis-Aconitate
of the new product.80,80a R580 + Citrate +
b
Aconitase contains iron in the form of Aconitate molecule flips 180°
an Fe S iron-sulfur cluster (Fig. 13-4).81–83
4 4 O – O O – O
However, the enzyme is usually isolated in C O C
a form that does not show its maximum O 1 Fe – 1, 5 Fe
H C
activity until it has been incubated with – C C O O C
C H + c C O
ferrous iron (Fe2+). The inactive form of the O 3 HB B H 3 H H
enzyme is thought to contain an Fe 3 S 4 BH CH2 CH2
cluster (Chapter 16) which is converted O 5 O C 5, 1
back to the Fe S cluster by the incubation cis-Aconitate –
4 4 – 2R, 3S-Isocitrate
+ O + O
(13-17)
A
B R452
O
D568
– C424
+ S
O
S Fe
C358
+ O C – O H Fe S S
O O Fe S
R644 O – C H Fe
O – H C C O H S C421
H
Ser O CH 2 H S
– N
Figure 13-4 (A) Stereoscopic view of the active site of
O N + mitochondrial aconitase with a molecule of L-isocitrate
+ H O placed by modeling next to the Fe S cluster. This cluster
– 4 4
still has a water molecule bound to one iron atom as in the
H101
R580 O free enzyme.83 Courtesy of C. D. Stout. (B) Interpretive
D100 diagram.

--- Page 692 ---

A. Addition of R–OH, R–NH, and R–SH to Polarized Double Bonds 689
2
with Fe2+.84 – 87 From Mössbauer spectroscopy it was dehydratase and some related iron-sulfur enzymes
deduced that the iron atom that is lost upon inactiva- (pp. 861-862) may act via a mechanism related to that
tion is the binding site for the – OH group of citrate or of vitamin B .
12
isocitrate and of an adjacent carboxylate.87 Since iron
can engage in oxidation–reduction processes, aconi-
tase could act by a mechanism different from others 7. Addition to or Formation of Isolated
discussed here. However, an Fe – OH group could Double Bonds
act much as does the Zn – OH of carbonic anhydrase
(Eq. 13-4). Any redox chemistry may be involved in Only a few examples are known in which an
control of the enzyme. enzyme induces addition to a double bond that is not
X-ray studies have confirmed the proximity of the conjugated with a carbonyl or carboxyl group. Pseudo-
Fe S cluster to bound substrate analogs.83,88 The iso- monads have been observed to catalyze stereospecific
4 4
citrate shown in Fig. 13-4 was fitted into the active site hydration of oleic acid to D-10-hydroxystearate.96 The
by modeling. It shows the water molecule bound to addition is antiand the proton enters from the re face.
the Fe S cluster as observed for the free enzyme.83
4 4
Notice that this cluster is held by three cysteine side
chains (C358, C421, and C424) rather than the usual 8. Conjugative and Decarboxylative
four (Chapter 16). The fourth iron atom is free to bind Elimination Reactions
to water. When the enzyme acts on isocitrate this
water must be displaced by the one generated from Elimination can occur if the electrophilic and
the substrate. The Fe probably acts as a polarizing nucleophilic groups to be removed are located not on
electrophile that assists in the elimination but it is adjacent carbon atoms but rather are separated from
apparently the histidine–aspartate pair (H101– D100) each other by a pair of atoms joined by a double bond.
that serves as the catalytic acid in generating the H O. Such a conjugative elimination of phosphate is the last
2
What is the catalytic base? The only candidate seen in step in the biosynthesis of chorismate (Eq. 13-18, step a).
the structure is the Ser 642 – OH, dissociated to – O –. Chorismate is converted to prephenate (see Box 9-E)
Can this be correct? Mutational analysis supports which undergoes a conjugative and decarboxylative
the essential role of this side chain.80a The peptide elimination (Eq. 13-18, step c) with loss of both water
NH and guanidinium groups of R644 appear to pro- and CO to form phenylpyruvate, the immediate bio-
2
vide an “oxyanion hole” (Chapter 12) that stabilizes synthetic precursor of phenylalanine. These reactions
the negative charge.86 Mutations also support the provide a good example of how elimination reactions
role of the His-Asp pair.88,89 Another His–Asp pair can be used to generate aromatic groups. In fact, this is the
(H167– D165) is located directly behind the bound usual method of synthesis of aromatic rings in nature.
substrate and Fe – OH in Fig. 13-4A and is apparently Notice the stereochemistry of Eq. 13-18, step a.
2
also essential.88 Orbital interaction rules predict that if the elimination
Aconitase exists as both mitochondrial and cyto- is a concerted process it should be syn. The observed
solic isoenzyme forms of similar structure. However, anti elimination suggests a more complex mechanism
the cytosolic isoenzyme has a second function. In its involving participation of a nucleophilic group of the
apoenzyme form, which lacks the iron–sulfur cluster, enzyme.97
it acts as the much-studied iron regulatory factor, Elimination usually involves loss of a proton
or iron-responsive element binding protein (IRE-BP). together with a nucleophilic group such as – OH,
This protein binds to a specific stem-loop structure in – NH +, phosphate, or pyrophosphate. However, as in
3
the messenger RNA for proteins involved in iron Eq. 13-18, step c, electrophilic groups such as – COO –
transport and storage (Chapter 28).86,90 can replace the proton. Another example is the con-
Other enzymes in the aconitase family include version of mevalonic acid-5-pyrophosphate to
isopropylmalate isomerase and homoaconitase isopentenyl pyrophosphate (Eq. 13-19): This is a key
enzymes functioning in the chain elongation pathways reaction in the biosynthesis of isoprenoid compounds
to leucine and lysine, both of which are pictured in such as cholesterol and vitamin A (Chapter 22). The
Fig. 17-18.90 There are also iron–sulfur dehydratases, phosphate ester formed in step a is a probable inter-
some of which may function by a mechanism similar mediate and the reaction probably involves a carbo-
to that of aconitase. Among these are the two fumarate cationic intermediate generated by the loss of phosphate
hydratases,fumarases A and B, which are formed in prior to the decarboxylation.
place of fumarase C by cells of E. coli growing anaero-
bically.91,92 Also related may be bacterial L-serine and
L-threonine dehydratases. These function without
the coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate (Chapter 14)
but contain iron–sulfur centers.93 – 95 A lactyl-CoA

--- Page 693 ---

690 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
–
OOC
C
CH
H
2 H
OPO3
2– 9. Isomerization Assisted by Addition
HO H An interesting use is made of addition to a double
O
bond by glutathione-dependent cis–trans isomerases.76
H One of them converts maleate to fumarate with a
H COO – turnover number of 300 s–1. Similar enzymes, which
5-Enoylpyruvylshikimate-3-P participate in bacterial breakdown of aromatic com-
pounds (Fig. 25-7), isomerize maleylacetoacetate and
a
P maleylpyruvate to the corresponding fumaryl deriva-
– i
OOC tives (Eq. 13-20). The – SH group of bound glutathione
C CH2 is thought to add to the double bond. Rotation can
O then occur in the enolic intermediate. Thiocyanate ion
catalyzes the isomerization of maleic acid nonenzy-
matically, presumably by a similar mechanism.
OH
–
COO – G S COO –
Chorismate Glutathione
Choris ( m Se a e t e B m ox u 9 ta -E se ) b O COO – – OOC O O
C +
H
Maleylpyruvate
H CH2
G S
HO C O – COO –
+
H
O –
Prephenate OOC
OH O
Rotation is possible in
c H 2 O, CO 2 O this enolic intermediate
C G SH
–
CH2 COO
O O
Phenylpyruvate Phenylalanine
(13-18) –
COO
–
OOC
Fumarylpyruvate (13-20)
OH – O O HO CH3
O
–
P P COO
–
O O O
Mevalonic acid diphosphate 10. Reversibility of Addition and Elimination
Reactions
a
Many addition and elimination reactions, e.g., the
–
O
hydration of aldehydes and ketones, and reactions
O
P catalyzed by lyases such as fumarate hydratase are
HO
strictly reversible. However, biosynthetic sequences
O CH3 O
are often nearly irreversible because of the elimination
C of inorganic phosphate or pyrophosphate ions. Both
–
P P O O of these ions occur in low concentrations within cells
so that the reverse reaction does not tend to take place.
b
P, CO In decarboxylative eliminations, carbon dioxide is
i 2
produced and reversal becomes unlikely because of
CH3
the high stability of CO . Further irreversibility is
2
introduced when the major product is an aromatic
P P O CH2
ring, as in the formation of phenylpyruvate.
Isopentyl pyrophosphate (13-19)

--- Page 694 ---

B. Enolic Intermediates in Enzymatic Reactions 691
base for deprotonation of R-mandelate.102 – 104 The
B. Enolic Intermediates in Enzymatic
enzyme is structurally a member of the enolase super-
Reactions
family105 and requires Mg2+ for activity. The pH depen-
dence of the reaction velocity k reveals two pK values
Enzymologists have freely proposed enolate anions, cat a
in the ES complex; ~ 6.4 and ~ 10.0. These are the same
enols, and enamines as intermediates for many years.
forS- and R- isomers. How can the pK values be
Such intermediates have been demonstrated for some a
assigned? Do they each belong in part to His 297 and
nonenzymatic acid- or base-catalyzed reactions, but
in part to Lys 166? Do other adjacent groups also share?
how can enzymes form enolates at pH 7 without the
In the K166R mutant the lower pK is raised to 8.0.
use of strong acids or bases? The microscopic pK a
value of an α-hydrogen in a ketone or aldehyde is a The D270N mutant has lost all but 0.01% of its catalytic
activity.104
about 17 – 20.72,98,99
The carboxylate group of the mandelate interacts
with side chains of E317, K264, and a Mg2+ ion (Fig.
R1 O R1 O 13-5). These may serve both to protonate the carboxy-
pKa 17–20
C C C C late and also to help stabilize an aci anion formed upon
–
R2 H R2 dissociation of the α-hydrogen (Eq. 13-22). Both pK a
values for mandelic acid and its enolic form and the
equilibrium constants for enolization in water are
–
R1 O
known107 and are given beside the arrows in Eq. 13-22.
C C
It is difficult to imagine how a base with a pK near
a
R2 (13-21) neutrality could remove an α-proton with a pK of
a
22.0, which is 14 pK units away from the pK of the
a
catalytic base. This corresponds to a thermodynamic
It will be similar for an acyl-CoA. However, for a
barrier (Eq. 9-97) of 14 x 5.7 = 80 kJ/ mol, making the
carboxylic acid, protonated on oxygen, the pK will be
a reaction impossibly slow. In addition to this thermo-
much higher (~ 22 – 25) and for carboxylate anions
dynamic barrier the rates of dissociation of carbon acids
even higher (~ 29 – 32).100
are known to be slow, presumably because of the lack
of hydrogen bond formation between the C – H proton
and the catalytic base (Eq. 9-97). This intrinsic barrier
1. Mandelate Racemase and Related
(Chapter 9) for simple ketones has been estimated
Enzymes
as 45 kJ/ mol for a total barrier of ~125 kJ. However,
the observed ∆G‡as estimated from Eq. 9-81 is only
The degradation of mandelic acid by the bacterium
~57 kJ/ mol. The enzyme must catalyze the reaction
Pseudomonas putida (Chapter 25) is initiated by mandalate
racemase, another (α/β) -barrel protein.101 X-ray by lowering the very high thermodynamic barrier and
8 perhaps also by lowering the intrinsic barrier.72,108
structures of bound inhibitors together with modeling
Protonation of the carboxylate greatly decreases
suggest that the side chain of Lys 264 is the catalytic
base that abstracts the α-H from S-mandelate (Fig. 13-5) the microscopic pK a for loss of the α-hydrogen as a
proton to form the enolic aci acid (Eq. 13-22). Double
and that the catalytic pair of His 297 and Asp 270 acts
protonation, although depending upon a pK of – 8,
as proton donor, or, in the reverse direction, as catalytic a
E317
O O
H
H –O
N H
: H297
H+ C
K264 H N H O C Figure 13-5 An S-mandelate ion in the
K166 H O HN N H O – O active site of mandelate racemase. Only
O Mg2+ H some of the polar groups surrounding
– O – the active site are shown. The enzyme
O – O has two catalytic acid–base groups.
D195 O O D270
Lysine 166 is thought to deprotonate
S-mandelate to form the aci anion, while
E221 His 297 deprotonates R-mandelate to
E247 form the same anion.106

--- Page 695 ---

692 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
–
HO HO O
~–8 ~3.4
C C C C C C
+
HO H O H O H
HO HO B HO
Mandelic acid
log ke = –15.4
log ke = –18.6
~7.4
22.0
HO HO
6.6
C C C C
–
HO OH O OH
aci Acid (enol) form (13-22)
would reduce the pK of the α-hydrogen to ~ 7.4, making ture almost identical to that of mandelate racemase but
a
it very easy to enolize109 and solving the thermodynamic has incorporated an additional feature that allows
problem. However, what forces could keep the sub- formation, by addition, of the intermediate aci-acid.101,105
strate molecule in this unlikely state of protonation?
Gerlt and Gassman proposed formation of a strong,
short hydrogen bond to a carboxylate oxygen.110 2. Isomerases
Formation of such a bond would lead to an increased
positive charge on the alpha carbon, lowering the pK The isomerases that catalyze the simplest reactions
a
and therefore the thermodynamic barrier. It could also are tautomerases that promote the oxo-enol (keto-enol)
lower the intrinsic barrier,108 for example, by permit- transformation. The widely distributed oxaloacetate
ting, to some extent, the formation of a C—H---N tautomerase (Eq. 13-24) is especially active in animal
hydrogen bond in the transition state.111 Polarization tissues.97,120 Oxaloacetate exists to a substantial extent
by the Mg2+ ion may also be involved. The very strong in the enolic form: at 38°, ~ 6% enol, 13% oxo, and ~ 81%
electrostatic forces within the active site may be suffi- covalent hydrate.120,121 A mammalian phenylpyruvate
cient to explain the formation of enolate anions or enols tautomerase has also been investigated.122
as intermediates in many different enzymes.108,112
A number of other racemases and epimerases may
O
function by similar mechanisms. While some amino
acid racemases depend upon pyridoxal phosphate – OOC CH2 C COO –
(Chapter 14), several others function without this Tautomerase
coenzyme. These include racemases for aspartate,113
glutamate,114–115a proline, phenylalanine,116 and diamino- OH
pimelate epimerase.117 Some spiders are able to inter- – H –
OOC C C COO
convertD and L forms of amino acid residues in intact (13-24)
polypeptide chains.118,119
Another enzyme of the mandelate pathway of The oxidation of one functional group of a mole-
degradation of aromatic rings (Fig. 25-8) is the cis,cis- cule by an adjacent group in the same molecule is a
muconate lactonizing enzyme which catalyzes the feature of many metabolic sequences. In most cases an
reaction of Eq. 13-23. It has a three-dimensional struc- enolic intermediate, formed either from a ketone as in
Eq. 13-25 or by a dehydration reaction (see Eq. 13-32),
is postulated.
–
O H H
O
C
Aldose–ketose interconversions. A metabolically
O
C important group of enzymes catalyze the interconver-
OH sion of aldose sugars with the corresponding 2-ketoses
(Table 10-1, reaction 4C). Several sugar phosphates
H
O undergo rapid isomerization. Glucose 6-phosphate
O
C CH2
O
isomerase (Eq. 13-25) appears to function in all cells
C with a high efficiency.123 – 125a The 132 kDa dimeric pro-
OH tein from muscle converts glucose 6-phosphate to
(13-23)

--- Page 696 ---

B. Enolic Intermediates in Enzymatic Reactions 693
turnovers of the enzyme, 2H removed from C-1 is put
H O H OH
back on the same molecule at C-2. This intramolecular
C C
1 transfer of a proton suggests a syn transfer, the proton
H C OH C being removed and put back on the same side of the
2 molecule. The carrier of the proton may be a histidine
OH
side chain.131 This result, together with the known
Glucose 6-phosphate cis-Enediol
configuration of glucose at C-2, indicates that the
2H intermediate is the cis-enediol and that addition of a
proton at either C-1 or C-2 of the enediol is to the re
Glucose
face. However, mannose-6-phosphate isomerase
6-phosphate 2H
isomerase catalyzes addition to the si face.
H C OH
Catalysis of ring opening by isomerases. Glu-
C O cose-6-phosphate isomerase catalyzes a second reaction,
namely, the opening of the ring of the α-anomer of
Fructose 6-phosphate
glucose 6-phosphate (one-half of the mutarotation
(13-25)
reaction; Eq. 10-88). Noltmann suggested a concerted
acid–base catalysis by two side chain groups as is
fructose 6-phosphate with a turnover number of ~ 103 s–1. indicated in Eq. 9-90. An NMR study showed that the
Hereditary defects in this enzyme cause a variety of isomerization of the α anomer occurs at least ten times
problems that range from mild to very severe.126 faster than that of the β. Thus, β-glucose 6-phosphate
Mannose 6-phosphate isomerase also forms fructose is first converted to α-glucose 6-phosphate before it
6-phosphate, while ribose 5-phosphate isomerase127 can be isomerized to fructose 6-phosphate.132
interconverts the 5-phosphates of D-ribose and D-xylulose
in the pentose phosphate pathways (Chapter 17). Other Triose phosphate isomerase. This dimeric
enzymes, most often metalloenzymes, catalyze the 53-kDa enzyme interconverts the 3-phosphate esters of
isomerization of free sugars. glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone and is the fastest
These enzymes vary widely in secondary and enzyme participating in glycolysis. Its molecular activity
tertiary structure.127a Mannose-6-phosphate isomerase at 25° is ~ 2800 s–1 in the direction shown in Eq. 13-26
is a 45 kDa Zn2+-containing monomer. The larger 65 kDa and ~ 250 s–1 in the reverse direction (the predominant
L-fucoseisomerase, which also acts on D-arabinose, is direction in metabolism)133 and is thought to operate
a hexameric Mn2+-dependent enzyme.127a L-Arabinose at the diffusion-controlled limit (Chapter 9).133 Each
isomerase of E. coli, which interconverts arabinose of the identical subunits consists of a striking (α /β) 8
andL-ribulose, is a hexamer of 60-kDa subunits128 barrel (Fig. 13-6) with an active site at the carboxyl
while the D-xylose isomerase of Streptomyces is a ends of the β strands.134 – 137 Structures of the enzyme
tetramer of 43-kDa subunits.129 The nonenzymatic containing bound inhibitors such as phosphoglycolo-
counterpart of the isomerization catalyzed by the enzyme hydroxamate have also been determined (Fig. 13-6).138
is the base-catalyzed Lobry deBruyn–Alberda van Triose phosphate isomerase is also one of the most
Ekenstein transformation (Eq. 13-25).130 investigated of all enzymes. Not only are its catalytic
In 1895, Emil Ficher proposed an enediol interme- properties unusual but also there are known defects in
diate for this isomerization. As would be expected, the the human enzyme137 and it is also a potential target
enzyme-catalyzed isomerization of glucose-6-phosphate for antitrypanosomal drugs.139
in2H O is accompanied by incorporation of deuterium
2
into the product fructose 6-phosphate at C-1. In the
H
reverse reaction 2H-containing fructose 6-phosphate
was found to react at only 45% of the rate of the 1H- O
containing compound. Thus, the primary deuterium N
isotope effect expected for a rate-limiting cleavage of Phosphoglycolohydroxamate (PGH),
the C – H bond was observed (see Chapter 12, Section
C O – a tight-binding inhibitor (Kd = 15µM)
that resembles enediolate 1 of Eq. 13-26
B,3). H2C
When fructose 6-phosphate containing both 2H
O
and14C in the 1 position was isomerized in the presence
of a large amount of nonlabeled fructose 6-phosphate,
2–
O3P
the product glucose 6-phosphate contained not only
14C but also 2H, and the distribution indicated that the Although its high catalytic activity might favor
2H had been transferred from the C-1 position into the intramolecular transfer of the proton removed by
C-2 position.123 It was concluded that in over half the triose phosphate isomerase, little such transfer has

--- Page 697 ---

694 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
O – OH O H trum of dihydroxyacetone bound to the enzyme re-
H H 3 vealed a shift of the carbonyl bands at 1733 cm–1 by
E165 C C
about 20 cm–1 to ~ 1713 cm–1. This might indicate a
H
–
O C O a 2 C O polarization and stretching of the carbonyl group by
H2C H2C 1 a positively charged histidine or lysine side chain of
the protein.142 The His 95 side chain is appropriately
O O
placed (Fig. 13-6) to function in this way143 and its
2–
O3P
2–
O3P replacement by glutamine decreases catalytic activity
Dihydroxyacetone Enediolate 1 by a factor of 400.144 The –NH +group of lysine 12,
3
phosphate
another essential residue, is apparently needed for
b
substrate binding.136,145 After product is released, an
O – isomerization within the enzyme is usually required
O
H to prepare it for acceptance of a new substrate. This
E-165
C H may involve movement of protons between side chain
O H C O groups or a conformational change or both. In the
O case of triose phosphate isomerase, a very rapid iso-
H2C c H C merization requiring about ~ 1 ms has been detected.146
O H To investigate further the function of His 95, Lodi
C
2–
O3P OH
and Knowles recorded the 13C and 15N NMR spectra of
Enediolate 2
H2C the three histidine rings148 both in unligated enzyme
O and in the phosphoglycolohydroxamate (PGH) complex.
The results were a surprise. The His 95 resonances
2–
O3P
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
(13-26) H 213.5 138.1 121.3
O 204.2 H 137.1 122.6
been observed.140 This suggested that a relatively weak N C
base such as a carboxylate group might serve as the C O – H 15N 15N H N E97
peptide
proton acceptor at the C-3 position of dihydroxyacetone
phosphate. Covalent labeling experiments and later
H2C
X-ray studies have implicated Glu 165, whose carbox- O
ylate group is thought to remove the pro-R hydrogen
atom from the hydroxymethyl group of dihydroxyace-
2–O3P
H95
PGH
tone phosphate as indicated in Eq. 13-26. When this
residue is replaced by Asp, most activity is lost.141
Kinetic studies suggest that this carboxyl group has a did not change at all when the pH was changed from
pK of ~ 3.9 in the free enzyme. However, k is inde- below 5 to 9.9, and the chemical shift values (shown
a cat
pendent of pH up to pH 10.140 The pK of the phosphate above) indicate clearly that the ring is unprotonated
a
also affects the binding (K ), with only the phosphate in both free enzyme and in the complex. The key
m
dianion being a substrate. Study of the infrared spec- chemical shift values are shown on the diagram to the
Figure 13-6 Stereoscopic view
into the active site of triose phos-
phate isomerase showing side
chains of some charged residues;
PGH, a molecule of bound phos-
phoglycolohydroxamate, an
analog of the substrate enolate.138
The peptide backbone, as an
alpha-carbon plot, is shown in
light lines.147 The (α /β) -barrel
8
structure is often called a TIM
barrel because of its discovery
in this enzyme. Courtesy of M.
Karplus.

--- Page 698 ---

B. Enolic Intermediates in Enzymatic Reactions 695
left; the arrows indicate the changes upon formation O – O
of the PGH complex. These results suggest that H95 H H
C C
is never protonated and that if it acts as the catalytic H H
acid it does so by dissociating to an imidazolate ion C O C O
(Eq. 13-27).148 H2C H2C
Pi
O
H
2–
O3P
O
O
Enediolate 2 H
H C
C
H N N
– C O
C O
H2C
H3C
Methylglyoxal (13-28)
O
2– O3P O
H a result of elimination of phosphate from enediolate 2
H
Bound enolate C of Eq. 13-26. Deletion of four residues from the hinged
intermediate N – N
C O lid produced an enzyme in which this side reaction
was increased 5.5-fold.146
H2C H
O Imidazolate Xylose isomerase and the hydride shift
2– O3P mechanism. This bacterial enzyme, which isomerizes
Enediol (13-27)
D-xylose to D-xylulose, has an (α/β)
8
barrel similar to
that of triose phosphate isomerase. It is of industrial
importance because it also catalyzes isomerization of
The imidazole would donate a proton to the enolate ion D-glucose to the sweeter sugar D-fructose, a reaction
and then remove a proton from the resulting enediol. used in preparation of high-fructose syrup. For this
Although the proposed chemistry is unusual, it is argued purpose the isomerase is often immobilized on an
that the high pK of the neutral imidazole acting as a insoluble matrix such as diethylaminoethyl cellulose.153
a
proton donor would be matched with the high pK of This enzyme, as well as other isomerases that act on
a
the enol, permitting rapid reaction.148 Nevertheless, free sugars, requires a metal ion such as Mg2+,Co2+,
two other possibilities exist. Theoretical calculations or Mn2+. The three-dimensional structures, solved in
support the idea that the proton transfer between the two several different laboratories,129,154 – 158 show that there
oxygens in the enediolate may occur without catalysis are two metal ions (ordinarily Mg2+) about 0.5 nm
by a proton donor149 as indicated in step b of Eq. 13-26. apart and held by an array of glutamate and aspartate
Another possibility is that a transient protonation of side chains. One glutamate carboxylate forms short
H95 by the adjacent E97 carboxyl group occurs and ionic bonds to both metal ions and an essential histi-
allows the histidine to participate in the proton transfer. dine is also coordinated with metal ion 2. The three-
Study of kinetic isotope effects has indicated coupled dimensional structure is superficially similar to that of
motion of protons and proton tunneling.143 triose phosphate isomerase but there are major differ-
Another detail should be mentioned. The active ences in properties. Xylose isomerase requires metal
site of triose phosphate isomerase is formed by a series ions, acts on unphosphorylated non-ionic substrates,
of loops connecting the α helices and β strands of the and does not catalyze detectable exchange of protons
barrel. One of those loops, consisting of residues 167 – with the solvent. Furthermore, X-ray structures do not
176, folds over the active site after the substrate is show the presence of any catalytic base that could initiate
bound to form a hinged lid that helps to hold the formation of an intermediate enolate ion. These facts sug-
substrate in the correct orientation for reaction.150 – 152 gested an alternative isomerization mechanism, one
When the lid, which can be seen in Fig. 13-6, closes, involving a hydride ion shift and well-known from
the peptide NH of G171 forms a hydrogen bond to a studies of the Cannizarro reaction.159 Because the non-
phosphate oxygen atom of the substrate. This is only ionic substrates and inhibitors bind weakly it has been
one of many known enzymes with deeply buried active difficult to obtain a clear picture of events in the active
sites that close in some similar fashion before a rapid site. The substrate is the α-anomer of D-xylopyranose155
reaction occurs. and the enzyme catalyzes the opening of the sugar
Although enzymes tend to be extremely specific ring (step a, Eq. 13-29).157 The details of this process
they are not always completely able to avoid side are not clear but acid-base catalysis as in Eq. 9-87 is
reactions. Triose phosphate isomerase releases small probable.
amounts of methylglyoxal (Eq. 13-28), presumably as There is a consensus156 – 158 that the open form of

--- Page 699 ---

696 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
5 HO 3 associate as dimers or higher oligomers. The enzyme
OH has a high content of nonpolar amino acid residues
HO
1 and is soluble in high concentrations of ethanol. This
OH
O property is compatible with the location of the eukary-
α-d-Xylopyranose
otic enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum. The sub-
a strate binding site is a hydrophobic cavity.
Oxosteroid isomerase has a remarkably high mole-
2+ M
2+
2 cular activity (~ 0.75 x 105 s–1). Substrates containing
M1 – K182 2H in the 4 position react only one-fourth as rapidly as
H H O H normal substrates. The large isotope effect suggested
O O
that cleavage of the C – H bond to form an enzyme-
O H N+ stabilized enolate anion is rate limiting (Eq. 13-30,
H H stepa).160 The proton in the axial position at C-4 is
H removed preferentially but without complete stereo-
O O H
H H specificty.165 The abstracted proton must be carried by
a group on the enzyme and returned to the 6 position
b Hydride ion shift of the substrate, again in an axial orientation (Eq. 13-30,
M2+ stepb), a suprafacial transfer. Studies of the binding
M2+ of spin-labeled substrate analogs, molecular modeling,
O and directed mutation indicate that Asp 38 is this proton
H
H H
O O carrier.164,166 Little exchange of the proton with solvent
is observed, presumably because of the extreme rapidity
–
O
of the isomerase action. However, competitive inhi-
bitors such as nortestosterone, whose double-bond
O H H arrangement is that of the product in Eq. 13-30, undergo
H
c exchange of one of the hydrogens at C-4 with the medium.
The ultraviolet absorption band of the inhibitor at 248
HO nm is shifted to 258 nm upon combination with the
enzyme, presumably as a result of formation of the
OH
OH
O
CH2OH O Asp 38
d-Xylulose (13-29)
–
O
Tyr 14
CH
3
the sugar is bound to one of the two metal ions as shown
*H
in Eq. 13-29 and that a bound hydroxide ion on the
3 6
second metal provides the catalytic base to remove a O H
H 5
proton from the – OH at position 2. The isomerization O
occurs with the shaded hydrogen atom being shifted
H
as H– to the carbon atom of the carbonyl group. During O Rate-limiting step
O
the reaction metal ion 2 moves apart from metal ion 1 C –H+ a
by ~ 0.09 nm,129,157,158 another fact that has made analy-
Asp 99
sis of X-ray data difficult. Protonation of the alkoxide
ion at C-2 is followed by ring closure (step c, Eq. 13-29).
C CH 3
3-Oxosteroid isomerases. Cholesterol serves
O O *H
in the animal body as a precursor of all of the steroid
O H
hormones, including the 3-oxosteroids progesterone –O H H
and testosterone (Chapter 22). The 3-hydroxyl group Stabilized enolate anion
of cholesterol is first oxidized to an oxo group. This is
followed by an essentially irreversible migration of the +H+ b
double bond in the 5,6-position into conjugation with
the carbonyl group (Eq. 13-30) catalyzed by a 3-oxo-∆5- CH 3
steroid isomerase. The small 125-residue enzyme from
*H
the bacterium Pseudomonastestosteroni has been studied
O H
by a great variety of methods.160 – 164 The subunits O H H
(13-30)

--- Page 700 ---

B. Enolic Intermediates in Enzymatic Reactions 697
enolate anion. Tyrosine 14 has been identified as the
3. Internal Oxidation–Reduction by
catalytic acid, able to stabilize the enolate anion as
Dehydration of Dihydroxyacids
depicted in Eq. 13-30.161,162 A high-resolution NMR
structure167 and X-ray crystal structures167a,b have re-
When a carboxylic acid contains hydroxyl groups
vealed an adjacent Asp 99 side chain that may assist.167c in both the α and β positions, dehydration leads to
Enzymatic isomerization of cis-aconitate to trans-
formation of an enol that can tautomerize to 2-oxo-3-
aconitate apparently also involves proton abstraction,165
deoxy derivatives of the original acid (Eq. 13-32).
with resonance in the anion extending into the carbox-
Thus, phosphogluconate dehydratase yields 2-oxo-3-
ylic acid group. Its mechanism may be directly related
deoxyphosphogluconate as the product. When the
to that of the oxosteroid isomerase. However, there
reaction is carried out in 2H O the 2H is incorporated
are other 1,3-proton shifts in which neither a carbonyl 2
with a random configuration at C-3, indicating that
nor a carboxyl group is present in the substrate
the enzyme catalyzes only the dehydration and that
(Eqs. 13-55, 13-56).
the tautomerization of the enol to the ketone is nonen-
zymatic.
4-Oxalocrotonate tautomerase. This bacterial
The reaction of Eq. 13-32 initiates a unique pathway
enzyme, which functions in the degradation of toluene
of sugar breakdown, the Entner–Douderoff pathway
(Chapter 25), is actually an isomerase. It catalyzes
(Eq. 17-18), in certain organisms. The 6-phosphoglu-
rapid interconversion of an unconjugated unsaturated
conate is formed by oxidation of the aldehyde group
α-oxoacid such as 4-oxalocrotonate with an intermedi-
of glucose 6-phosphate. This pattern of oxidation of
ate enol (which may leave the enzyme) and the iso-
a sugar to an aldonic acid followed by dehydration
meric conjugated oxoacid (Eq. 13-31).168 – 170 A related
according to Eq. 13-32 occurs frequently in metabolism.
5-carboxymethyl-2-hydroxymuconate isomerase
A related reaction is the dehydration of 2-phosphogly-
cerate by enolase (Eq. 13-15). In this case the product
is phosphoenolpyruvate, a stabilized form of the enolic
–
COO
intermediate of Eq. 13-32 (when R = H).
H
OH
– –
O O
(R) H O O
H C a C
OH O H
–
COO
The enol 2-Hydroxymuconate
HO H H2O
H H
R R
COO – COO – b
For 6-Phosphogluconate
H R =
H H (CHOH) 2 COO–
O OH O
CHOPO2–
2 3
(R) H (R) H
H H H2C
H
COO – COO – R (13-32)
4-Oxalocrotonate 2-Oxo-3-hexenedioate
(13-31)
4. Formation and Metabolism of
Methylglyoxal (Pyruvaldehyde)
catalyzes the same reaction when R = – CH COO– in
2
Eq. 13-31. It is an unusually small enzyme consisting
The rather toxic methylglyoxal is formed in many
of only 62 amino acid residues. The pH dependence
organisms and within human tissues.174 It arises in
reveals pK values of 6.2 and 9.0 in the free enzyme
a part as a side reaction of triose phosphate isomerase
and 7.7 and 8.5 in the ES complex.171
(Eq. 13-28) and also from oxidation of acetone (Eq. 17-7)
The pK of 6.2 has been associated with the amino-
a or aminoacetone, a metabolite of threonine (Chapter
terminal proline 1.172 4-Oxalocrotonate tautomerase is
24).175 In addition, yeast and some bacteria, including
one of a small group of enzymes that have been syn-
E. coli, have a methylglyoxal synthase that converts
thesized nonenzymatically with both L amino acids and dihydroxyacetone to methylglyoxal, apparently using
as a mirror image constructed with D amino acids.173 a mechanism similar to that of triose phosphate iso-
merase. It presumably forms enediolate 2 of Eq. 13-26,
which eliminates inorganic phosphate to yield methyl-

--- Page 701 ---

698 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
glyoxal as in Eq. 13-28.176,176a Methylglyoxal is con- uncertain. Glyoxylase II, which catalyzes step c of
verted to D-lactate by the two-enzyme glyoxalase Eq. 13-33, is an esterase.175,180
system (Eq. 13-33).177 The combined action of methyl-
glyoxal synthase and the glyoxalases provides a bypass
to the usual glycolysis pathway (Fig. 10-3). Although C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation
it does not provide energy to the cell, it releases inor-
ganic phosphate from sugar phosphates that may In Chapter 12 and in the preceding sections of this
accumulate under conditions of low phosphate because chapter we examined displacement and addition reac-
the free P concentration is too low to support the gly- tions involving nucleophilic centers on O, N, or S.
i
ceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase reaction Bonds from carbon to these atoms can usually be broken
(stepa of Fig. 10-3). easily by acidic or basic catalysis. The breaking and
Glyoxalase acts not only on methylglyoxal but also making of C – C bonds does not occur as readily and
on other α-oxo-aldehydes. It is thought to be an im- the “carbon skeletons” of organic molecules often stick
portant enzyme system that protects cells against these together tenaciously. Yet living cells must both form
potentially dangerous metabolites. Glyoxalase consists and destroy the many complex, branched carbon com-
of a pair of enzymes, glyoxalase I and glyoxalase II, pounds found within them.
which catalyze the reactions of Eq. 13-33. Each sub- A major mechanistic problem in cleavage or for-
unit of the 183-residue human glyoxalase I contains mation of carbon–carbon bonds is the creation of a
one tightly bound Zn2+ ion.178 However, the E.coli nucleophilic center on a carbon atom. The problem is
enzyme178a is inactive with Zn2+ and maximally active most often solved by using the activating influence of a
with Ni2+. The enzyme requires glutathione as a co- carbonyl group to generate a resonance-stabilized enolate
factor, and in step a of the reaction (Eq. 13-33) the gluta- anion. Just as the presence of a carbonyl group facili-
thione adds to form a thiohemiacetal179 which is then tates cleavage of an adjacent C – H bond, so it can also
isomerized in step b. During this step retention of the assist the cleavage of a C – C bond. The best known
abstracted proton is so complete that it was earlier reactions of this type are the aldol cleavage and the
thought to function by an intramolecular hydride ion
shift as in xylose isomerase. More recent evidence
favors an enolate anion intermediate. However, the O O
three-dimensional structure is not related to that of
–
C C H C C COO
other isomerases and the exact mechanism remains
α β
Cleavage of C—H bond β Cleavage with
O facilitated by a carbonyl group release of CO2
H
C
C O
decarboxylation of (cid:1)-oxo acids. The latter has been
R referred to as β decarboxylation and its reverse as β
G—SH (Glutathione)
Methylglyoxal if carboxylation. In this book these terms have been
R = CH3 extended to include other reactions by which bonds
a HO S G between the α and β carbon atoms of a carbonyl com-
pound are broken or formed, and these will be referred
H C
to as (cid:1) cleavage and (cid:1) condensation.
Glyoxalase I C O Theβcondensationreactions consist of displacement
R or addition reactions in which an enzyme-bound enolate
b
anion acts as the nucleophile. We can group these con-
S G densation reactions into three categories as indicated
O C by reaction types 5A, 5B, and 5C of Table 10-1.
OH
C H 2 O
H c G—SH
R 1. Displacement on a Carbonyl Group
Glyoxalase II –
O Aβ-oxo acid, with proper catalysis, is susceptible
O
C to hydrolysis by attack of water on the carbonyl group.
H
An example is the reaction catalyzed by oxaloacetate
C
OH acetylhydrolase which has been isolated from Asper-
D gillus niger (Eq. 13-34). A related cleavage is catalyzed
d-lactate if
by ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (see Eq. 13-48).
R = CH3 (13-33)

--- Page 702 ---

C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation 699
– O O reactions by which C – C bonds are formed183b and, in
HO
the reverse reaction, cleaved in metabolism. Aldolases
C C
– are classified into two major types. The type II aldolases
OOC CH2 O H
are metal-ion dependent, the metal ion stabilizing the
Oxaloacetate (monoanion)
intermediate enolate ion (Eq. 13-36, steps a and b).
Type I aldolases, which include the most studied
CH3 COOH mammalian enzymes, have a more complex mechanism
Acetic acid involving intermediate Schiff base forms (Eq. 13-36,
– OOC COOH stepsa’,b’,c’,d’).184 The best known members of this
Oxalate (monoanion) (13-34) group are the fructose bisphosphate aldolases
(often referred to simply as aldolases), which cleave
fructose-1,6-P during glycolysis (Fig. 10-2, step e).
2
Thethiolases181 are lyases that cleave β-oxoacyl These enzymes have been found in all plant and
derivatives of CoA by displacement with a thiol group animal tissues examined and are absent only from a few
of another CoA molecule (Eq. 13-35). This is the chain specialized bacteria. Three closely related isoenzymes
cleavage step in the β oxidation sequence by which are found in vertebrates.185,186 The much studied
fatty acid chains are degraded (Fig. 10-4). Biosynthetic rabbit muscle aldolase A is a 158-kDa protein tetramer
thiolases catalyze the condensation of two molecules of identical peptide chains.186,187 Aldolase B, which is
of acetyl-CoA to form acetoacetyl-CoA, (see Eq. 17-5), lacking in hereditary fructose intolerance, predominates
a precursor to cholesterol and related compounds and in liver and isoenzyme C in brain.185
to poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (Box 21-D). Because acetyl- Treatment with sodium borohydride of the enzyme-
CoA is a thioester, the reaction is usually described as substrate complex of aldolase A and dihydroxyacetone
aClaisen condensation. A related reaction, involving phosphate leads to formation of a covalent linkage
decarboxylation of malonyl-CoA, is a step in fatty acid between the protein and substrate. This and other
synthesis. Since the thiolases are inhibited by – SH evidence suggested a Schiff base intermediate (Eq. 13-36).
reagents it has been suggested that a thiol group in the When14C-containing substrate was used, the borohy-
enzyme reacts initially with the β-carbonyl group as in dride reduction (Eq. 3-34) labeled a lysine side chain
Eq. 13-35 to give an enzyme-bound S-acyl intermediate. in the active site. The radioactive label was followed
The acyl group is then transferred to CoA in a second through the sequence determination and was found
step. on Lys 229 in the chain of 363 amino acids.186,188–188b
The enzyme is another (α /β) 8-barrel protein and the
H side chain of Lys 229 projects into the interior of the
O O barrel which opens at the C-terminal ends of the
CoA S
strands. The conjugate base form of another lysine,
or E S H C C
Lys 146, may represent the basic group B in Eq. 13-36,
R CH2 S CoA
O S E
Thiolase
C O Enzyme
(Type I aldolase)
R S CoA +
O C O Enzyme–NH 3 HN+
H3C S CoA a’
C C H C C H B—
R C S E Acetyl-CoA
(13-35) :B
HO Schiff base
2
a (Type II aldolase)
A very similar reaction is catalyzed by 3-hydroxy- b’
3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase (HMG-CoA lyase), which M2+
Enzyme
functions in the formation of acetoacetate in the human
body (Eq. 17-5, step c) and also in the catabolism of O– H + B HN H + B
leucine (Fig. 24-18)182,183 and in the synthesis of
C C C O C C C O
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA, the presursor
of cholesterol (Eq. 17-5, step b)183a Stabilized enolate Enamine
c’
b
2. Addition of an Enolate Anion to a Carbonyl Enzyme
Group or an Imine; Aldolases O H 2 O HN+
Thealdol condensation (Eq. 13-36), which is also C C C OH C C C OH
d’
illustrated in Box 10-D, is one of the more common
Enzyme–NH + Product Schiff base (13-36)
3

--- Page 703 ---

700 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
stepb. Another possibility is that the adjacent phosphate Special aldolases of both classes cleave and form
group of the substrate acts as the acid–base catalyst C – C bonds throughout metabolism. Several of them
for this step.189 Aldolase A has been altered by muta- act on 2-oxo-3-deoxy substrates forming pyruvate as
tions into a monomeric form that retains high catalytic one product (Eq. 13-37). The aldehyde product varies.
activity,190 something that has not often been accom- In the Entner–Doudoroff pathway of carbohydrate
plished for oligomeric enzymes. metabolism (Chapter 21) 3-deoxy-2-oxo-6-phospho-
Thetype II aldolases are not inactivated by sodium gluconate (KDPG) is cleaved to pyruvate and 3-phos-
borohydride in the presence of substrate. A probable phoglyceraldehyde.194 The same products arise from
function of the essential metal ion is to polarize the the corresponding phosphogalactonate derivative.195
carbonyl group as indicated in Eq. 13-36. In both yeast The subunits of the trimeric KDPG aldolase have an
andE. coli aldolase the Zn2+ is held by 3 imidazole (α /β) -barrel structure similar to that of eukaryotic
8
groups.191,191a An arginine side chain is a conserved fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase.194 The 8-carbon
residue involved in substrate binding in several class sugar acid “KDO” of bacterial cell walls (Fig. 4-26) is
II aldolases.192 Some blue-green algae contain both cleaved by another aldolase. The catabolism of hydroxy-
types of aldolase, as do the flagellates Euglenaand proline leads to 4-hydroxy-2-oxoglutarate, which is
Chlamydomonas. cleaved to pyruvate and glyoxylate.196 In the catabo-
The catabolism of L-fucose by E. coli requires lism of deoxynucleotides, another aldolase converts
cleavage of L-fuculose-1-phosphate to form dihydroxy- 2-deoxyribose 5-phosphate to acetaldehyde and gly-
acetone phosphate and D-lactaldehyde by a class II ceraldehyde 3-phosphate.197
aldolase.193
H2C O PO3 2– COO –
–
C O C O COO
H O
H C OH CH2 C O + C
R
H C O H H C OH CH3
Pyruvate
HO C H R (13-37)
CH3
Closely related to aldolases is transaldolase, an
l-Fuculose-1-phosphate
important enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathways
of sugar metabolism and in photosynthesis. The mech-
The mechanism of chain cleavage proposed on the anism of the transaldolase reaction (Eq. 17-15) is similar
basis of the structure and modeling193 is illustrated in to that used by fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase
Fig. 13-7. with a lysine side chain forming a Schiff base and
catalytic aspartate and glutamate side chains.198
O
O 2– Polycarboxylic acid synthases. Several enzymes,
P O
includingcitrate synthase, the key enzyme which
O catalyzes the first step of the citric acid cycle, promote
E73
HC
2 condensations of acetyl-CoA with ketones (Eq. 13-38).
O C H O Anα-oxo acid is most often the second substrate, and
H Zn2+
OH
H O a thioester intermediate (Eq. 13-38) undergoes hydrol-
HO C C ysis to release coenzyme A.199 Because the substrate
acetyl-CoA is a thioester, the reaction is often described
H 3 C O H
as a Claisen condensation. The same enzyme that
– H
O catalyzes the condensation of acetyl-CoA with a ketone
also catalyzes the second step, the hydrolysis of the
CoA thioester. These polycarboxylic acid synthases
are important in biosynthesis. They carry out the
initial steps in a general chain elongation process (Fig.
Y113’
17-18). While one function of the thioester group in
acetyl-CoA is to activate the methyl hydrogens toward
Figure 13-7 Interaction of the bound zinc ion of L-fuculose-
the aldol condensation, the subsequent hydrolysis of
1-phosphate aldolase and catalytic side chains with the sub-
the thioester linkage provides for overall irreversibility
strate in the active site of the enzyme as revealed by X-ray
crystallography and modeling. See Dreyer and Schulz.193 and “drives” the synthetic reaction.

--- Page 704 ---

C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation 701
TABLE 13-1
Products Arising from Reactions of Acetyl-CoA with a Second Substrate with Catalysis by a
Polycarboxylate Synthase
Ketone substrate Product Further metabolites
– –
H OOC CH2 COO Carbohydrates, etc.,
O C C
– via glyoxylate pathway
COO HO H
Glyoxylate l-Malate
O C
CH2 COO –
Si-Citrate synthase
– OOC
C
CH2 COO –
2-Carbon unit from
COO – HO CH2 COO – acetyl-CoA occupies
pro-S position
Oxaloacetate Citrate
CH2CH2 COO – – OOC CH2 COO –
O C C Lysine via
COO – HO CH2CH2 COO – α-aminoadipic acid
2-Oxoglutarate Homocitrate
CH3
– –
CH OOC CH2 COO
O C CH3 C CH3 Leucine
–
COO HO CH
2-Oxoisovalerate CH3
α-Isopropylmalate
O Free acetoacetate
–
CH2 C HO CH2 COO
O C S CoA C S CoA
CH3 H3C CH2 C
Acetoacetyl-CoA
O
Isoprenoid
S-3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
(HMG-CoA) compounds
The stereochemistry of the reaction is B
also illustrated in Eq. 13-38. These enzymes
may be classified by designating the face of H O a H O–
the carbonyl group to which the enolate H
C C C C
anion adds. The si face is up in Eq. 13-38.
H S CoA H S CoA
The common citrate synthase of animal
tissues200 and that of E. coli201 condense with
R
thesi face and are designated (si)-citrate +
B’H O C O
synthases. A few anaerobic bacteria use b C
–
citrate (re)-synthase having the opposite O O
stereochemistry.202 Many citrate synthases
C S CoA
are ~100-kDa dimers203,204 but some are
hexamers203,205 and are allosterically inhibit-
H2C
c COO –
ed by NADH. The second substrates and – OOC C H2C
R HO
products of several related reactions of HO 2 – OOC C
acetyl-CoA are summarized in Table 13-1. CoA–SH R
HO
Thesi-citrate synthase of pigs is a dimer
–
of 437-residue chains, each of which is orga- Citrate if R = CH 2 COO
l-Malate if R = H
nized into a large rigid domain and a smaller
(13-38)

--- Page 705 ---

702 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
A
B
Figure 13-8 Three-dimen-
sional structure of citrate
synthase. (A) Stereoscopic
alpha carbon trace of the
dimeric pig enzyme in its open
conformation.209 A molecule
of citrate is shown in the
lower subunit. The view
is down the two-fold axis.
Courtesy of Robert Huber.
(B) Space-filling representa-
tion of the open (left) and
closed (right) forms of the
same enzyme.200 Courtesy
of Stephen J. Remington.
flexible domain. The active site lies between the the acetyl-CoA binding site. This conformational
domains.206 When oxaloacetate binds into the cleft change also accounts for the observation of an ordered
the smaller domain undergoes a complex motion kinetic mechanism with oxaloacetate binding before
that closes the enzyme tightly around the substrate acetyl-CoA. The imidazole of His 274 is correctly
(Fig. 13-8).200,207,208 The bound oxaloacetate is shown oriented to abstract a proton from the methyl group of
in Fig. 13-9. It is surrounded by a large number of acetyl-CoA to generate the intermediate enolate anion.
polar side chains, including several from histidine and When oxaloacetate alone is bound into the active site
arginine residues. Of these, Arg 401 and Arg 421 of the carbonyl stretching frequency, observed by infrared
the second subunit bind the substrates’ two carboxyl- spectroscopy, is shifted from 1718 cm–1 for free oxalo-
ate groups. In this tight complex the imidazole of His acetate to 1697 cm–1. This decrease of 21 cm–1 suggests
320 is in the correct position to protonate the carbonyl a strong polarization of the C = O bond by its interaction
oxygen of the oxaloacetate. The domain movement with His 320 in the ground state.211 This interaction is
has also brought the groups that bind the acetyl-CoA seen also in the 13C NMR spectrum, the carbonyl
into their proper position creating, by “induced fit,” resonance being shifted downfield by 6.8 ppm upon

--- Page 706 ---

C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation 703
binding to the protein.212 The enolate anion mecha- Citrate
nism is also supported by kinetic isotope effects.213 CoA ATP
The methyl protons of dithia-acetyl-CoA are much
more reactive than those of acetyl-CoA (pK
a
~ 12.5 vs ADP + Pi
~ 20). When citrate acts on this acetyl-CoA analog
together with oxaloacetate, the expected enolate anion Acetyl-CoA Oxaloacetate
∆G' (pH 7)* = +0.9 kJ mol-1 (13-39)
S
citryl-CoA using a mechanism similar to that in Eq.
H3C C S CoA 12-47. There is evidence for both phosphoenzyme
Dithia-acetyl-CoA and citryl enzyme intermediates (Eq. 13-40).221 Native
ATP-citrate lyase is a tetramer of 110-kDa subunits.
forms rapidly as is indicated by the appearance of a It usually contains some phosphoserine and phospho-
306 nm absorption band. However, it condenses very threonine residues but they apparently have little
slowly with the oxaloacetate.214 The binding equilib- effect on activity.222 Phosphorylation is catalyzed by
ria, kinetics, and X-ray structures of complexes for a cAMP-dependent and by insulin-dependent protein
variety of other analogs of acetyl-CoA have also been kinases.223,224 A related reaction is the ATP-dependent
studied.210,215-216a It appears that Asp 375 and His 274 cleavage of malate to acetyl-CoA and glyoxylate. It
work together to generate the enolate anion (Fig. 13-9). requires two enzymes, malyl-CoA being an intermedi-
NMR measurements indicate formation of an unusually ate.225
short hydrogen bond, but its signifi-
cance is uncertain.216a,216b Malate syn-
thase (Table 13-1) operates with a very A
similar mechanism but has an entirely
different amino acid sequence and
protein fold.216c
Other Claisen condensations are
involved in synthesis of fatty acids and
polyketides217 (Chapter 21) and in for-
mation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
CoA, the precursor to the polyprenyl
family of compounds (Chapter 22). In
these cases the acetyl group of acetyl-
CoA is transferred by a simple displace-
ment mechanism onto an –SH group at
the active site of the synthase to form an
B R401
acetyl-enzyme.218,219 The acetyl-enzyme H
N
is the actual reactant in step b of Eq. 17-5
where this reaction, as well as that of C
H
HMG-CoA lyase, is illustrated. H N + N
H H
H R329
Citrate cleaving enzymes. In
N
H
eukaryotic organisms the synthesis of R421 O – O C N
citrate takes place within the mitochon- H 2 N N H H C + H
dria, but under some circumstances N C
+ O N
citrate is exported into the cytoplasm. N – C H
H C O H
There it is cleaved by ATP-citrate O H
N C H
lyase. To ensure that the reaction goes
H H
to completion, cleavage is coupled to C O
–O
the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and inor- S
C
ganic phosphate (Eq. 13-39). The value O
H274 D375
ofG’ given here is extremely dependent CoA
upon the concentration of Mg2+ as a
result of strong chelation of Mg2+ by
Figure 13-9 Active site of pig citrate synthase. (A) Stereoscopic view
citrate.220 The reaction sequence is com-
with a molecule of citrate in the active site.200 Courtesy of Stephen J.
plex but can be understood in terms of
Remington. (B) Interpretive view of the enolate anion of acetyl-CoA and
an initial ATP-dependent synthesis of oxaloacetate bound in the active site. Based on work by Kurz et al.210

--- Page 707 ---

704 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
A substrate-induced citrate lyase found in bacteria by fumarate hydratase in ordinary water. Chiral acetates
such as E. coli andKlebsiella promotes the anaerobic have also been prepared nonenzymatically,229 and
dissimilation of citrate splitting it to oxaloacetate and their configuration has been established unequivocally.
acetate.226 The large ~ 585-kDa protein from Klebsiella225
has the composition (αβγ) , where the α,β, and γ sub-
6
units have masses of ~ 55-, 30-, and 10-kDa, respectively. 3HOH H OH COO –
The subunit carries an unusual covalently bound deriv- Fumarate C C H
ative of coenzyme A227 (see also Chapter 14). The 10-kDa – OOC 3H
γ subunit serves as an acyl-carrier protein, the – SH
of its prosthetic group being acetylated by a separate
ATP-dependent ligase. The resulting acetyl-enzyme O COO – – OOC COO –
undergoes an acyl exchange (analogous to a CoA- 2H2O
transferase reaction; Eq. 12-50) to form a citryl enzyme C C H
before the aldol cleavage takes place (Eq. 13-40). – OOC 3H Oxa a l c o e a ty ce l- tate H
hydrolase 3H C COO –
Citrate Acetyl-CoA 2H
citrate re-synthase
R-Acetate
Acetyl-E citryl-E acetyl-E
–
HO CH2 COO H
acetate oxaloacetate (13-40) C Citrate lyase 3H C COO –
OOC C COO – 2H2O 2H
The first unique enzyme of the important glyoxy- 3H H Oxaloacetate R-Acetate
late pathway (Chapter 17), isocitrate lyase, cleaves (13-42)
isocitrate to succinate and glyoxylate (Eq. 13-41).228
The carboxylate group that acts as electron acceptor During the action of both oxaloacetate acetyl-
would presumably be protonated by the enzyme. hydrolase and citrate lyase (Eq. 13-42) inversion of
configuration occurs about the carbon atom that carries
the negative charge in the departing enolate anion.
H
That inversion also occurs during catalysis by citrate
O
(re)-synthase and other related enzymes has been
H C COO – demonstrated through the use of chiral acetates.229,230
H
The findings with malate synthase199 are illustrated in
C
– O Eq. 13-38. Presumably, a basic group B of the enzyme
HOOC CH2 COO
–
C COO removes a proton to form the planar enolate anion.
threo-ds-Isocitrate
H The second substrate glyoxylate approaches from the
Glyoxylate other side of the molecule and condenses as is shown.
Since any one of the three protons in either R or S chiral
– CH2 COO – acetyl-CoA might have been abstracted by base B,
OOC
CH2 several possible combinations of isotopes are possible in
Succinate theL-malate formed. One of the results of the experi-
∆G' (pH 7) = 8.7 kJ mol-1 (13-41) ment using chiral (R) acetyl-CoA is illustrated in Eq.
13-43. The reader can easily tabulate the results of
removal of the 2H or 3H. However, notice that if the
3. Chiral Acetates and Their Use in base – B: removes 2H (D) or 3H (T) the reaction will be
Stereochemical Studies much slower because of the kinetic isotope effects
which are expected to be Hk/Dk≈ 7 and Hk/Tk≈ 16. A
Consider the series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions second important fact is that the pro-R hydrogen at C-3
shown in Eq. 13-42. Fumarate is hydrated in 3H-con- in malate is specifically exchanged out into water by
taining water to malate which is oxidized to oxaloace- the action of fumarate hydratase. From the distribution
tate. Hydrolysis of the latter with oxaloacetate acetyl- of tritium in the malate and fumarate formed using the
hydrolase (Eq. 13-34) in 2H O gives oxalate and chiral two chiral acetates, the inversion by malate synthase
2
(R) acetate. The identical product can be obtained by was established. See Kyte231 for a detailed discussion.
condensing oxaloacetate with acetyl-CoA using citrate
(re)-synthetase. The resulting citrate is cleaved in 2H O
2
using a citrate lyase having the si specificity.229,230
Acetate of the opposite chirality can be formed enzy-
matically beginning with [2,3-3H]fumarate hydrated

--- Page 708 ---

C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation 705
Bi The enzyme is inactivated by borohydride in the presence
of substrate, and acid hydrolysis of the inactivated
H O enzyme yielded ε-N-isopropyllysine. Decarboxylation
H
C C occurs from a Schiff base by a mechanism analogous
H S CoA to that of the aldol cleavage shown in Eq. 13-36.236
Glyoxylate
Mechanistically related is 4-oxalocrotonate decarboxy-
lase.236a
This proton is
exchanged out Malate synthase
(Eq. 13-38)
by the activity Linked oxidation and decarboxylation. Metabolic
of fumarase pathways often make use of oxidation of a β-hydroxy
–
H COO acid to a β-oxoacid followed by decarboxylationin
C
the active site of the same enzyme. An example is
C
H
conversion of L-malate to pyruvate (Eq. 13-45). The
– OOC OH Mg2+or Mn2+-dependent decarboxylating malic dehy-
drogenase that catalyzes the reaction is usually called
l-Malate (13-43)
the malic enzyme. It is found in most organisms.237 – 240
While a concerted decarboxylation and dehydrogena-
4. Addition of an Enolate Ion to Carbon tion may sometimes occur,241–242 the enzymes of this
Dioxide and Decarboxylation group appear usually to operate with bound oxoacid
intermediates as in Eq. 13-45.
The addition of an enolate anion to CO to form a
2
β-oxoacid represents one of the commonest means of
incorporation of CO into organic compounds. The HO H
2
reverse reaction of decarboxylation is a major mecha-
C
nism of biochemical formation of CO 2 . The equilibrium – OOC CH2 COO –
constants usually favor decarboxylation but the cleav-
+
age of ATP can be coupled to drive carboxylation when NADP
it is needed, e.g., in photosynthesis.
+
NADPH + H
Decarboxylation of (cid:1)-oxoacids. Beta-oxoacids O O
such as oxaloacetic acid and acetoacetic acid are unsta- H + CO2
ble, their decarboxylation being catalyzed by amines, C C
metal ions, and other substances. Catalysis by amines
– OOC CH2 COO – H3C COO –
depends upon Schiff base formation,232 while metal Bound oxaloacetate Pyruvate
(13-45)
ions form chelates in which the metal assists in electron
withdrawal to form an enolate anion.233 – 235
Other reactions of this type are the oxidation of isoci-
trate to 2-oxoglutarate in the citric acid cycle (Fig. 17-4,
H H
O stepsd and e),243 oxidation of 6-phosphogluconate to
β C α C ribulose 5-phosphate (Eq. 17-12),244 and corresponding
–
O C C O reactions of isopropylmalate dehydrogenase245,246 and
O
–
O
M2+ tartrate dehydrogenase.247,248 Crystallographic studies
of isocitrate dehydrogenase using both photolabile
“caged” isocitrate247 and slow mutant forms243 with
Can we apply any of this information from non- polychromatic Laue crystallography (Chapter 3) have
enzymatic catalysis to decarboxylating enzymes? demonstrated the rapid formation of the anticipated
Some decarboxylases do form Schiff bases with their intermediateoxalosuccinate.
substrates, and some are dependent on metal ions.235
The acetone-forming fermentation of Clostridium Phosphoenolpyruvate, a key metabolic inter-
acetobutylicum requires large amounts of acetoacetate mediate. A compound of central importance in
decarboxylase (Eq. 13-44). metabolism is the phosphate ester of the enol form of
pyruvate, commonly known simply as phosphoenol-
pyruvate (PEP).249 It is formed in the glycolysis path-
O O
+ way by dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate (Eq. 13-15)
H CO2
C C or by decarboxylation of oxaloacetate. Serving as a
–
H3C CH2 COO H3C CH3 preformed enol from which a reactive enolate anion
Acetoacetate Acetone can be released for condensation reactions,250,251 PEP
(13-44)

--- Page 709 ---

706 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
is utilized in metabolism in many ways. and GDP. These organisms lack pyruvate kinase,
which allows for buildup of the high PEP concentra-
tion needed to drive this reaction.260 In a similar way
O PO3 2– PEP can be converted to oxaloacetate by PEP carboxy-
– OOC C transphosphorylase, an enzyme found only in pro-
pionic acid bacteria and in Entamoeba. The reaction
CH2
(Eq. 13-47) is accompanied by synthesis of inorganic
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)
pyrophosphate which may be cleaved to “pull” the
reaction in the indicated direction.
In animals and in many bacteria, PEP is formed
by decarboxylation of oxaloacetate. In this reaction,
which is catalyzed by PEP carboxykinase (PEPCK), a PEP + CO + P → PP + oxaloacetate (13-47)
2 i i
molecule of GTP, ATP, or inosine triphosphate captures
and phosphorylates the enolate anion generated by the
decarboxylation (Eq. 13-46).252 The stereochemistry is Oxaloacetate is also decarboxylated without phos-
such that CO departs from the si face of the forming phorylation of the enolate anion formed but with release
2
enol.253 The phospho group is transferred from GTP of free pyruvate. Both pyruvate kinase and PEPCK
with inversion at the phosphorus atom.254 The en- can act as oxaloacetate decarboxylases.261
zyme requires a divalent metal ion, preferably Mn2+. In the important reactions discussed in the follow-
In fact, kinetic studies of the GTP-dependent avian ing sections enolate ions are intermediates in carbon-
mitochondrial enzyme indicate two metal-binding carbon bond formation. Other examples are given in
sites, one on the polyphosphate group of the bound Eqs. 20-7 and 20-8, and Fig. 25-1, in which C – C bonds
GTP and one on carboxylate side chains of the pro- are formed by action of PEP as a carbon nucleophile,
tein.252,255 The three-dimensional structure of the ATP-
dependentE. coli enzyme reveals a nucleotide binding
site similar to the ATP site of adenylate kinase (Fig.
O O–
12-30).256 A definite binding site for CO is also present O P Nu
in the enzyme.257
2
–OOC C
O–
PEPCK is also activated by low concentrations of
CH C
Fe2+ and this activation depends upon a protein that H
has been identified as glutathione peroxidase (Eq. 15-58).
By destroying H O the latter may allow the Fe2+ to e.g., in aldol-like condensations.242a Yet another unusual
2 2
prevent oxidation of an SH group on PEP carboxy- type of reaction, involving formation of an enol ether
kinase.258 Synthesis of PEPCK is stimulated by gluca- linkage is illustrated in Box 13-B and in Eq. 25-3.
gon, evidently through a direct action of cAMP on
transcription of the structural gene.259 Transcription Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase. The major
is also stimulated by glucocorticoids and thyroid route of incorporation of CO into organic compounds
2
hormone and is inhibited by insulin. is via photosynthesis. When 14C-labeled CO enters
2
In some organisms, such as the parasitic Ascaris chloroplasts of green plants, the first organic 14C-con-
suum, PEPCK functions principally as a means of taining compound detected is 3-phosphoglycerate.
synthesis of oxaloacetate by reaction of PEP with CO Two molecules of this compound are formed through
2
the action of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase
(abbreviated rubisco), an enzyme present in chloro-
– O – O O O – O O – plasts and making up 16% of the protein of spinach
leaves. This enzyme, whose structure is illustrated in
P P P
O O O O Guanosine Fig. 13-10, is thought to be the most abundant protein
–
OOC O GTP on earth. Because O competes with CO as a substrate,
2 2
H2C C the enzyme also catalyzes an “oxygenase” reaction. It
COO – is therefore often called ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
Oxaloacetate carboxylase/ oxygenase.262 The rubisco from most
plants is a 500 - to 560-kDa L S oligomer as shown in
GDP 8 8
Fig. 13-10. The large subunit is encoded in the chloro-
CO2
plast DNA. However, a family of nuclear genes en-
O PO3
2–
code the small subunits, which are synthesized as
H2C C
larger precursors, with N-terminal extensions being
–
COO removed to give the mature subunits.263,264 Two types
PEP
of small subunits occupy different positions in the
re Face is toward reader (13-46)

--- Page 710 ---

C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation 707
quasi-symmetric spinach rubisco.264 In Euglena the Chemical studies also support the indicated mech-
small subunit is synthesized as a polyprotein precursor anism. For example, the β-oxoacid intermediate
containing eight copies of the subunit.265 Rubisco formed in step b of Eq. 13-48 or Fig. 13-12 has been
from the hydrogen-oxidizing bacterium Alcaligenes identified as a product released from the enzyme by
eutrophus has a similar quaternary structure,266 but acid denaturation during steady-state turnover.273,274
the enzyme from Rhodospirillum rubrum is a simple Isotopic exchange with 3H in the solvent275 and mea-
dimer.267 In dinoflagellates the rubisco gene is present surement of 13C isotope effects277 have provided addi-
in nuclear DNA rather than in the chloroplasts.268 tional verification of the mechanism. The catalytic
The carboxylation reaction catalyzed by rubisco activity of the enzyme is determined by ionizable
differs from others that we have considered in that groups with pK values of 7.1 and 8.3 in the ES com-
a
the carboxylated product is split by the same enzyme plex.278
(Eq. 13-48). The mechanism shown in Eq. 13-48 was The apparent value of K for total CO (CO +
m 2 2
suggested by Bassham et al.271 Ribulose bisphosphate, HCO –) is high, 11– 30 mM, but for the true substrate
3
for which the enzyme is absolutely specific, is first CO it is only 0.45 mM. In intact chloroplasts the
2
converted to its enolic form, a 2,3-enediol. Loss of a affinity for substrate is distinctly higher, with the K
m
proton from the 3-OH group forms the endiolate anion for total CO dropping to ~ 0.6 mM. The difference
2
needed for the carboxylation in step b. The product appears to result largely from a regulatory reaction of
of this step is a β-oxoacid which undergoes enzyme- CO in which the side chain amino group of lysine 201
2
catalyzed hydrolytic cleavage (Eq. 13-48, step c; see of the large subunit forms a carbamate (Eq. 13-49).
also Eq. 13-34). Support for this mechanism came Although carbamylation is spontanous, it is enhanced
from the observation that 2-carboxyarabinitol bisphos- by an ATP-dependent process catalyzed by rubisco
phate (Fig. 13-11B) is a potent inhibitor, possibly a activase.279 The carbamylation converts the side
transition state analog.272 This inhibitor, bound into chain of Lys 201 into a negatively charged group that
the active site of the enzyme from spinach, is seen in binds to an essential divalent metal, usually Mg2+, in
both Figs. 13-10B and 13-11A. An expanded version of the active center282 as is shown in Fig. 13-11, A and B.
Eq. 13-48 is given in Fig. 13-12, which is based upon The nature of the reaction is uncertain. One possibility
modeling together with a variety of X-ray structures is that the activase is a chaperonin.280 It appears to
including that shown in Fig. 13-11. assist the enzyme in removing inhibitory sugars that
An essential Mg2+ ion is held by carboxylates of arise by side reactions in the active site.281 Rubisco is
D203 and E204 and by modified K201. It also coordi- also regulated by the level of a natural inhibitor which
nates three molecules of H O in the free enzyme.272a has been identified as 2-carboxyarabinitol 1-phosphate.
2
Catalytic roles for the H294 and H327 imidazole groups This is the same as the inhibitor shown in Fig. 13-11
are still being elucidated.272b Lysine 175 protonates but with one less phosphate group and consequent
C2 of the aci anion generated by C–C bond cleavage weaker binding.273a
(stepe, Fig. 13-12).272c,276 Like many enzymes, rubisco
exists in two major conformational states: open and
closed.272d
CO2 O
H
Lys 201 NH2 Lys 201 N C
Inactive form O –
O C O
Mg2+
O 1 CH2OPO3 2– HO CH2OPO3 2–
C C
2 a
HO O
C 3 H
–
C H
Lys 201 N
H
C
Mg2+
H C OH O C OH –
O
CH2OPO3 2– CH2OPO3 2– Active form
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate Enediolate (13-49)
b
– In most plants photosynthesis is also strongly
OOC
CH2OPO3
2–
inhibited by O . This observation led to the discovery
HO C c H COO – that O compet 2 es directly for CO at the active site of
H2O 2 HO C 2 2
rubisco in a process called photorespiration. Chloro-
O
C
C
H
CH2OPO3
2–
plasts inhibited by oxygen produce glycolate in large
OH
d-3-Phosphoglycerate amounts282a as a result of the reaction of the intermedi-
CH2OPO3
2–
ate enediolate ion formed in step b of Eq. 13-48 with O
(13-48) 2

--- Page 711 ---

708 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
A
B
Figure 13-10 Stereoscopic view of
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase
(rubisco) from spinach. (A) The sym-
metric L S molecule contains eight 475-
8 8
residue large subunits (in two shades of
gray) and eight 123-residue small sub-
units (lighter gray in upper half of
image). (B) One L S substructure
2 2
containing two active sites shared
between adjacent large subunits with
the bound inhibitor 2-carboxy-D-arabini-
tol 1,5-bisphosphate.269 In the upper LS
unit the S subunit (top) is light and the L
subunit is dark. Courtesy of Inger
Andersson. Similar structures have
been determined for enzymes from
tobacco269a and from the cyanobacterium
Synechoccus.270
A B O
2– O
O P
5
2+ – O O
M OH 4 O
–
O
O 3 HH OH
H N HO 2
1
O
K201 O
P
O 2–
O
Figure 13-11 (A) Overview of the active site of spinach rubisco showing bound 2-carboxy-D-arabinitol 1,5-bisphosphate and
Mg2+ and residues within hydrogen-bonding distance of these ligands. The hydroxyl groups at C2 and C3 of the inhibitor are
incis conformation. 269 Courtesy of Inger Andersson. (B) Structure of the inhibitor 2-carboxy-D-arabinitol 1,5-bisphosphate. A
part of the carbamylated lysine 201 and the essential metal ion are also shown.

--- Page 712 ---

C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation 709
E204 E204
O O
C C
– H294 – H294
O O
HN HN
C O – Mg2 O + H 2 H N a p b H s ro t 2 r t 9 a o 4 c n ts b C in O d 2 s C O – Mg2 O + – N H +
D O 203 + H – N O C – O H O C 5 OPO 3 2– a D O 203 + H – N O C O C H O O C H + 3 N K334 OPO 3 2–
O 3 4 HO
C 2 OH C OH
K201 K201
Carbamylated
lysine 201, one 1
resonance form
OPO2– OPO2–
3 3
Enediolate and bound CO
b 2
E204 E204
O O
C C
– –
O O
– –
O O
C
O – Mg2+ c
C
O – Mg2+
–
O O
O – O C O OPO2– O – O C O OPO2–
D203 + HN C O H C 3 3 D203 + HN C O H C 3 3
C C
HO 2 HO 2
OH
K201 1 O H OH K201 1 O H H N+
H
N HN
HN H327
Hydration of d
C-3 carbonyl H327
E204
O
C
–
O
–
O
C
O – Mg2+
–
O
O – O C O OPO2–
D203 + HN C O H 2 C 3
C
HO –
OH
K201 O
OPO2–
H H 3 e
+
NH
Two molecules of
K175 3-Phosphoglycerate
Figure 13-12 Proposed mechanism of action of ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (rubisco). This is an abbreviated version
of the mechanism as presented by Taylor and Andersson.276 The binding of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate occurs after carbamyla-
tion of lysine 201 and binding of a magnesium ion. Formation of an enediolate intermediate in step a is probably catalyzed by
the carbamate group as indicated. Removal of a proton from the 3-OH, perhaps by H294, and addition of a proton to form an
– OH group at C2 are also necessary. The CO may bind to the Mg2+ and be polarized by interaction with other side chains
2
prior to reaction. Carboxylation occurs by addition of the enediolate to CO in step b. The hydration of the resulting 3-oxo
2
group (step c) is necessary for cleavage of the C – C bond in step d. The participation of the newly formed carboxylate as an aci
anion coordinated to Mg2+ is presumably involved. Protonation, with stereochemical inversion, is thought to involve K175, as
shown. The two product molecules dissociate in step e.

--- Page 713 ---

710 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
(Eq. 13-50, step a). The peroxide formed in this way intermediate of Eq. 13-50. The resulting dicarbonyl
breaks up under the hydrolytic action of the enzyme bisphosphate can rearrange to give a carboxytetritol
to form phosphoglycolate and 3-phosphoglycerate bisphosphate (Eq. 13-51).284
(Eq. 13-50, step b).
H
+
H H
H
+
CH2OPO3
2–
O O O C HO CH2OPO3 2–
HO
O
CH2OPO3
2–
a HO
O
CH2OPO3
2–
H
O
O –
C
C
H
OH
– OOC C
C
H
OH
C C –
OH
H H
CH2OPO3
2–
CH2OPO3
2–
C C
– O C OH O C OH Deoxypentodiulose-bisphosphate 2-Carboxytetritol-1,4-bisphosphate
CH2OPO3
2–
b CH2OPO3
2– (13-51)
HO
2
–
O
Carbon dioxide or bicarbonate ion? An impor-
– O O O C H tant question in the consideration of carboxylation and
C
C OH decarboxylation reactions is whether the reactant or the
CH2OPO3 2– CH2OPO3 2– p
th
r
e
o d
q
u
u
c
e
t
s t
i
i
s
o
C
n
O
w
2
a
o
s
r
s
H
ug
C
g
O
es
3 –
t
.
e d
A
b
n
y
a
K
pp
re
r
b
o
s
a c
a
h
n d
to
R
a
o
n
u
s
g
w
h
e
t
r
o
i
n
n
,
g
286
Phosphoglycolate 3-Phosphoglycerate
(13-50)
a b
+ –
Molecular oxygen usually reacts rapidly with only CO + H O H CO H + HCO
2 2 2 3 3
those organic substrates, such as dihydroflavins, that
(13-52)
are able to form stable free radicals. However, the
endiolate anion of Eq. 13-50 may be able to donate a who pointed out that the attainment of equilibrium
single electron to O to form a superoxide–organic between free CO and HCO – (Eq. 13-52) may require
2 2 3
radical pair prior to formation of the peroxide (see also several seconds. If an enzyme produces CO as a
2
Eq. 15-30). Similar oxygenase side reactions have been product and progress of the reaction is followed mano-
observed for a variety of other enzymes that utilize metrically, the pressure will rise higher than the equi-
carbanion mechanisms.283 The reaction of rubisco librium value as the CO is evolved. Later when
2
with O is of both theoretical and practical interest, the substrate is exhausted and the CO equilibrates with
2 2
latter because of its significance in lowering the yield bicarbonate, the pressure will fall again. The addition
in photosynthesis (Chapter 23). of carbonic anhydrase, which catalyzes Eq. 13-52, step
The simpler dimeric rubisco from Rhodospirillum is a, abolishes the “overshoot.” If bicarbonate is the
very inefficient in carboxylation and catalyzes much primary product of a decarboxylation, there is a lag
more oxygenation than do rubiscos of higher plants.283a in the appearance of free CO .
2
Mutant enzymes that have impaired carboxylase and A second approach is to use [18O]bicarbonate and
enhanced oxygenase are also known.284,284a to follow the incorporation of 18O into a carboxylated
The small subunits of rubisco may help suppress substrate. If CO is the primary substrate only two
2
undesirable side reactions.285 For example, the follow- labeled oxygen atoms enter the compound, whereas
ing deoxypentodiulose phosphate can be formed by β if HCO – is the reactant three are incorporated.287 A
3
elimination from the second intermediate of Eq. 13-48. third technique is measurement of the rate of incorpo-
ration of CO or bicarbonate in the carboxylated prod-
2
uct. Over a short interval of time, e.g., 1 min, different
CH3
kinetics will be observed for the incorporation of CO
2
O C and of bicarbonate.288 Using these methods, it was
established that the product formed in Eq. 13-46 and
O C H
the reactant in Eq. 13-47 is CO . However, the carboxyla-
2
C OH tionenzymes considered in the next section use bicar-
CH2OPO3
2– bonate as the substrate.
Some side products of the normal oxgenase reaction
arise by elimination of a peroxide ion from the first

--- Page 714 ---

C. Beta Cleavage and Condensation 711
utilized to concentrate the CO and to localize it next
5. Incorporation of Bicarbonate into Carboxyl 2
to the enolate anion generated by the same process.
Groups
PEP carboxylase is lacking from animal tissues
and fungi. In these creatures PEP is converted to
An important enzyme with a biosynthetic function
pyruvate, which is then carboxylated to oxaloacetate
in many bacteria and in all higher plants is PEP car-
with coupled cleavage of ATP by the action of pyruvate
boxylase,289 which catalyzes the reaction of Eq. 13-53.
carboxylase (Eq. 14-3), an enzyme that not only utilizes
This enzyme, in effect, accomplishes the reverse of Eq.
bicarbonate ion but also contains biotin. However,
13-46 by converting the three-carbon PEP, by reaction
there are mechanistic similarities between its action
with bicarbonate, into the four-carbon oxaloacetate.
and that of PEP carboxylase.
The latter is needed for “priming” of the citric acid
cycle and for biosynthesis of such amino acids as
PEP mutase and the synthesis of phosphonates.
aspartate and glutamate. That the enzyme functions
The lipids of some organisms, such as Tetrahymena,
in this way is indicated by the fact that mutants of
contain aminoethylphosphonate, a compound with
Salmonelladefective in the enzyme do not grow unless
a C – P bond (Chapter 8). There are also many other
oxaloacetate or some other intermediate in the citric
naturally occurring phosphono compounds and huge
acid cycle is added to the medium. The enzyme from
quantities of synthetic phosphonates, present in deter-
S. typhimurium is a 400-kDa tetramer with complex
gents, herbicides, and insecticides, are metabolized by
regulatory properties. The corresponding enzyme
bacteria.297 Here we will consider only one step in the
from spinach has 12 subunits and 12 bound Mn2+
biosynthesis of phosphonates, the conversion of PEP
ions. The enzyme also has a special function in the
into phosphonopyruvate (Eq. 13-54), a reaction cata-
C plants,290 in which it is a component of a carbon
4 lyzed by PEP mutase. The phospho group is moved
dioxide concentrating system (Chapter 23).
When [18O]bicarbonate is a substrate, two labeled
oxygen atoms enter the oxaloacetate, while the third OH
–
appears in P. A concerted, cyclic mechanism could O
i –
OOC O P
explain these results. However, study of kinetic iso- Y Enzyme
tope effects,291 use of a substrate with a chiral thio- C O a – O
phospho group,292 and additional 18O exchange CH2 Y Enzyme
HO P
studies293 have ruled out this possibility. A transient PEP
carboxyl phosphate (Eq. 13-53) is evidently an inter- – O
mediate.294,295 The incorporation of the 18O from bicar-
OOC CH2
C
bonate into phosphate is indicated by the asterisks. b
–
The carboxyl group enters on the si face of PEP. How- O
ever, there is another possibility.295,296 The carboxyl – OH
phosphate, while in the active site adjacent to the
OOC CH2
–
Y Enzyme
C P O
enolate anion, may eliminate phosphate, the enolate
Reverse reaction ( )
ion adding to the resulting CO to form the final O O
2 is strongly favored
product. According to this mechanism the group Phosphonopyruvate (13-54)
transfer potential of the phosopho group in PEP is
from the oxygen atom of PEP to the methylene carbon
– atom. When attached to carbon the phospho group
O
– is designated phosphono. The reaction occurs with
OOC O P
C OH – OOC O – retention of the configuration around phosphorus
O C and a phosphoenzyme intermediate seems to be in-
CH2 a O O – volved298,299 as shown in Eq. 13-54. The equilibrium in
PEP *O – H2C P this reaction strongly favors PEP. One further product
OH
*O C *O *O formed from phosphonopyruvate is phosphonoethyl-
* b C amine, a component of phosphonolipids.300 It is easy
OH
to imagine a synthetic route involving transamination
*OH
followed by decarboxylation. Another mutase, similar
– Carboxyl phosphate
OOC to PEP mutase, shifts the carboxyphospho group
O – OOC – PO 2 –– exactly as in Eq. 13-54 as part of the
O
– biosynthetic pathway of a natural herbicide formed
O
H2C
P byStreptomyces hygroscopicus.301,302 Soil bacteria con-
CO ** O – – O * OH tain specialized enzymes that catalyze the hydrolytic
Oxaloacetate (13-53) cleavage of P – C bonds.302a

--- Page 715 ---

712 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
fact that the enzyme is strongly inhibited by the cation
D. Some Isomerization and Rearrangement
of 2-(diethylamino) ethyl pyrophosphate, an analog of
Reactions
a probable carbocation intermediate. Cysteine and
glutamate side chains are essential.307
A few metabolic reactions do not fit into any of
Reaction type 6B of Table 10-1 is allylic rearrange-
the categories discussed so far and apparently do not
ment with simultaneous condensation with another
depend upon a coenzyme. Some of these involve
molecule. The reaction, which is catalyzed by prenyl-
transfer of alkyl groups or of hydrogen atoms from
transferases,307a occurs during the polymerization
one carbon to another. The hydrogen atoms move by
of polyprenyl compounds (Fig. 22-1,Eqs. 22-2, 22-3).
direct transfer without exchange with the medium.
Experimental evidence favors a carbocation mechanism
All of the reactions could involve carbocations but
for all of these reactions.308,309 See Chapter 22.
there is often more than one mechanistic possibility.
Reaction type 6C (Table 10-1) occurs during the
A simple 1,3-proton shift is shown in Table 10-1 as
biosynthesis of leucine and valine (Fig. 24-17). The
reaction type 6A. An example is the isomerization of
oleic acid to trans-∆10-octadecenoic acid (Eq. 13-55) rearrangement is often compared with the nonenzy-
matic acid-catalyzed pinacol–pinacolone rearrangement
catalyzed by a soluble enzyme from a pseudomonad.303
in which a similar shift of an alkyl group takes place
(Eq. 13-57). The enzyme-catalyzed rearrangement
H
H
H C C C C
10 H CH3 CH3 H + CH3 CH3
H 9 C H + H CH2 H3C C C CH3 H3C C C CH3
trans-∆10-Octadecenoic acid
Oleic acid +
(cis-∆9-octadecenoic acid) (13-55) OH OH OH H O H
Pinacol
A second example is isomerization of isopentenyl CH3 CH3 H2O CH3
diphosphate to dimethylallyldiphosphate (Eq.
13-56).304 – 307 The stereochemistry has been investigated H3C C C
+
CH3 H3C C C CH3
using the 3H-labeled compound shown in Eq. 13-56. O H + O CH3
Thepro-R proton is lost from C-2 and a proton is added
H Pinacolone
to the re face at C-4. When the reaction was carried (13-57)
out in 2H O a chiral methyl group was produced as
2
shown.304 A concerted proton addition and abstraction
presumably gives the structure drawn in brackets in
is also possible, the observed trans stereochemistry
Table 10-1. The same enzyme always catalyzes reduction
being expected for such a mechanism. However, the
with NADH to the diol, the Mg2+-dependent enzyme
being called acetohydroxy acid isomeroreductase.
Rearrangement has never been observed without the
CH3
accompanying reduction.310–313 More complex rear-
1H C CH2 rangements that occur during biosynthesis of sterols
C C O P P are described in Chapter 22.
3H HR H
T
Isopentenyl diphosphate
2H +
+
H
CH3
1H C CH2
C C O P P
2H
3H H
Dimethylallyl diphosphate (13-56)

--- Page 716 ---

713
References
1. Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and 28a. Engel, C. K., Kiema, T. R., Hiltunen, J. K., and 50. Sacchettini, J. C., Meininger, T., Rodrick, S.,
Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, N. Y. (p. 465) Wierenga, R. K. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.275, 847– and Banaszak, L. J. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261,
2. Sorensen, P. E., and Jencks, W. P. (1987) J. Am. 859 15183–15185
Chem. Soc.109, 4675–4690 29. D’Ordine, R. L., Tonge, P. J., Carey, P. R., and 51. Bearne, S. L., and Wolfenden, R. (1995) J. Am.
3. Kallen, R. G., and Jencks, W. P. (1966) J. Biol. Anderson, V. E. (1994) Biochemistry33, 12635– Chem. Soc.117, 9588–9589
Chem.241, 5845–5850, 5851–5863 12643 52. Weaver, T., and Banaszak, L. (1996) Biochemis-
4. Edsall, J. T., and Wyman, J. (1958) Biophysical 30. Bahnson, B. J., and Anderson, V. E. (1991) try35, 13955–13965
Chemistry, Vol. I, Academic Press, New York Biochemistry30, 5894–5906 53. Weaver, T., Lees, M., and Banaszak, L. (1997)
(p. 550ff) 31. D’Ordine, R. L., Bahnson, B. J., Tonge, P. J., Protein Sci.6, 834–842
5. Fernley, R. T. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13, and Anderson, V. E. (1994) Biochemistry33, 53a. Weaver, T., Lees, M., Zaitsev, V., Zaitseva, I.,
356–359 14733–14742 Duke, E., Lindley, P., McSweeny, S., Svensson,
6. Sly, W. S., and Hu, P. Y. (1995) Ann. Rev. 31a. Hofstein, H. A., Feng, Y., Anderson, V. E., and A., Keruchenko, J., Keruchenko, I., Gladilin,
Biochem.64, 375–401 Tonge, P. J. (1999) Biochemistry38, 9508–9516 K., and Banaszak, L. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.280,
7. Hazen, S. A., Waheed, A., Sly, W. S., LaNoue, 32. Yang, S.-Y., He, X.-Y., and Schulz, H. (1995) 431–442
K. F., and Lynch, C. J. (1996) FASEB J.10, Biochemistry34, 6441–6447 53b. Beeckmans, S., and Van Driessche, E. (1998)
481–490 33. Annand, R. R., Kozlowski, J. F., Davisson, V. J. Biol. Chem.273, 31661–31669
8. Heck, R. W., Boriack-Sjodin, P. A., Qian, M., J., and Schwab, J. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 54. Mohrig, J. R., Moerke, K. A., Cloutier, D. L.,
Tu, C., Christianson, D. W., Laipis, P. J., and 1088–1094 Lane, B. D., Person, E. C., and Onasch, T. B.
Silverman, D. N. (1996) Biochemistry35, 34. Brock, D. J. H., Kass, L. R., and Bloch, K. (1995)Science269, 527–529
11605–11611 (1967)J. Biol. Chem.242, 4432–4440 55. Rose, I. A. (1972) CRC Critical Review of
9. Maren, T. H. (1985) N. Engl. J. Med.313, 179– 35. Hebert, H., Schmidt-Krey, I., Morgenstern, R., Biochemistry1, 33–57
181 Murata, K., Hirai, T., Mitsuoka, K., and 56. Brant, D. A., Barnett, L. B., and Alberty, R. A.
10. Stams, T., Nair, S. K., Okuyama, T., Waheed, Fujiyoshi, Y. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.271, 751–758 (1963)J. Am. Chem. Soc.85, 2204–2209
A., Sly, W. S., and Christianson, D. W. (1996) 36. Hu, L., Borleske, B. L., and Colman, R. F. 57. Schmidt, D. E., Jr., Nigh, W. G., Tanzer, C.,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 13589–13594 (1997)Protein Sci.6, 43–52 and Richards, J. H. (1969) J. Am. Chem. Soc.91,
11. Guilloton, M. B., Korte, J. J., Lamblin, A. F., 37. Rushmore, T. H., and Pickett, C. B. (1993) J. 5849–5854
Fuchs, J. A., and Anderson, P. M. (1992) J. Biol. Biol. Chem.268, 11475–11478 58. Nigh, W. G., and Richards, J. H. (1969) J. Am.
Chem.267, 3731–3734 38. Ji, X., Johnson, W. W., Sesay, M. A., Dickert, L., Chem. Soc.91, 5847–5848
12. Kisker, C., Schindelin, H., Alber, B. E., Ferry, J. Prasad, S. M., Ammon, H. L., Armstrong, R. 59. Hansen, J. N., Dinovo, E. C., and Boyer, P. D.
G., and Rees, D. C. (1996) EMBO J.15, 2323– N., and Gilliland, G. L. (1994) Biochemistry33, (1969)J. Biol. Chem.244, 6270–6279
2330 1043–1052 60. Blanchard, J. S., and Cleland, W. W. (1980)
13. Rowlett, R. S., Chance, M. R., Wirt, M. D., 39. Oakley, A. J., Rossjohn, J., Lo Bello, M., Biochemistry19, 4506–4513
Sidelinger, D. E., Royal, J. R., Woodroffe, M., Caccuri, A. M., Federici, G., and Parker, M. W. 61. Porter, D. J. T., and Bright, H. J. (1980) J. Biol.
Wang, Y.-F. A., Saha, R. P., and Lam, M. G. (1997)Biochemistry36, 576–585 Chem.255, 4772–4780
(1994)Biochemistry33, 13967–13976 40. Reinemer, P., Prade, L., Hof, P., Neuefeind, T., 62. Jones, V. T., Lowe, G., and Potter, B. V. L.
13a. Kimber, M. S., and Pai, E. F. (2000) EMBO J. Huber, R., Zettl, R., Palme, K., Schell, J., (1980)Eur. J. Biochem.108, 433–437
19, 1407–418 Koelln, I., Bartunik, H. D., and Bieseler, B. 63. Botting, N. P., and Gani, D. (1992) Biochemistry
14. Miyamoto, H., Miyashita, T., Okushima, M., (1996)J. Mol. Biol.255, 289–309 31, 1509–1520
Nakano, S., Morita, T., and Matsushiro, A. 41. Xiao, G., Liu, S., Ji, X., Johnson, W. W., Chen, 64. Shi, W., Dunbar, J., Jayasekera, M. M. K., Viola,
(1996)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 9657–9660 J., Parsons, J. F., Stevens, W. J., Gilliland, G. L., R. E., and Farber, G. K. (1997) Biochemistry36,
15. Håkansson, K., Carlsson, M., Svensson, L. A., and Armstrong, R. N. (1996) Biochemistry35, 9136–9144
and Liljas, A. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.227, 1192–1204 4753–4765 65. Jayasekera, M. M. K., Shi, W., Farber, G. K.,
16. Kumar, V., and Kannan, K. K. (1994) J. Mol. 41a. Neuefeind, T., Huber, R., Reinemer, P., and Viola, R. E. (1997) Biochemistry36, 9145–
Biol.241, 226–232 Knäblein, J., Prade, L., Mann, K., and Bieseler, 9150
17. Kiefer, L. L., Paterno, S. A., and Fierke, C. A. B. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.274, 577–587 66. Goda, S. K., Minton, N. P., Botting, N. P., and
(1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 6831–6837 42. McTigue, M. A., Williams, D. R., and Tainer, J. Gani, D. (1992) Biochemistry31, 10747–10756
17a. Lesburg, C. A., Huang, C.-c, Christianson, D. A. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.246, 21–27 67. Weiss, P. M., Boerner, R. J., and Cleland, W. W.
W., and Fierke, C. A. (1997) Biochemistry36, 43. Yang, G., Liang, P.-H., and Dunaway- (1987)J. Am. Chem. Soc.109, 7201–7202
15780–15791 Mariano, D. (1994) Biochemistry33, 8327–8331 68. Anderson, S. R., Anderson, V. E., and Knowles,
18. Liang, J.-Y., and Lipscomb, W. N. (1987) 44. Crooks, G. P., Xu, L., Barkley, R. M., and J. R. (1994) Biochemistry33, 10545–10555
Biochemistry26, 5293–5301 Copley, S. D. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 68a. Vinarov, D. A., and Nowak, T. (1998) Biochem-
19. Pocker, Y., and Janjic, N. (1989) J. Am. Chem. 10791–10798 istry37, 15238–15246
Soc.111, 731–733 45. Yang, G., Liu, R.-Q., Taylor, K. L., Xiang, H., 69. Vinarov, D. A., and Nowak, T. (1999) Biochem-
19a. Earnhardt, J. N., Qian, M., Tu, C., Lakkis, M. Price, J., and Dunaway-Mariano, D. (1996) istry38, 12138–12149
M., Bergenhem, N. C. H., Laipis, P. J., Tashian, Biochemistry36, 10879–10885 70. Zhang, E., Hatada, M., Brewer, J. M., and
R. E., and Silverman, D. N. (1998) Biochemistry 46. Benning, M. M., Taylor, K. L., Liu, R.-Q., Yang, Lebioda, L. (1994) Biochemistry33, 6295–6300
37, 10837–10845 G., Xiang, H., Wesenberg, G., Dunaway- 71. Wedekind, J. E., Reed, G. H., and Rayment, I.
19b. Denisov, V. P., Jonsson, B.-H., and Halle, B. Mariano, D., and Holden, H. M. (1996) (1995)Biochemistry34, 4325–4330
(1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 2327–2328 Biochemistry35, 8103–8109 72. Duquerroy, S., Camus, C., and Janin, J. (1995)
20. Paneth, P., and O’Leary, M. H. (1985) J. Am. 47. Taylor, K. L., Liu, R.-Q., Liang, P.-H., Price, J., Biochemistry34, 12513–12523
Chem. Soc.107, 7381–7384 Dunaway-Mariano, D., Tonge, P. J., Clarkson, 73. Larsen, T. M., Wedekind, J. E., Rayment, I.,
21. Scolnick, L. R., and Christianson, D. W. (1996) J., and Carey, P. R. (1995) Biochemistry34, and Reed, G. H. (1996) Biochemistry35, 4349–
Biochemistry35, 16429–16434 13881–13888 4358
22. Toba, S., Colombo, G., and Merz, K. M., Jr. 48. Clarkson, J., Tonge, P. J., Taylor, K. L., 73a. Hubbard, B. K., Koch, M., Palmer, D. R. J.,
(1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 2290–2302 Dunaway-Mariano, D., and Carey, P. R. (1997) Babbitt, P. C., and Gerlt, J. A. (1998) Biochemis-
23. Merz, K. M., Jr., and Banci, L. (1997) J. Am. Biochemistry36, 10192–10199 try37, 14369–14375
Chem. Soc.119, 863–871 49. Taylor, K. L., Xiang, H., Liu, R.-Q., Yang, G., 73b. Thompson, T. B., Garrett, J. B., Taylor, E. A.,
24. Briganti, F., Mangani, S., Orioli, P., Scozzafa- and Dunaway-Mariano, D. (1997) Biochemistry Meganathan, R., Gerlt, J. A., and Rayment, I.
va, A., Vernaglione, G., and Supuran, C. T. 36, 1349–1361 (2000)Biochemistry39, 10662–10676
(1997)Biochemistry36, 10384–10392 49a. Benning, M. M., Haller, T., Gerlt, J. A., and 74. Linhardt, R. J., Turnbull, J. E., Wang, H. M.,
25. Ren, X., Tu, C., Laipis, P. J., and Silverman, D. Holden, H. M. (2000) Biochemistry39, 4630– Loganathan, D., and Gallagher, J. T. (1990)
N. (1995) Biochemistry34, 8492–8498 4639 Biochemistry29, 2611–2617
26. Malatesta, V., and Cocivera, M. (1978) Journal 49b. Xiang, H., Luo, L., Taylor, K. L., and Dun- 75. Desai, U. R., Wang, H.-M., and Linhardt, R. J.
of Organic Chemistry43, 1737–1742 away-Mariano, D. (1999) Biochemistry38, (1993)Biochemistry32, 8140–8145
27. Jencks, W. P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and 7638–7652 76. Kiss, J. (1974) Adv. Carbohydrate Chem.
Enzymology, Dover, Mineola, New York 49c. Babbitt, P. C., and Gerlt, J. A. (1997) J. Biol. Biochem.29, 229–303
28. Engel, C. K., Mathieu, M., Zeelen, J. P., Chem.272, 30591–30594 76a. Li, S., Kelly, S. J., Lamani, E., Ferraroni, M.,
Hiltunen, J. K., and Wierenga, R. K. (1996) and Jedrzejas, M. J. (2000) EMBO J.19, 1228–
EMBO J.15, 5135–5145 1240

--- Page 717 ---

714 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
References
76b. Ponnuraj, K., and Jedrzejas, M. J. (2000) J. Mol. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.29, 792–794 135. Lolis, E., Alber, T., Davenport, R. C., Rose, D.,
Biol.299, 885–895 108. Guthrie, J. P., and Kluger, R. (1993) J. Am. Hartman, F. C., and Petsko, G. A. (1990)
77. Yoder, M. D., Keen, N. T., and Jurnak, F. Chem. Soc.115, 11569–11572 Biochemistry29, 6609–6618
(1993)Science260, 1503–1507 109. Gerlt, J. A., Kozarich, J. W., Kenyon, G. L., and 136. Joseph-McCarthy, D., Lolis, E., Komives, E.
78. Cohen, F. E. (1993) Science260, 1444–1445 Gassman, P. G. (1991) J. Am. Chem. Soc.113, A., and Petsko, G. A. (1994) Biochemistry33,
79. Kita, N., Boyd, C. M., Garrett, M. R., Jurnak, 9667–9669 2815–2823
F., and Keen, N. T. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 110. Gerlt, J. A., and Gassman, P. G. (1993) J. Am. 137. Mande, S. C., Mainfroid, V., Kalk, K. H.,
26529–26535 Chem. Soc.115, 11552–11568 Goraj, K., Martial, J. A., and Hol, W. G. J.
80. Kuo, D. J., and Rose, I. A. (1987) Biochemistry 111. Guthrie, J. P. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, (1994)Protein Sci.3, 810–821
26, 7589–7596 1151–1152 138. Davenport, R. C., Bash, P. A., Seaton, B. A.,
80a. Lloyd, S. J., Lauble, H., Prasad, G. S., and 112. Tobin, J. B., and Frey, P. A. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Karplus, M., Petsko, G. A., and Ringe, D.
Stout, C. D. (1999) Protein Sci.8, 2655–2662 Soc.118, 12253–12260 (1991)Biochemistry30, 5821–5826
81. Werst, M. M., Kennedy, M. C., Houseman, A. 113. Yamauchi, T., Choi, S.-Y., Okada, H., Yohda, 139. Verlinde, C. L. M. J., Witmans, C. J., Pijning,
L. P., Beinert, H., and Hoffman, B. M. (1990) M., Kumagai, H., Esaki, N., and Soda, K. T., Kalk, K. H., Hol, W. G. J., Callens, M., and
Biochemistry29, 10533–10540 (1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 18361–18364 Opperdoes, F. R. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 1578–1584
82. Kilpatrick, L. K., Kennedy, M. C., Beinert, H., 114. Glavas, S., and Tanner, M. E. (1999) Biochemis- 140. Rose, I. A., Fung, W.-J., and Warms, J. V. B.
Czernuszewicz, R. S., Qiu, D., and Spiro, T. G. try38, 4106–4113 (1990)Biochemistry29, 4312–4317
(1994)J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 4053–4061 115. Ho, H.-T., Falk, P. J., Ervin, K. M., Krishnan, B. 140a.Harris, T. K., Cole, R. N., Comer, F. I., and
83. Lauble, H., Kennedy, M. C., Beinert, H., and S., Discotto, L. F., Dougherty, T. J., and Pucci, Mildvan, A. S. (1998) Biochemistry37, 16828–
Stout, C. D. (1992) Biochemistry31, 2735–2748 M. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2464–2470 16838
84. Kennedy, M. C., Emptage, M. H., and Beinert, 115a.Hwang, K. Y., Cho, C.-S., Kim, S. S., Sung, H.- 141. Joseph-McCarthy, D., Rost, L. E., Komives, E.
H. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 3145–3151 C., Yu, Y. G., and Cho, Y. (1999) Nature Struct. A., and Petsko, G. A. (1994) Biochemistry33,
85. Kennedy, M. C., and Beinert, H. (1988) J. Biol. Biol.6, 422–426 2824–2829
Chem.263, 8194–8198 116. Stein, T., Kluge, B., Vater, J., Franke, P., Otto, 142. Belasco, J. G., and Knowles, J. R. (1980)
86. Beinert, H., and Kennedy, M. C. (1993) FASEB A., and Wittmann-Liebold, B. (1995) Biochem- Biochemistry19, 472–477
J.7, 1442–1448 istry34, 4633–4642 143. Alston, W. C., II, Kanska, M., and Murray, C.
87. Kent, T. A., Emptage, M. H., Merkle, H., 117. Wiseman, J. S., and Nichols, J. S. (1984) J. Biol. J. (1996) Biochemistry35, 12873–12881
Kennedy, M. C., Beinert, H., and Münck, E. Chem.259, 8907–8914 144. Nickbarg, E. B., Davenport, R. C., Petsko, G.
(1985)J. Biol. Chem.260, 6871–6881 118. Shikata, Y., Watanabe, T., Teramoto, T., Inoue, A., and Knowles, J. R. (1988) Biochemistry27,
88. Lauble, H., Kennedy, M. C., Beinert, H., and A., Kawakami, Y., Nishizawa, Y., Katayama, 5948–5960
Stout, C. D. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.237, 437–451 K., and Kuwada, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 145. Lodi, P. J., Chang, L. C., Knowles, J. R., and
89. Zheng, L., Kennedy, M. C., Beinert, H., and 16719–16723 Komives, E. A. (1994) Biochemistry33, 2809–
Zalkin, H. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 7895–7903 119. Heck, S. D., Faraci, W. S., Kelbaugh, P. R., 2814
90. Gruer, M. J., Artymiuk, P. J., and Guest, J. R. Saccomano, N. A., Thadeio, P. F., and 146. Raines, R. T., and Knowles, J. R. (1987)
(1997)Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 3–6 Volkmann, R. A. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Biochemistry26, 7014–7020
91. Flint, D. H. (1993) Biochemistry32, 799–805 U.S.A.93, 4036–4039 147. Bash, P. A., Field, M. J., Davenport, R. C.,
92. Flint, D. H., and McKay, R. G. (1994) J. Am. 120. Johnson, J. D., Creighton, D. J., and Lambert, Petsko, G. A., Ringe, D., and Karplus, M.
Chem. Soc.116, 5534–5539 M. R. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 4535–4541 (1991)Biochemistry30, 5826–5832
93. Hofmeister, A. E. M., Grabowski, R., Linder, 121. Cooper, A. J. L., Gines, J. Z., and Meister, A. 148. Lodi, P. J., and Knowles, J. R. (1991) Biochemis-
D., and Buckel, W. (1993) Eur. J. Biochem.215, (1983)Chem. Rev.83, 321–358 try30, 6948–6956
341–349 122. Pirrung, M. C., Chen, J., Rowley, E. G., and 149. Alagona, G., Ghio, C., and Kollman, P. A.
94. Grabowski, R., Hofmeister, A. E. M., and McPhail, A. T. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, (1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 9855–9862
Buckel, W. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 297– 7103–7110 150. Pompliano, D. L., Peyman, A., and Knowles,
300 123. Noltmann, E. A. (1972) in The Enzymes, 3rd J. R. (1990) Biochemistry29, 3186–3194
95. Hofmeister, A. E. M., Berger, S., and Buckel, ed., Vol. 6 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 271–354, 151. Yüksel, K. Ü., Sun, A.-Q., Gracy, R. W., and
W. (1992) Eur. J. Biochem.205, 743–749 Academic Press, New York Schnackerz, K. D. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269,
96. Schroepfer, G. J., Jr. (1966) J. Biol. Chem.241, 124. McGee, D. M., Hathaway, G. H., Palmieri, R. 5005–5008
5441–5447 H., and Noltmann, E. A. (1980) J. Mol. Biol. 152. Williams, J. C., and McDermott, A. E. (1995)
97. Hill, R. K., and Newkome, G. R. (1969) J. Am. 142, 29–42 Biochemistry34, 8309–8319
Chem. Soc.91, 5893–5894 125. Mushegian, A. R., and Koonin, E. V. (1996) 153. Carrell, H. L., Rubin, B. H., Hurley, T. J., and
98. Chiang, Y., and Kresge, A. J. (1991) Science Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 10268–10273 Glusker, J. P. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 3230–
253, 395–400 125a.Jeffery, C. J., Bahnson, B. J., Chien, W., Ringe, 3236
99. Vellom, D. C., Radic’, Z., Li, Y., Pickering, N. D., and Petsko, G. A. (2000) Biochemistry39, 154. Farber, G. K., Glasfeld, A., Tiraby, G., Ringe,
A., Camp, S., and Taylor, P. (1993) Biochemistry 955–964 D., and Petsko, G. A. (1989) Biochemistry28,
32, 12–17 126. Tanaka, K. R., and Paglia, D. E. (1995) in The 7289–7297
100. Gerlt, J. A., and Gassman, P. G. (1993) Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited 155. Collyer, C. A., Goldberg, J. D., Viehmann, H.,
Biochemistry32, 11943–11952 Disease (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. Blow, D. M., Ramsden, N. G., Fleet, G. W. J.,
101. Petsko, G. A., Kenyon, G. L., Gerlt, J. A., S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 3485–3511, Montgomery, F. J., and Grice, P. (1992)
Ringe, D., and Kozarich, J. W. (1993) Trends McGraw-Hill, New York Biochemistry31, 12211–12218
Biochem. Sci.18, 372–376 127. Woodruff, W. W., III, and Wolfenden, R. 156. Jenkins, J., Janin, J., Rey, F., Chiadmi, M., van
102. Neidhart, D. J., Howell, P. L., Petsko, G. A., (1979)J. Biol. Chem.254, 5866–5867 Tilbeurgh, H., Lasters, I., De Maeyer, M., Van
Powers, V. M., Li, R., Kenyon, G. L., and 127a.Seemann, J. E., and Schulz, G. E. (1997) J. Mol. Belle, D., Wodak, S. J., Lauwereys, M.,
Gerlt, J. A. (1991) Biochemistry30, 9264–9273 Biol.273, 256–268 Stanssens, P., Mrabet, N. T., Snauwaert, J.,
103. St. Maurice, M., and Bearne, S. L. (2000) 128. Wallace, L. J., Eiserling, F. A., and Wilcox, G. Matthyssens, G., and Lambeir, A.-M. (1992)
Biochemistry39, 13324–13335 (1978)J. Biol. Chem.253, 3717–3720 Biochemistry31, 5449–5458
104. Schafer, S. L., Barrett, W. C., Kallarakal, A. T., 129. Bogumil, R., Kappl, R., Hüttermann, J., and 157. Whitaker, R. D., Cho, Y., Cha, J., Carrell, H. L.,
Mitra, B., Kozarich, J. W., Gerlt, J. A., Clifton, Witzel, H. (1997) Biochemistry36, 2345–2352 Glusker, J. P., Karplus, P. A., and Batt, C. A.
J. G., Petsko, G. A., and Kenyon, G. L. (1996) 130. Speck, J. C., Jr. (1958) Adv. Carbohydrate Chem. (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 22895–22906
Biochemistry35, 5662–5669 13, 63–103 158. Allen, K. N., Lavie, A., Petsko, G. A., and
105. Babbitt, P. C., Hasson, M. S., Wedekind, J. E., 131. Gibson, D. R., Gracy, R. W., and Hartman, F. Ringe, D. (1995) Biochemistry34, 3742–3749
Palmer, D. R. J., Barrett, W. C., Reed, G. H., C. (1980) J. Biol. Chem.255, 9369–9374 159. Hall, S. S., Doweyko, A. M., and Jordan, F.
Rayment, I., Ringe, D., Kenyon, G. L., and 132. Balaban, R. S., and Ferretti, J. A. (1983) Proc. (1978)J. Am. Chem. Soc.100, 5934
Gerlt, J. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 16489–16501 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.80, 1241–1245 160. Xue, L., Talalay, P., and Mildvan, A. S. (1991)
106. Babbitt, P. C., Mrachko, G. T., Hasson, M. S., 133. Blacklow, S. C., Raines, R. T., Lim, W. A., Biochemistry30, 10858–10865
Huisman, G. W., Kolter, R., Ringe, D., Petsko, Zamore, P. D., and Knowles, J. R. (1988) 161. Brooks, B., and Benisek, W. F. (1994) Biochem-
G. A., Kenyon, G. L., and Gerlt, J. A. (1995) Biochemistry27, 1158–1167 istry33, 2682–2687
Science267, 1159–1161 134. Muirhead, H. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 162. Austin, J. C., Zhao, Q., Jordan, T., Talalay, P.,
107. Chiang, Y., Kresge, A. J., Pruszynski, P., 326–330 Mildvan, A. S., and Spiro, T. G. (1995)
Schepp, N. P., and Wirz, J. (1990) Angew. Biochemistry34, 4441–4447

--- Page 718 ---

715
References
163. Zhao, Q., Li, Y.-K., Mildvan, A. S., and Talalay, 184. Marsh, J. J., and Lebherz, H. G. (1992) Trends 214. Wlassics, I. D., and Anderson, V. E. (1989)
P. (1995) Biochemistry34, 6562–6572 Biochem. Sci.17, 110–113 Biochemistry28, 1627–1633
164. Hawkinson, D. C., Pollack, R. M., and Ambulos, 185. Cox, T. M. (1994) FASEB J.8, 62–71 215. Usher, K. C., Remington, S. J., Martin, D. P.,
N. P., Jr. (1994) Biochemistry33, 12172–12183 186. Morris, A. J., and Tolan, D. R. (1994) Biochem- and Drueckhammer, D. G. (1994) Biochemistry
165. Viger, A., Coustal, S., and Marquet, A. (1983) istry33, 12291–12297 33, 7753–7759
J. Am. Chem. Soc.103, 451–458 187. Sygusch, J., Beaudry, D., and Allaire, M. (1987) 215a.Kurz, L. C., Nakra, T., Stein, R., Plungkhen,
166. Holman, C. M., and Benisek, W. F. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 7846–7850 W., Riley, M., Hsu, F., and Drysdale, G. R.
Biochemistry33, 2672–2681 188. Lai, C. Y., and Oshima, T. (1971) Arch. (1998)Biochemistry37, 9724–9737
167. Wu, Z. R., Ebrahimian, S., Zawrotny, M. E., Biochem. Biophys.144, 363– 216. Schwartz, B., Drueckhammer, D. G., Usher, K.
Thornburg, L. D., Perez-Alvarado, G. C., 188a.Choi, K. H., Mazurkie, A. S., Morris, A. J., C., and Remington, S. J. (1995) Biochemistry34,
Brothers, P., Pollack, R. M., and Summers, M. Utheza, D., Tolan, D. R., and Allen, K. N. 15459–15466
F. (1997) Science276, 415–418 (1999)Biochemistry38, 12655–12664 216a.Gu, Z., Drueckhammer, D. G., Kurz, L., Liu,
167a.Kim, S. W., Cha, S.-S., Cho, H.-S., Kim, J.-S., 188b.Dalby, A., Dauter, Z., and Littlechild, J. A. K., Martin, D. P., and McDermott, A. (1999)
Ha, N.-C., Cho, M.-J., Joo, S., Kim, K. K., Choi, (1999)Protein Sci.8, 291–297 Biochemistry38, 8022–8031
K. Y., and Oh, B.-H. (1997) Biochemistry36, 189. Periana, R. A., Motiu-DeGrood, R., Chiang, Y., 216b.Mulholland, A. J., Lyne, P. D., and Karplus,
14030–14036 and Hupe, D. J. (1980) J. Am. Chem. Soc.102, M. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Soc.122, 534–535
167b.Choi, G., Ha, N.-C., Kim, S. W., Kim, D.-H., 3923–3927 216c.Howard, B. R., Endrizzi, J. A., and Reming-
Park, S., Oh, B.-H., and Choi, K. Y. (2000) 190. Beernink, P. T., and Tolan, D. R. (1996) Proc. ton, S. J. (2000) Biochemistry39, 3156–3168
Biochemistry39, 903–909 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 5374–5379 217. Smith, S. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1248–1259
167c.Thornburg, L. D., Hénot, F., Bash, D. P., 191. Kadonaga, J. T., and Knowles, J. R. (1983) 218. Misra, I., Narasimhan, C., and Miziorko, H.
Hawkinson, D. C., Bartel, S. D., and Pollack, Biochemistry22, 130–136 M. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 12129–12135
R. M. (1998) Biochemistry37, 10499–10506 191a.Hall, D. R., Leonard, G. A., Reed, C. D., Watt, 219. Misra, I., and Miziorko, H. M. (1996) Biochem-
168. Chen, L. H., Kenyon, G. L., Curtin, F., C. I., Berry, A., and Hunter, W. N. (1999) J. istry35, 9610–9616
Harayama, S., Bembenek, M. E., Hajipour, G., Mol. Biol.287, 383–394 220. Guynn, R. W., and Veech, R. L. (1979) J. Biol.
and Whitman, C. P. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 192. Qamar, S., Marsh, K., and Berry, A. (1996) Chem.254, 1691–1698
17716–17721 Protein Sci.5, 154–161 221. Linn, T. C., and Srere, P. A. (1979) J. Biol.
169. Subramanya, H. S., Roper, D. I., Dauter, Z., 193. Dreyer, M. K., and Schulz, G. E. (1996) J. Mol. Chem.254, 1691–1698
Dodson, E. J., Davies, G. J., Wilson, K. S., and Biol.259, 458–466 222. Ranganathan, N. S., Linn, T. C., and Srere, P.
Wigley, D. B. (1996) Biochemistry35, 792–802 194. Lebioda, L., Hatada, M. H., Tulinsky, A., and A. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257, 698–702
170. Taylor, A. B., Czerwinski, R. M., Johnson, W. Mavridis, I. M. (1982) J. Mol. Biol.162, 445– 223. Elshourbagy, N. A., Near, J. C., Kmetz, P. J.,
H., Jr., Whitman, C. P., and Hackert, M. L. 458 Sathe, G. M., Southan, C., Strickler, J. E.,
(1998)Biochemistry37, 14692–14700 195. Meloche, H. P. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, Gross, M., Young, J. F., Wells, T. N. C., and
171. Stivers, J. T., Abeygunawardana, C., Mildvan, 38–41 Groot, P. H. E. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 1430–
A. S., Hajipour, G., and Whitman, C. P. (1996) 196. Dekker, E. E., and Kitson, R. P. (1992) J. Biol. 1435
Biochemistry35, 814–823 Chem.267, 10507–10514 224. Pentyala, S. N., and Benjamin, W. B. (1995)
172. Czerwinski, R. M., Harris, T. K., Johnson, W. 197. Wong, C.-H., Garcia-Junceda, E., Chen, L., Biochemistry34, 10961–10969
H., Jr., Legler, P. M., Stivers, J. T., Mildvan, A. Blanco, O., Gijsen, H. J. M., and Steensma, D. 225. Hersch, L. B. (1973) J. Biol. Chem.248, 7295–
S., and Whitman, C. P. (1999) Biochemistry38, H. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 3333–3339 7303
12358–12366 198. Jia, J., Schörken, U., Lindqvist, Y., Sprenger, 226. Nilekani, S., and SivaRaman, C. (1983)
173. Fitzgerald, M. C., Chernushevich, I., Stand- G. A., and Schneider, G. (1997) Protein Sci.6, Biochemistry22, 4657–4663
ing, K. G., Kent, S. B. H., and Whitman, C. P. 119–124 227. Oppenheimer, N. J., Singh, M., Sweeley, C. C.,
(1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 11075–11080 199. Higgins, M. J. P., Kornblatt, J. A., and Rudney, Sung, S.-J., and Srere, P. A. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.
174. Lo, T. W. C., Westwood, M. E., McLellan, A. H. (1972) in The Enzymes, 3rd ed., Vol. 7 254, 1000–1002
C., Selwood, T., and Thornalley, P. J. (1994) J. (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 407–434, Academic 228. Ko, Y. H., Vanni, P., Munske, G. R., and
Biol. Chem.269, 32299–32305 Press, New York McFadden, B. A. (1991) Biochemistry30, 7451–
175. Ridderström, M., Saccucci, F., Hellman, U., 200. Wiegand, G., and Remington, S. J. (1986) Ann. 7456
Bergman, T., Principato, G., and Mannervik, Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.15, 97–117 229. Lenz, H., Buckel, W., Wunderwald, P.,
B. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 319–323 201. Anderson, D. H., and Duckworth, H. W. Biedermann, G., Buschmeier, V., Eggerer, H.,
176. Richard, J. P. (1991) Biochemistry30, 4581–4585 (1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 2163–2169 Cornforth, J. W., Redmond, J. W., and Mallaby,
176a.Saadat, D., and Harrison, D. H. T. (2000) 202. Wiegand, G., Remington, S., Deisenhofer, J., R. (1971) Eur. J. Biochem.24, 207–215
Biochemistry39, 2950–2960 and Huber, R. (1984) J. Mol. Biol.174, 205–219 230. Retey, J., Luthy, J., and Arigoni, D. (1970)
177. Lan, Y., Lu, T., Lovett, P. S., and Creighton, D. 203. Rault-Leonardon, M., Atkinson, M. A. L., Nature (London)226, 519–521
J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 12957–12960 Slaughter, C. A., Moomaw, C. R., and Srere, P. 231. Kyte, J. (1995) Mechanism in Protein Chemistry,
178. Cameron, A. D., Ridderström, M., Olin, B., A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 257–263 Garland Publ., New York (pp. 293–313)
Kavarana, M. J., Creighton, D. J., and 204. Russell, R. J. M., Ferguson, J. M. C., Hough, D. 232. Leussing, D. L., and Raghavan, N. V. (1980)
Mannervik, B. (1999) Biochemistry38, 13480– W., Danson, M. J., and Taylor, G. L. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.102, 5635–5643
13490 Biochemistry36, 9983–9994 233. Steinberger, R., and Westheimer, F. H. (1951)
178a.He, M. M., Clugston, S. L., Honek, J. F., and 205. Pereira, F. D., Donald, L. J., Hosfield, D. J., J. Am. Chem. Soc.73, 429–435
Matthews, B. W. (2000) Biochemistry39, 8719– and Duckworth, H. W. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 234. Kubala, G., and Martell, A. E. (1982) J. Am.
8727 269, 412–417 Chem. Soc.104, 6602–6609
179. Rae, C., O’Donoghue, S. I., Bubb, W. A., and 206. Karpusas, M., Holland, D., and Remington, S. 235. Waldrop, G. L., Braxton, B. F., Urbauer, J. L.,
Kuchel, P. W. (1994) Biochemistry33, 3548–3559 J. (1991) Biochemistry30, 6024–6031 Cleland, W. W., and Kiick, D. M. (1994)
180. Bito, A., Haider, M., Hadler, I., and Breiten- 207. Chothia, C., and Lesk, A. M. (1985) Trends Biochemistry33, 5262–5267
bach, M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 21509–21519 Biochem. Sci.10, 116–118 236. Highbarger, L. A., Gerlt, J. A., and Kenyon, G.
181. Mathieu, M., Modis, Y., Zeelen, J. P., Engel, C. 208. Evans, C. T., Kurz, L. C., Remington, S. J., and L. (1996) Biochemistry35, 41–46
K., Abagyan, R. A., Ahlberg, A., Rasmussen, Srere, P. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 10661–10672 236a.Stanley, T. M., Johnson, W. H., Jr., Burks, E. A.,
B., Lamzin, V. S., Kunau, W. H., and Wieren- 209. Remington, S., Wiegand, G., and Huber, R. Whitman, C. P., Hwang, C.-C., and Cook, P. F.
ga, R. K. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.273, 714–728 (1982)J. Mol. Biol.158, 111 – 152 (2000)Biochemistry39, 718–726
181a.Modis, Y., and Wierenga, R. K. (2000) J. Mol. 210. Kurz, L. C., Roble, J. H., Nakra, T., Drysdale, 237. Loeber, G., Infante, A. A., Maurer-Fogy, I.,
Biol.297, 1171–1182 G. R., Buzan, J. M., Schwartz, B., and Drueck- Krystek, E., and Dworkin, M. B. (1991) J. Biol.
182. Roberts, J. R., Narasimhan, C., and Miziorko, hammer, D. G. (1997) Biochemistry36, 3981– Chem.266, 3016–3021
H. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 17311–17316 3990 238. Chou, W.-Y., Liu, M.-Y., Huang, S.-M., and
183. Narasimhan, C., Roberts, J. R., and Miziorko, 211. Kurz, L. C., and Drysdale, G. R. (1987) Chang, G.-G. (1996) Biochemistry35, 9873–9879
H. M. (1995) Biochemistry34, 9930–9935 Biochemistry26, 2623–2627 239. Winning, B. M., Bourguignon, J., and Leaver,
183a.Vinarov, D. A., and Miziorko, H. M. (2000) 212. Kurz, L. C., Ackerman, J. J. H., and Drysdale, C. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 4780–4786
Biochemistry39, 3360–3368 G. R. (1985) Biochemistry24, 452–457 240. Wei, C.-H., Chou, W.-Y., and Chang, G.-G.
183b.Richard, J. P., and Nagorski, R. W. (1999) J. 213. Clark, J. D., O’Keefe, S. J., and Knowles, J. R. (1995)Biochemistry34, 7949–7954
Am. Chem. Soc.121, 4763–4770 (1988)Biochemistry27, 5961–5971 241. Karsten, W. E., and Cook, P. F. (1994) Biochem-
istry33, 2096–2103

--- Page 719 ---

716 Chapter 13. Enzymatic Addition, Elimination, Condensation, and Isomerization: Roles for Enolate and Carbocation Intermediates
References
241a.Liu, D., Karsten, W. E., and Cook, P. F. (2000) 272a.Taylor, T. C., and Andersson, I. (1996) Nature 298. McQueney, M. S., Lee, S.-l, Bowman, E.,
Biochemistry39, 11955–11960 Struct. Biol.3, 95–101 Mariano, P. S., and Dunaway-Mariano, D.
242. Edens, W. A., Urbauer, J. L., and Cleland, W. 272b.Harpel, M. R., Larimer, F. W., and Hartman, F. (1989)J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 6885–6887
W. (1997) Biochemistry36, 1141–1147 C. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 730–738 299. Seidel, H. M., and Knowles, J. R. (1994)
242a.Gruys, K. J., and Sikorski, J. A. (1998) in 272c.Harpel, M. R., and Hartman, F. C. (1996) Biochemistry33, 5641–5646
Comprehensive Biological Catalysis. A Mechanis- Biochemistry35, 13865–13870 300. Bowman, E., McQueney, M., Barry, R. J., and
tic Reference, Vol. I (Sinnott, M., ed), pp. 273– 272d.Duff, A. P., Andrews, T. J., and Curmi, R. M. Dunaway-Mariano, D. (1988) J. Am. Chem.
291, Academic Press, San Diego, California G. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.298, 903–916 Soc.110, 5575–5576
243. Bolduc, J. M., Dyer, D. H., Scott, W. G., Singer, 273. Pierce, J., Andrews, T. J., and Lorimer, G. H. 301. Hidaka, T., and Seto, H. (1989) J. Am. Chem.
P., Sweet, R. M., Koshland, D. E., Jr., and (1986)J. Biol. Chem.261, 10248–10256 Soc.111, 8012–8013
Stoddard, B. L. (1995) Science268, 1312–1318 273a.Berry, J. A., Lorimer, G. H., Pierce, J., Seeman, 302. Freeman, S., Pollack, S. J., and Knowles, J. R.
244. Berdis, A. J., and Cook, P. F. (1993) Biochemis- J. R., Meeks, J., and Freas, S. (1987) Proc. Natl. (1992)J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 377–378
try32, 2041–2046 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 734–738 302a.Morais, M. C., Zhang, W., Baker, A. S., Zhang,
245. Dean, A. M., and Dvorak, L. (1995) Protein Sci. 274. Jaworowski, A., Hartman, F. C., and Rose, I. G., Dunaway-Mariano, D., and Allen, K. N.
4, 2156–2167 A. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 6783–6789 (2000)Biochemistry39, 10385–10396
246. Wallon, G., Kryger, G., Lovett, S. T., Oshima, 275. Saver, B. G., and Knowles, J. R. (1982) 303. Mortimer, C. E., and Niehaus, W. G., Jr. (1974)
T., Ringe, D., and Petsko, G. A. (1997) J. Mol. Biochemistry21, 5398–5403 J. Biol. Chem.249, 2833–2842
Biol.266, 1016–1031 276. Taylor, T. C., and Andersson, I. (1997) J. Mol. 304. Clifford, K., Cornforth, J. W., Mallaby, R., and
247. Brubaker, M. J., Dyer, D. H., Stoddard, B., and Biol.265, 432–444 Phillips, G. T. (1971) J. Chem. Soc. Chem.
Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1996) Biochemistry35, 277. Roeske, C. A., and O’Leary, M. H. (1984) Commun., 1599–1600
2854–2864 Biochemistry23, 6275–6284 305. Reardan, J. E., and Abeles, R. H. (1986)
248. Tipton, P. A. (1993) Biochemistry32, 2822–2827 278. Van Dyke, D. E., and Schloss, J. V. (1986) Biochemistry25, 5609–5616
249. Kalckar, H. M. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, Biochemistry25, 5145–5156 306. Poulter, C. D., Muehlbacker, M., and Davis, D.
132–133 279. van de Loo, F. J., and Salvucci, M. E. (1996) R. (1989) J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 3740–3742
250. Peliska, J. A., and O’Leary, M. H. (1991) J. Am. Biochemistry35, 8143–8148 307. Street, I. P., Coffman, H. R., Baker, J. A., and
Chem. Soc.113, 1841–1842 280. de Jiménez, E. S., Medrano, L., and Martínez- Poulter, C. D. (1994) Biochemistry33, 4212–4217
251. Seeholzer, S. H., Jaworowski, A., and Rose, I. Barajas, E. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2826–2831 307a.Oh, S. K., Han, K. H., Ryu, S. B., and Kang, H.
A. (1991) Biochemistry30, 727–732 281. Larson, E. M., O’Brien, C. M., Zhu, G., (2000)J. Biol. Chem.275, 18482–18488
252. Matte, A., Tari, L. W., Goldie, H., and Delbaere, Spreitzer, R. J., and Portis, A. R., Jr. (1997) J. 308. Cane, D. E., Abell, C., Harrison, P. H.,
L. T. J. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 8105–8108 Biol. Chem.272, 17033–17037 Hubbard, B. R., Kane, C. T., Lattman, R.,
253. Hwang, S. H., and Nowak, T. (1986) Biochem- 282. Mueller, D. D., Schmidt, A., Pappan, K. L., Oliver, J. S., and Weiner, S. W. (1991) Philos
istry25, 5590–5595 McKay, R. A., and Schaefer, J. (1995) Biochem- Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci332, 123–129
254. Konopka, J. M., Lardy, H. A., and Frey, P. A. istry34, 5597–5603 309. Cane, D. E., Pawlak, J. L., and Horak, R. M.
(1986)Biochemistry25, 5571–5575 282a.Ogren, W. L. (1984) Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol.35, (1990)Biochemistry29, 5476–5490
255. Hlavaty, J. J., and Nowak, T. (1997) Biochemis- 415–442 310. Aulabaugh, A., and Schloss, J. V. (1990)
try36, 3389–3403 283. Tse, J. M.-T., and Schloss, J. V. (1993) Biochem- Biochemistry29, 2824–2830
256. Matte, A., Goldie, H., Sweet, R. M., and istry32, 10398–10403 311. Biou, V., Dumas, R., Cohen-Addad, C., Douce,
Delbaere, L. T. J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.256, 126–143 283a.Sugawara, H., Yamamoto, H., Shibata, N., R., Job, D., and Pebay-Peyroula, E. (1997)
257. Arnelle, D. R., and O’Leary, M. H. (1992) Inoue, T., Okada, S., Miyake, C., Yokota, A., EMBO J.16, 3405–3415
Biochemistry31, 4363–4368 and Kai, Y. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 15655– 312. Halgand, F., Dumas, R., Biou, V., Andrieu, J.-
258. Punekar, N. S., and Lardy, H. A. (1987) J. Biol. 15661 P., Thomazeau, K., Gagnon, J., Douce, R., and
Chem.262, 6714–6719 284. Harpel, M. R., Serpersu, E. H., Lamerdin, J. Forest, E. (1999) Biochemistry38, 6025–6034
259. Roseler, W. J., Vandenbark, G. R., and Hanson, A., Huang, Z.-H., Gage, D. A., and Hartman, 313. Proust-De Martin, F., Dumas, R., and Field,
R. H. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 9657–9664 F. C. (1995) Biochemistry34, 11296–11306 M. J. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Soc.122, 7688–7697
260. Rohrer, S. D., Saz, H. J., and Nowak, T. (1986) 284a.Gutteridge, S., Rhoades, D. F., and Herrmann,
J. Biol. Chem.261, 13049–13055 C. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 7818–7824
261. Hebdo, C. A., and Nowak, T. (1982) J. Biol. 285. Morell, M. K., Wilkin, J.-M., Kane, H. J., and
Chem.257, 5503–5514 Andrews, T. J. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 5445–
262. Hartman, F. C., and Harpel, M. R. (1994) Ann. 5451
Rev. Biochem.63, 197–234 286. Krebs, H. A., and Roughton, F. J. W. (1948)
263. Wasmann, C. C., Reiss, B., and Bohnert, H. J. Biochem. J.43, 550–555
(1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 617–619 287. Kaziro, Y., Hass, L. F., Boyer, P. D., and Ochoa,
264. Shibata, N., Inoue, T., Fukuhara, K., Nagara, S. (1962) J. Biol. Chem.237, 1460–1468
Y., Kitagawa, R., Harada, S., Kasai, N., 288. Cooper, T. G., Tchen, T. T., Wood, H. G., and
Uemura, K., Kato, K., Yokota, A., and Kai, Y. Benedict, C. R. (1968) J. Biol. Chem.243, 3857–
(1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 26449–26452 3863
265. Tessier, L. H., Paulus, F., Keller, M., Vial, C., 289. González, D. H., and Andreo, C. S. (1988)
and Imbault, P. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.245, 22–33 Biochemistry27, 177–183
266. Holzenburg, A., Mayer, F., Harauz, G., van 290. Harpster, M. H., and Taylor, W. C. (1986) J.
Heel, M., Tokuoka, R., Ishida, T., Harata, K., Biol. Chem.261, 6132–6136
Pal, G. P., and Saenger, W. (1987) Nature 291. O’Leary, M. H., Rife, J. E., and Slater, J. D.
(London)325, 730–732 (1981)Biochemistry20, 7308–7314
267. Erijman, L., Lorimer, G. H., and Weber, G. 292. Hansen, D. E., and Knowles, J. R. (1982) J.
(1993)Biochemistry32, 5187–5195 Biol. Chem.257, 14795–14798
268. Morse, D., Salois, P., Markovic, P., and 293. Fujita, N., Izui, K., Nishino, I., and Katsuki, H.
Hastings, J. W. (1995) Science268, 1622–1624 (1984)Biochemistry23, 1774–1779
269. Andersson, I. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, 160–174 294. González, D. H., and Andreo, C. S. (1989)
269a.Schreuder, H. A., Knight, S., Curmi, P. M. G., Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 24–27
Andersson, I., Cascio, D., Sweet, R. M., 295. Knowles, J. R. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biochem.58,
Brändén, C.-I., and Eisenberg, D. (1993) 195–221
Protein Sci.2, 1136–1146 296. Janc, J. W., Urbauer, J. L., O’Leary, M. H., and
270. Newman, J., and Gutteridge, S. (1993) J. Biol. Cleland, W. W. (1992) Biochemistry31, 6432–
Chem.268, 25876–25886 6440
271. Bassham, J. A., Benson, A. A., Kay, L. D., 297. Lee, S.-L., Hepburn, T. W., Swartz, W. H.,
Harris, A. Z., Wilson, A. T., and Calvin, M. Ammon, H. L., Mariano, P. S., and Dunaway-
(1954)J. Am. Chem. Soc.76, 1760–1770 Matiano, D. (1992) J. Am. Chem. Soc.114,
272. Siegel, M. I., and Lane, M. D. (1973) J. Biol. 7346–7354
Chem.248, 5486–5498

--- Page 720 ---

717
Study Questions
1. Discuss the role of carbonyl groups in facilitating 7. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase catalyzes the
reactions of metabolism. following reaction:
2. Write a step-by-step sequence showing the chemical Oxaloacetate + GTP→ CO +
2
mechanisms involved in the action of a type I phosphoenolpyruvate + GDP
aldolase that catalyzes cleavage of fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate. The enzyme is inactivated by sodium Illustrate the probable mechanism of the reaction.
borohydride in the presence of the substrate.
Explain this inactivation. 8. Write a complete step-by-step mechanism for the
action of ATP-citrate lyase which catalyzes the
3. Some methylotrophic bacteria dehydrogenate following reaction (Eq. 13-39):
methanol to formaldehyde. The latter undergoes
an aldol condensation to form a hexulose-6-phos- ATP + citrate + CoA – SH → Acetyl – CoA +
phate: oxaloacetate + ADP + P
i
CH2OH 9. Malonyl-CoA synthetase forms its product from
free malonate and MgATP. Both phospho-enzyme
HC OH
and malonyl-enzyme intermediates have been
C O detected. Suggest a sequential mechanism of
action. See Kim, Y. S., and Lee, J. K. (1986) J. Biol.
(HC OH)2
Chem.261, 16295–16297.
CH2OP
10. The carboxylation of acetone with HCO – to form
3
Write a reasonable cycle of biochemical reactions acetoacetate (the reverse of Eq. 13-44) is not a
(utilizing this compound) by which three molecules thermodynamically spontaneous process (∆G°’
of methanol can yield one molecule of glyceralde- ~17 kJ mol–1). An anaerobic strain of Xanthobacter
hyde 3-phosphate, a compound that can be either couples this reaction to the cleavage of ATP to
catabolized for energy or utilized for biosynthesis. AMP + 2 P. Suggest possible mechanisms. See
i
Sluis, M. K., and Ensign, S. A. (1997) Proc. Natl.
4. Malate is formed in the glyoxylate pathway by Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 8456–8461.
reaction of glyoxylate with Acetyl-CoA. Indicate
the chemical mechanism of the reactions involved 11. The reaction of Eq. 10-11 begins with a hydroxyla-
and structure of an intermediate species. tion, which can be viewed as insertion of an oxygen
atom into a C–H bond. Draw the probable inter-
5. Acetyl-CoA is condensed with acetoacetyl-CoA to mediate formed in this reaction and indicate how
give an intermediate which is eventually converted it can be converted to the final products.
to mevalonate.
a) Show the sequence of reactions leading from 12. Cyanase from E. coli decomposes cyanate (NCO–)
acetyl-CoA to mevalonate with the structures to ammonia and CO . Isotopic labeling studies
2
of important intermediates. show that the second oxygen atom in the product
b) Mevalonate is an important intermediate on CO comes not from H O but from a second sub-
2 2
the pathway leading to what class of compounds? strate, bicarbonate ion. The correct equation for
the enzymatic process is:
6. a) Show the structures of the reactants for the
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase NCO– + H+ + HCO – → NH – COO– + CO
3 2 2
reaction.
b) Free coenzyme A is liberated in the above Propose a sequence of steps for this enzymatic
reaction. From which of the two reactants did reaction, which has been investigated by Ander-
it come? Explain the metabolic significance of son and coworkers. Johnson, W. V., and Ander-
the liberation of free CoA. son, P. M. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 9021–9025 and
Anderson, P. M., Korte, J. J., Holcomb, T. A., Cho,
Y.-g, Son, C.-m, and Sung, Y.-c. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
269, 15036–15045.

--- Page 721 ---

718 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
The vitamin biotin is formed in nature (left) by condensation of L-alanine with pimeloyl-CoA to form
8-amino-7-oxononanoate (AON). This compound is seen at the upper left of the center structure
–OC O joined as a Schiff base with the coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate (PLP). This is a product complex of
A Pi l m an e i l n o e yl-CoAa –OC O the enzyme AON synthase (see Webster et al.,Biochemistry39, 516-528, 2000) Courtesy of D. Alexeev,
CO2 n O 8o-7An H -aom3 nx Cioona-ot-e H NH3 H H + b + + 3 3 N N C O H3 c H N N H –O d Bioti C n O S R c 2 et a - . ( a t 1 L a l. - . l , h y B J y z . a d e B x d r i t o o e b l x r . , y y C a e a h n t e h P d m y L L . l P ) 2 . - d S 7 d a e 3 e w r , p i 2 v y e 0 a n e 1 t r d i 9 . v e 6 B e n -2 , i t o 0 a t t 2 n r i 0 a n i 4 n n s , s t y 1 a e n 9 m r 9 m th 8 in e e ). d a s i s i C s a e o t . r e e u A q i r n u t t e i t t s r h h y e e e s o l e t f e h n f G r t z e u y i e s o m o t g h e t u h i p a a e n y r m g r e u i L n n v z u a y d . t m e i T p d h e h e s i o a c ( m s a s p r t i e b h n p o a d s x t i y b e p , l , h a c i s o , n e s d t p ) ( h . D h e a S o f t t b o e e r r p f i m u t z b n s o i c c s f t h i i o t n s s
in all living organisms to cleave C–C bonds adjacent to C=O groups.
Contents
719 A. ATP and the Nucleotide “Handles” Boxes
720 B. Coenzyme A and Phosphopantetheine 721 Box 14-A Discovery of the Vitamins
723 C. Biotin and the Formation of Carboxyl Groups 728 Box 14-B The Biotin-Binding Proteins Avidin and
from Bicarbonate Streptavidin
724 1. Biotin-Containing Enzymes 738 Box 14-C The Vitamin B Family: Pyridoxine,
6
725 2. The Mechanism of Biotin Action Pyridoxal, and Pyridoxamine
725 Carboxybiotin 756 Box 14-D Dietary Requirements for B Vitamins
726 Carboxyphosphate
727 Theβ carboxylation step Tables
729 3. Control Mechanisms 725 Table 14-1 Enzymes Containing Bound Biotin
729 4. Pumping Ions with the Help of Biotin 735 Table 14-2 Enzymes Dependent upon Thiamin
730 D. Thiamin Diphosphate Diphosphate as a Coenzyme
730 1. Chemical Properties of Thiamin 743 Table 14-3 Some Enzymes That Require Pyridoxal
731 2. Catalytic Mechanisms Phosphate as a Coenzyme
733 3. Structures of Thiamin-Dependent Enzymes 753 Table 14-4 Some Pyruvoyl Enzymes
734 4. The Variety of Enzymatic Reactions Involving
Thiamin
736 5. Oxidative Decarboxylation and 2-Acetylthiamin
Diphosphate
736 6. Thiamin Coenzymes in Nerve Action
737 E. Pyridoxal Phosphate
737 1. Nonenzymatic Models
740 2. A General Mechanism of Action of PLP
741 3. The Variety of PLP-Dependent Reactions
741 Loss of the α-Hydrogen (Group a)
744 Decarboxylation(Group b)
745 Side chain cleavage (Group c)
745 Ketimine intermediate as electron acceptor
(Group d)
746 Glycogen phosphorylase
747 4. Pyridoxamine Phophate as a Coenzyme
747 5. Stereochemistry of PLP-Requiring Enzymes
749 6. Seeing Changes in the Optical Properties of the
Coenzyme
750 Imine groups in free enzymes
750 Absorption bands at 500 nm
750 7. Atomic Structures
751 8. Constructing a Detailed Picture of the Action of a
PLP Enzyme
753 F. Pyruvoyl Groups and Other Unusual Electrophilic
Centers
754 1. Decarboxylases
755 2. Proline and Glycine Reductases
755 3. Dehydroalanine and Histidine and Phenylalanine
Ammonia-Lyases
758 References
763 Study Questions

--- Page 722 ---

719
14
Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
O
–O C
Alanine O
a –O C
Pimeloyl-CoA
CO2 b O
–O C
O NH3 + c
d
H3C H H + 3N
8-Amino-
7-oxo-
nonanoate + H
H3N CH3 N
O S
N
H
Biotin
Most of the reactions discussed in Chapters 12 and electrons. Some of these coenzymes, such as
13 are catalyzed by enzymes that contain only those NAD+ and NADP+, can usually dissociate rapidly
functional groups found in the side chains of the and reversibly from the enzymes with which they
constituent amino acids. Coenzymes are nonprotein function. Others, including FAD, are much more
molecules that function as essential parts of enzymes. tightly bound and rarely if ever dissociate from
Coenzymes often serve as “special reagents” needed the protein catalyst. Heme groups are covalently
for reactions that would be difficult or impossible linked to proteins such as cytochrome c and
using only simple acid–base catalysis. In many instances, cannot be dissociated without destroying the
they also serve as carriers, alternating catalysts that enzyme. Very tightly bound coenzyme groups
accept and donate chemical groups, hydrogen atoms, are often called prosthetic groups, but there is
or electrons. Coenzymes will be considered here in no sharp line that divides prosthetic groups from
three groups: the loosely bound coenzymes. For example, NAD+
is bound weakly to some proteins but tightly to
1. Compounds of high group transfer potential such others. Oxidative coenzymes are discussed in
as ATP and GTP that function in energy coupling Chapter 15.
within cells. Because it is cleaved and then disso-
ciates from the enzyme to which it is bound, ATP
may be regarded as a substrate rather than a A. ATP and the Nucleotide “Handles”
coenzyme. However, as a phosphorylated form
of ADP it may also be viewed as a carrier of high- The role of ATP in “driving” biosynthetic reactions
energy phospho groups. has been considered in Chapter 12, where attention was
focused on the polyphosphate group which undergoes
2. Compounds, often derivatives of vitamins that, cleavage. What about the adenosine end? Here is a
while in the active site of the enzyme, alter the shapely structure borrowed from the nucleic acids.
structure of a substrate in a way that permits it to What is it doing as a carrier of phospho groups? At
react more readily. Coenzyme A, pyridoxal phos- least part of the answer seems to be that the adenosine
phate, thiamin diphosphate, and vitamin B monophosphate (AMP) portion of the molecule is a
12
coenzymes fall into this group. “handle” which can be “grasped” by catalytic proteins.
For some enzymes, such as acetyl-CoA synthetase
3. Oxidative coenzymes with structures of precisely (Eq. 12-45), the handle is important because the inter-
determined oxidation–reduction potential. Ex- mediate acyl adenylate must remain bound to the
amples are NAD+, NADP+, FAD, and lipoic acid. protein. Without the large adenosine group, there
They serve as carriers of hydrogen atoms or of would be little for the protein to hold onto.

--- Page 723 ---

720 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
molecules is a commonplace reaction within living
NH2
cells, one example being the formation of the neuro-
transmitteracetylcholine. In the laboratory acetyla-
N
–O O N tion is carried out with reactive compounds such as
–O
P acetic anhydride or acetyl chloride.
O
P
O P O O CH2
O
N N
–O
O– O CH3
+
CH2 N CH3
OH OH HO CH2
CH3
The AMP “handle” in ATP
Acetylating
agent
O CH3
AMP is only one of several handles to which
+
nature attaches phospho groups to form di- and tri- H3C C CH2 N CH3
phosphate derivatives. Like AMP, the other handles
A
O
cetylcholin
C
e
H2
CH3
(14-1)
are nucleotides, the monomer units of nucleic acids.
Thus, one enzyme requiring a polyphosphate as an
energy source selects ATP, another CTP, or GTP. The Lipmann wondered what nature used in their place.
nucleotide handles not only carry polyphosphate His approach in seeking the biological “active acetate”
groups but also are present in other coenzymes, such is one that has been used successfully in solving many
as CoA, NAD+, NADP+, and FAD. In addition, they biochemical problems. He first set up a test system to
serve as carriers for small organic molecules. For examine the ability of extracts prepared from fresh
example,uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-Glc) liver tissue to catalyze the acetylation of sulfanilamide
Chapter 10, is a carrier of active glucosyl groups im- (Eq. 14-2). A specific color test was available for quan-
portant in sugar metabolism and cytidine diphos- titative determination of very small amounts of the
phate choline is an intermediate in synthesis of
phospholipids.
O
Recalling that acetyl adenylate (acetyl-AMP) is
an intermediate in synthesis of acetyl-CoA, and com- C CH3
paring the biosynthesis of sugars, phospholipids, and
NH2 HN
acetyl-CoA, we see that in each case the enzyme in-
volved requires a different nucleotide handle. The
handle may provide a means of recognition which can
acetylation
help an enzyme to pick the right bit of raw material
out of the sea of molecules surrounding it. Figure 5-6
shows the shapes of the four purine and pyrimidine
O S O O S O
bases forming the most common nucleotide handles.
The distinctive differences both in shape and in hydro- NH2 NH2
gen bond patterns are obvious. In binding to proteins, Sulfanilamide (14-2)
the hydrogen bond-forming groups in the purine and
pyrimidine bases sometimes interact with precisely
positioned groups in the protein. However, in some product. The rate of acetylation of sulfanilamide under
enzymes the “handle” is not precisely bound. This standard conditions was taken as a measure of the
seems to be the case for adenine, which makes surpris- activity of the biochemical acetylation system. Lipmann
ingly few hydrogen bonds to proteins.1 Hydroxyl soon discovered that the reaction required ATP and
groups of the ribose or deoxyribose ring also often that the ATP was cleaved to ADP concurrently with
form hydrogen bonds and the negatively charged the formation of acetyl-sulfanilamide. He also found
oxygen atoms of the 5'-phosphate may interact with that dialysis or ultrafiltration rendered the liver extract
positively charged protein side chains. almost inactive in acetylation. Apparently some essen-
tial material passed out through the semipermeable
dialysis membrane. When the dialysate or ultrafiltrate
B. Coenzyme A and Phosphopantetheine was concentrated and added back, acetylation activity
was restored. The unknown material was not destroyed
The existence of a special coenzyme required in by boiling, and Lipmann postulated that it was a new
biological acetylation was recognized by Fritz Lipmann coenzyme which he called coenzyme A (CoA). Now
in 1945.2–3a The joining of acetyl groups to other the test system was used to estimate the amount of the

--- Page 724 ---

B. Coenzyme A and Phosphopantetheine 721
BOX 14-A DISCOVERY OF THE VITAMINS
Several mysterious and often fatal diseases Riboflavin was found to be most responsible for the
which resulted from vitamin deficiencies were stimulation of rat growth, while vitamin B was
6
prevalent until the past century. Sailors on long sea needed to prevent a facial dermatitis or “rat pellagra.”
voyages were often the victims. In the Orient, the Pantothenic acid was especially effective in curing
diseaseberiberi was rampant and millions died of a chick dermatitis, while nicotinamide was required
its strange paralysis called “polyneuritis.” In 1840, to cure human pellagra. Biotin was required for
George Budd predicted that the disease was caused growth of yeast.
by the lack of some organic compound that would The antiscurvy (antiscorbutic) activity was
be discovered in “a not too distant future.”a In 1893, calledvitamin C, and when its structure became
C. Eijkman, a Dutch physician working in Indonesia, known it was called ascorbic acid. The fat-soluble
observed paralysis in chicks fed white rice consumed factor preventing rickets was designated vitamin D.
by the local populace. He found that the paralysis By 1922, it was recognized that another fat-soluble
could be relieved promptly by feeding an extract of factor, vitamin E, is essential for full-term pregnancy
rice polishings. This was one of the pieces of evidence in the rat. In the early 1930s vitamin K and the
that led the Polish biochemist Casimir Funk to for- essential fatty acids were added to the list of fat-
mulate the “vitamine theory” in about 1912. Funk soluble vitamins. Study of the human blood disor-
suggested that the diseases beriberi,pellagra,rickets, ders“tropical macrocytic anemia” and “pernicious
andscurvy resulted from lack in the diet of four anemia” led to recognition of two more water-soluble
different vital nutrients. He imagined them all to be vitamins,folic acid and vitamin B . The latter is
12
amines, hence the name vitamine. required in minute amounts and was not isolated
In the same year in England, F. G. Hopkins until 1948. Have all the vitamins been discovered?
announced that he had fed rats on purified diets Rats can be reared on an almost completely synthetic
and discovered that amazingly small amounts of diet. However, there is the possibility that for good
accessory growth factors, which could be obtained health humans require some as yet undiscovered
from milk, were necessary for normal growth.b By compounds in our diet. Furthermore, it is quite
1915, E. V. McCollum and M. Davis at the University likely that we receive some essential nutrients that
of Wisconsin had recognized that rat growth depended we cannot synthesize from bacteria in our intestinal
on not one but at least two accessory factors. The tracts. An example may be the pyrroloquinoline
first, soluble in fatty solvents, they called A, and the quinone (PQQ).e
other, soluble in water, they designated B. Factor B Why do we need vitamins? Early clues came
cured beriberi in chicks. Later, when it was shown in 1935 when nicotinamide was found in NAD+ by
that vitamine A was not an amine, the “e” was H. von Euler and associates and in NADP+ by War-
dropped and vitamin became a general term. burg and Christian. Two years later, K. Lohman and
Progress in isolation of the vitamins was slow, P. Schuster isolated pure cocarboxylase, a dialyz-
principally because of a lack of interest. According able material required for decarboxylation of pyru-
to R. R. Williams, when he started his work on isola- vate by an enzyme from yeast. It was shown to be
tion of the antiberiberi factor in 1910 most people thiamin diphosphate (Fig. 15-3). Most of the water-
were convinced that his efforts were doomed to soluble vitamins are converted into coenzymes or
failure, so ingrained was Pasteur’s idea that diseases are covalently bound into active sites of enzymes.
were caused only by bacteria. In 1926, Jansen isolated Some lipid-soluble vitamins have similar functions
a small amount of thiamin, but it was not until 1933 but others, such as vitamin D and some metabolites
that Williams, working almost without financial of vitamin A, act more like hormones, binding to
support, succeeded in preparing a large amount receptors that control gene expression or other
of the crystalline compound from rice polishings. aspects of metabolism.
Characterization and synthesis followed rapidly.c,d
It was soon apparent that the new vitamin alone a Hughes, R. E. (1973) Medical History17, 127–134
would not satisfy the dietary need of rats for the B b Harris, L. D. (1937) Vitamins in Theory and Practice, Cambridge
Univ. Press, London and New York
factor. A second thermostable factor (B ) was required
2 c Karlson, P. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 536–537
in addition to thiamin (B 1 ), which was labile and d Williams, R. R., and Spies, T. D. (1938) Vitamin B 1 and Its Use in
easily destroyed by heating. When it became clear Medicine, Macmillan, New York
that factor B contained more than one component, e Killgore, J., Smidt, C., Duich, L., Romero-Chapman, N., Tinker,
2
D., Reiser, K., Melko, M., Hyde, D., and Rucker, R. B. (1989)
it was called vitamin B complex. There was some
Science245, 850–852
confusion until relatively specific animal tests for
each one of the members had been devised.

--- Page 725 ---

722 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
coenzyme in a given volume of dialysate or in any
O O
other sample. When small amounts of CoA were
1. Activation of
supplied to the test system, only partial restoration of
R C S CoA acyl group, R C ,
the acetylation activity was observed and the amount
toward transfer by
of restoration was proportional to the amount of CoA. Y– nucleophilic displacment
With test system in hand to monitor various fraction-
ation methods, Lipmann soon isolated the new coen- O
zyme in pure form from yeast and liver.
2. Activation of a hydrogen
Coenzyme A (Fig. 14-1) is a surprisingly complex C C S CoA atom adjacent to the
molecule. The handle is AMP with an extra phospho carbonyl of a thioester
group on its 3'-hydroxyl. The phosphate of the 5'-carbon H
is linked in anhydride (pyrophosphate) linkage to (Leaves as H+)
another phosphoric acid, which is in turn esterified
withpantoic acid. Pantoic acid is linked to (cid:1)-alanine These functions depend, to a considerable extent, on
and the latter to (cid:1)-mercaptoethylamine through the fact that the properties of the carbonyl group of a
amide linkages, the reactive SH group being attached thioester are closely similar to those of an isolated
to a long (1.9-nm) semi-flexible chain. Coenzyme A carbonyl group in a ketone.5
can be cleaved by hydrolysis to pantetheine(Fig. 14-1), Synthesis of fatty acids in bacteria requires a small
pantetheine 4'-phosphate, and pantothenic acid. acyl carrier protein (ACP) whose functions are
These three compounds are all growth factors. similar to those of CoA. However, it contains pante-
Pantothenic acid is a vitamin, which is essential to
human life. Its name is derived from a Greek root that
reflects its universal occurrence in living things. The
Reactive—SH group at
bacteriumLactobacillus bulgaricus, which converts milk end of long flexible chain
HS
Pantoic acid β-Mercapto-
ethylamine
CH3 β-Alanine
NH
CH3
HO CH2 C O O
C C Pantetheine
4'-phosphate,
H
OH
N
H
H2C
pro
b
st
o
h
u
e
n
ti
d
c
β-Alanine
CH2 COOH
group of
1.9 nm
NH The
Pantothenic acid acyl carrier
vitamin
protein O pantothenic
(ACP) H
acid
to yogurt, needs the more complex pantetheine for H3C OH d-Pantoic
growth. It finds a ready supply of pantetheine in milk acid
H3C
and has lost its ability to synthesize this compound.
However, it can convert pantetheine to CoA. Pantetheine
4'O
4'-phosphate is required for growth of Acetobacter O
P
suboxydans. While it is not a dietary essential for most O– NH3
organisms, it is found in a covalently bound form in O
several enzymes. O P N N
While CoA was discovered as the “acetylation –O
O
coenzyme,” it has a far more general function. It is
required, in the form of acetyl-CoA, to catalyze the with A ex M tr P a 5' O N N
phospho
synthesis of citrate in the citric acid cycle. It is essential
group on
to the β oxidation of fatty acids and carries propionyl 3'-OH 3'
and other acyl groups in a great variety of other meta- O
O OH
bolic reactions. About 4% of all known enzymes require
P
CoA or one of its esters as a substrate.4 –O
OH
Coenzyme A has two distinctly different biochemical
functions, which have already been considered briefly
in Chapters 12 and 13 and can be summarized as
follows: Figure 14-1 Coenzyme A, an acyl-activating coenzyme
containing the vitamin pantothenic acid.

--- Page 726 ---

C. Biotin and the Formation of Carboxyl Groups from Bicarbonate 723
theine 4'-phosphate covalently bonded through phos- protein through hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen-
phodiester linkage to a serine side chain. In E. coli this bond recognition interactions. Additional specific
is at position 36 in the 77-residue protein.6,7 Here the hydrophobic interactions allow the enzyme to hold the
nucleotide handle of CoA has been replaced with a acetyl group in a precise position where it can be acted
larger and more complex protein which can interact in upon by the catalytic groups. In the case of CoA trans-
specific ways with the multiprotein fatty acid synthase ferase (Eq. 12-50) smaller thiols can replace CoA but
complex described in Chapter 21. In higher organisms with much lower catalytic rates. The acyl-CoA deriva-
ACP is usually not a separate protein but a domain in tives are weakly bound, the expected intrinsic binding
a large synthase molecule. Bound phosphopantetheine energy of the pantetheine portion of the molecule
is also found in enzymes involved in synthesis of pep- apparently being used to increase k .17 From a study
cat
tide antibiotics (Chapter 29)8,9 and polyketides (Chap- of kinetics and equilibria it was concluded that the
ter 21).10,11 It is also present in subunits of cytochrome binding energy of the interaction of the nucleotide
oxidase and of ATP synthase of Neurospora but appears portion of coenzyme A with the enzyme is utilized
to play only a structural role, being needed for proper to increase the rate of formation and to stabilize the
assembly of these multimeric proteins.12 In a citrate- covalently linked E-CoA (see Eq. 12-50). On the other
cleaving enzyme, and in a bacterial malonate decar- hand, binding of the pantoic acid part of the molecule
boxylase, phosphopantethine is attached to a serine decreases the stability of the transition state for break-
side chain as 2’-(5’’-phosphoribosyl)-3’-dephospho- up of the complex by ~ 40 kJ/mol, which corresponds
CoA.13–14a to a 107-fold increase in the reaction rate.16
4'-Phosphopantetheine C. Biotin and the Formation of Carboxyl
Groups from Bicarbonate
O
O
P By 1901 it was recognized that yeast required for
–O
O its growth an unknown material which was called
Adenine bios. This was eventually found to be a mixture of
O
pantothenic acid, inositol, and a third component
β
which was named biotin. Biotin was also recognized
3' 2'
as a factor promoting growth and respiration of the
clover root nodule organism Rhizobium trifolii and as
HO O O O O– vitamin H, a material that prevented dermatitis and
α OH HO P Ser paralysis in rats that were fed large amounts of un-
cooked egg white. Isolation of the pure vitamin was
3'
CH2 O O CH2
5'' a heroic task accomplished by Kögl in 1935. In one
2'-(5''-Phophoribosyl)-3'-dephospho-CoA preparation 250 kg of dried egg yolk yielded only
1.1 mg of crystalline biotin.18
Attachment of phosphopantetheine to proteins is
10
catalyzed by a phosphotransferase that utilizes CoA as HOOC
the donor. A phosphodiesterase removes the phospho- 8
9
pantetheine, providing a turnover cycle.15–15b A variety 6 H
7 3’
of synthetic analogs have been made.4,16 The reactive N
H 2’ O
center of CoA and phosphopantetheine is the SH group, 2 3
S 1
which is carried on a flexible arm that consists in part 5 4 N
of the β-alanine portion of pantothenic acid. A mystery H 1’
(+)-Biotin
is why pantoic acid, a small odd-shaped molecule that
the human body cannot make, is so essential for life.
The hydroxyl group is a potential reactive site and the Biotin contains three chiral centers and therefore
two methyl groups may enter into formation of a “tri- has eight stereoisomers.18,19 Of these, only one, the
alkyl lock” (p. 485), part of a sophisticated “elbow” or dextrorotatory (+)-biotin, is biologically active.19,20
shoulder for the SH-bearing arm. The vitamin is readily oxidized to the sulfoxide and sul-
When it binds to citrate synthase acetyl-CoA appears fone. The sulfoxide can be reduced back to biotin by a
to bind only after the enzyme has undergone a confor- molybdenum-containing reductase in some bacteria
mational change that closes the enzyme around its (see also Chapter 16, Section H).20a Biotin is synthesized
other substrate oxaloacetate (Fig. 13-8). The adenine from pimeloyl-CoA (see chapter banner, p. 719 and
ring of the long CoA handle is tightly bonded to the Eq. 24-39). Four enzymes are required. Two of them, a

--- Page 727 ---

724 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
synthase that catalyzes step a (banner) and a transami- In addition to pyruvate carboxylase, other biotin-
nase that catalyzes step b, contain the coenzyme pyri- requiring enzymes act on acetyl-CoA,propionyl-CoA,
doxal phosphate (PLP).20b The final step is insertion of and(cid:1)-methylcrotonyl-CoA, using HCO – to add
3
a sulfur atom from an iron-sulfur center. carboxyl groups at the sites indicated by the arrows in
the accompanying structures. Because of the presence
of the C = C double bond conjugated with the carbonyl
1. Biotin-Containing Enzymes group, the carboxylation of β-methylcrotonyl-CoA is
electronically analogous to β carboxylation.
Within cells the biotin is covalently bonded to
proteins, its double ring being attached to a 1.6-nm
O CH3 O
flexible arm. The first clue to this fact was obtained
from isolation of a biotin-containing material biocytin, H3C C S CoA H2C C S CoA
ε-N-biotinyl-L-lysine, from autolysates (self-digests) of Acetyl-CoA Propionyl-CoA
rapidly growing yeast.21 It was subsequently shown
O
that the lysine residue of the biocytin was originally
present in proteins at the active sites of biotin-containing H3C CH C C S CoA
enzymes usually within the sequence AMKM22 or
VMKM.23 Other conserved features also mark the CH3
attachment site.24
β-Methylcrotonyl-CoA
Human cells, as well as those of other higher eukary-
otes, carry genes for all four of these enzymes.25– 29
O Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is a cytosolic enzyme needed
~1.6
nm
for synthesis of fatty acids but the other three enzymes
enter mitochondria when they function. The biotin-
HN NH HN
O dependent carboxylases, which are listed in Table 14-1,
C O
Peptide have a variety of molecular sizes and subunits but show
C chain
much evolutionary conservation in their sequences
N NH
S H O C and chemical mechanisms.22,25 In higher eukaryotes
all of the catalytic apparatus of the enzymes is present
Biotin in single large 190 - to 200-kDa subunits. The 251-kDa
subunit of yeast acetyl-CoA carboxylase consists of
Biocytin 2337 amino acid residues.30 That of rats contains 234531
and that of the alga Cyclotella 2089.32 Human cytosolic
Biotin acts as a carboxyl group carrier in a series acetyl-Co carboxylase has 2347 residues while a mito-
of carboxylation reactions, a function originally sug- chondria-associated form has an extra 136 residues,
gested by the fact that aspartate partially replaces most of them in a hydrophobic N-terminal extension.32a,b
biotin in promoting the growth of the yeast Torula Plants have two forms of the enzyme, one cytosolic
cremonis. Aspartate was known to arise by transami- and one located in plastids. In wheat, they have 2260
nation from oxaloacetate, which in turn could be and 2311 residues, respectively.32c,32d Animal and
formed by carboxylation of pyruvate. Subsequent fungal pyruvate carboxylases are also large ~ 500-kDa
studies showed that biotin was needed for an enzy- tetramers.32e The yeast enzyme consists of 1178-residue
matic ATP-dependent reaction of pyruvate with bicar- monomers.33 In contrast, the 560-kDa human propionyl-
bonate ion to form oxaloacetate (Eq. 14-3). This is a β CoA carboxylase is an α β tetramer.34,35
4 4
carboxylation coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP. In bacteria and in at least some plant chloroplasts,36,37
acetyl-CoA carboxylase consists of three different
kinds of subunit and four different peptide chains.
O
The much studied E. coli enzyme is composed of a
HCO
3
– CH3 C COO– 156-residue biotin carboxyl carrier protein,38 a 449-
residue biotin carboxylase, whose three-dimensional
ATP structure in known,39,39a and a carboxyltransferase
Pyruvate carboxylase subunit consisting of 304 (α)- and 319 (β)- residue
ADP + P chains. These all associate as a dimer of the three
i O
subunits (eight peptide chains).40 – 42
–OOC CH2 C COO– (14-3) Biotin becomes attached to the proper ε-amino
Oxaloacetate groups at the active centers of biotin enzymes by the
action of biotin holoenzyme synthetase (biotinyl

--- Page 728 ---

C. Biotin and the Formation of Carboxyl Groups from Bicarbonate 725
protein ligase), which utilizes ATP to form an interme- The function of biotin is to mediate the coupling of
diate biotinyl-AMP.43– 47a Hereditary deficiency of this ATP cleavage to the carboxylation, making the overall
enzyme has been observed in a few children and has reaction exergonic. This is accomplished by a two-stage
been treated by administration of extra biotin.48 The E. process in which a carboxybiotin intermediate is
coli biotin holoenzyme synthetase, whose three-dimen- formed (Eq. 14-5). There is one known biotin-containing
sional structure is known, has a dual function. It is also enzyme that does not utilize ATP. Propionic acid bacteria
a repressor of transcription of the biotin biosynthetic contain a carboxyltransferase which transfers a carb-
operon.45 Intracellular degradation of biotin-contain- oxyl group reversibly from methylmalonyl-CoA to
ing proteins yields biotin-containing oligopeptides as pyruvate to form oxaloacetate and propionyl-CoA
well as biocytin. These are acted on by biotinidase (see Fig. 17-10). This huge enzyme consists of a central
to release free biotin.49,50 The action of this enzyme in hexameric core of large 12S subunits to which six 5S
recycling biotin may be a controlling factor in the rate dimeric subunits and twelve 123-residue biotinylated
of formation of new biotin-dependent enzymes. peptides are attached.25,52 No ATP is needed because
free HCO – is not a substrate. However, biotin serves
3
as the carboxyl group carrier in this enzyme too.
2. The Mechanism of Biotin Action
It may seem surprising that a coenzyme is needed
HCO–
3
for these carboxylation reactions. However, unless ATP Biotin (covalently bound)
the cleavage of ATP were coupled to the reactions, the
a
equilibria would lie far in the direction of decarboxyla-
ADP + P
tion. For example, the measured apparent equilibrium i
constantK’ for conversion of propionyl-CoA to S methyl- Carboxybiotin
malonyl-CoA at pH 8.1 and 28°C51 is given by Eq. 14-4. O
C C H
[ADP][P][methylmalonyl−CoA] b
K′ = i = 5.7
[ATP][HCO − ][propionyl−CoA]
3
∆G′ = − 4.36 kJ mol−1 (14-4)
O
C C COO–
O O
H
b’
TABLE 14-1 or C C C C C C COO–
Enzymes Containing Bound Biotin
H
CH3 CH3 H
1. Catalyzing beta carboxylation using HCO 3 – with coupled (14-5)
cleavage of ATP to ADP + P
i
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase Carboxybiotin. The structure of biotin suggested
Propionyl-CoA carboxylase that bicarbonate might be incorporated reversibly into
Pyruvate carboxylase its position 2'. However, this proved not to be true and
β-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase it remained for F. Lynen and associates to obtain a clue
(δ carboxylation)
from a “model reaction.” They showed that purified
β-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase promoted the
2. Carboxyl group transfer without cleavage of ATP
carboxylation of free biotin with bicarbonate (H14CO –)
3
and ATP. While the carboxylated biotin was labile,
Carboxyltransferase of Propionobacterium
treatment with diazomethane (Eq. 14-6) gave a stable
3. Biotin-dependent Na+ pumps dimethyl ester of N-1'-carboxybiotin.53,54 The co-
valently bound biotin at active sites of enzymes was
Oxaloacetate decarboxylase also successfully labeled with 14CO Treatment of
2.
Methylmalonyl-CoA decarboxylase the labeled enzymes with diazomethane followed by
Glutaconyl-CoA decarboxylase
hydrolysis with trypsin and pepsin gave authentic
N-1'-carboxybiocytin. It was now clear that the cleav-
4. Other
age of ATP is required to couple the CO from HCO –
Malonate decarboxylase 2 3
to the biotin to form carboxybiotin. The enzyme must
Urea carboxylase

--- Page 729 ---

726 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
O ATP ADP
O O
H O C HO C
HN NH O– O PO3 –
O Carboxyphosphate
C (14-7)
OH
S
H14CO– phospho group to ADP from carbamoyl phosphate,
3
an analog of carboxyphosphate in a reaction that is
ATP
analogous to the reverse of that in Eq. 14-7 and also
by a slow bicarbonate-dependent ATPase activity that
ADP + P
i does not depend upon biotin.57,58,58a
The simplest mechanism for transfer of the carboxyl
O O
group of carboxyphosphate to biotin would appear to
14C
be nucleophilic displacement of the phosphate leaving
–O N NH group by N1' of biotin. The enzyme could presumably
first catalyze removal of the N1' hydrogen to form a
ureido anion.59 Another reasonable possibility would
N-1’-Carboxybiotin be for the terminal phospho group of ATP to be trans-
ferred to biotin to form an O-phosphate60,61
CHN
3 2
–
O
O O
14C 1’ 1' N NH
3
H3CO N NH
O
C Ureido anion
OCH3
S
(14-6) (Eq. 14-8, step a) which could react with bicarbonate as
in Eq. 14-8, step b. Cleavage of the enol phosphate by
attack of HCO – would simultaneously create a nucleo-
3
then transfer the carboxyl group from carboxybiotin philic center at N1' and carboxyphosphate ready to
to the substrate that is to be carboxylated. Enzymatic react with N1'. However, this could not easily explain
transfer of a carboxyl group from chemically synthe- the ATPase activity in the absence of biotin.
sized carboxybiotin onto specific substrates confirmed
the proposed mechanism.55
O
The biotin carboxyl carrier subunit of E. coli
acetyl-CoA carboxylasecontains the covalently bound HO P O–
biotin.55a,b The larger biotin carboxylase subunit cata-
lyzes the ATP-dependent attachment of CO to the O O
biotin and the carboxyltransferase subunit c
2
atalyzes ATP ADP
O–
the final transcarboxylation step (Eq. 14-5, step b) by
HN NH O C N NH
which acetyl-CoA is converted into malonyl-CoA. a
The biotin, which is attached to the carrier protein, is HO
presumably able to move by means of its flexible arm
Bicarbonate
from a site on the carboxylase to a site on the transcar-
boxylase.
b
Pi
Carboxyphosphate. During the initial carboxyla-
O
tion step 18O from labeled bicarbonate enters the P
i O
that is split from ATP. This suggested transient forma-
tion of carboxyphosphate by nucleophilic attack of C N NH
HCO – on ATP (Eq. 14-7). The carboxyl group of this
3 HO
reactive mixed anhydride56 could then be transferred
to biotin. This mechanism is supported by the fact Carboxybiotin
that biotin carboxylase catalyzes the transfer of a (14-8)

--- Page 730 ---

C. Biotin and the Formation of Carboxyl Groups from Bicarbonate 727
Either of the foregoing mechanisms requires that (stepc), driving the reaction to completion. The
the ureido anion of biotin attack the rather unreactive observed transfer of isotope from 18O-containing
carbon atom of carboxyphosphate. Another alternative, bicarbonate into ADP would be observed.
which is analogous to that suggested for PEP carboxy-
lase (Eq. 13-53) is for carboxyphosphate to eliminate The (cid:1) carboxylation step. Once formed, the
inorganic phosphate to give the more electrophilic CO carboxybiotin“head group” could swing to the carb-
2
(Eq. 14-9, step a). The very basic inorganic phosphate oxyltransferase site where transfer of the carboxyl
trianion PO 3– that is eliminated could remove the group into the final product takes place. This might
4
proton from N1' of biotin to create the biotin ureido occur either by nucleophilic attack of an enolate anion
anion (step b), which could then add to CO (step c).22 on the carbonyl carbon (Eq. 14-11) or on CO generated
2 2
by reversal of the reactions of Eq. 14-9, steps b and c.
O–
O– O
O O– M2+ or H+
O– P O
P
O–
O– O
O O
H N NH HO
C
a CoA S CH2 C N NH
O Enolate anion
Carboxyl-phosphate from acetyl-CoA O
b Biotin
O
O
C O
N NH Biotin
O H+
c Carboxybiotin
CoA S CH2 COOH
Malonyl-CoA (14-11)
(14-9)
Have we checked all of the possibilities for the When pyruvate with a chiral methyl group is
mechanism of biotin carboxylation? Kruger and asso- carboxylated by pyruvate carboxylase the configuration
ciates62,63 suggested that biotin, as a ureido anion, at C-3 is retained. The carboxyl enters from the 2-si
might add to bicarbonate to form a highly unstable side, the same side from which the proton (marked H*)
intermediate which, however, could be phosphorylated was removed to form the enolate anion (Eq. 14-12).
by ATP (Eq. 14-10, steps a and b). This intermediate Comparable stereochemistry has been established for
could undergo elimination of inorganic phosphate other biotin-dependent enzymes.64,65
ATP
H COO– H COO–
2
*
ADP H C C C C
O
O H O H O–
H+
P OH Pyruvate 2-Si face is facing viewer
O– O
O O– HO
–O –OOC COO–
C N NH –O C N NH
C C
a
HO HO H O
H (14-12)
Biotin ureido anion
b
ADP These enzymes do not catalyze any proton exchange
O– at C-3 of pyruvate or at C-2 of an acyl-CoA unless the
H O biotin is first carboxylated. This suggested that removal
O of the proton to the biotin oxygen and carboxylation
O
2–O3P O C N NH
might be synchronous. However, 13C and 2H kinetic
c HO isotope effects and studies of 3H exchange66 support
C N NH
the existence of a discrete enolate anion intermediate
HO as shown in Eq. 14-11.65,67 This mechanism is also
Pi
consistent with the observation that propionyl-CoA
Carboxybiotin (14-10)

--- Page 731 ---

728 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
BOX 14-B THE BIOTIN-BINDING PROTEINS AVIDIN AND STREPTAVIDIN
A biochemical curiosity is the presence in egg Other reactive derivatives can be used to attach
white of the glycoprotein avidin.a,b Each 68-kDa biotin to phenolic, thiol, or carbonyl groups.
subunit of this tetrameric protein binds one molecule The affinity of avidin or streptavidin for the
of biotin tenaciously with K ~ 1015 M–1. Nature’s resulting biotinylated materials is still very high.
f
purpose in placing this unusual protein in egg white This fact has permitted the application of this “biotin
is uncertain. Perhaps it is a storage form of biotin, –avidin technology” to numerous aspects of research
but it is more likely an antibiotic that depletes the and diagnostic medicine. For example, a specific
environment of biotin. A closely similar protein antibody (IgG) can be utilized for immunoassay of a
streptavidin is secreted into the culture medium by hormone or other ligand. A second antibody, specific
Streptomyces avidinii.c Its sequence is homologous to for the IgG–ligand complex, can be produced in a
that of avidin. It has a similar binding constant for biotinylated form. A steptavidin complex of a biotin-
biotin and the two proteins have similar three-dimen- ylated enzyme such as alkaline phosphatase, β-galac-
sional structures.a,d– j Biotin binds at one end of a β tosidase, or horseradish peroxidase, for which a sensitive
barrel formed from antiparallel strands and is held colorimetric assay is available, is allowed to react
by multiple hydrogen bonds and a conformational with the biotin·anti-IgG·IgG·ligand complex. The
alteration that allows a peptide loop to close over streptavidin now releases enzyme in proportion to
the bound vitamin. the amount of ligand originally present. Since the
Historically, avidin was important to the discov- biotinylated anti IgG and streptavidin·biotinylated
ery of biotin. The bonding between avidin and enzyme can be stored as a stable mixture, the assay
biotin is so tight that inclusion of raw egg white in is simple and fast.
the diet of animals is sufficient to cause a severe biotin
deficiency. Avidin has also been an important tool
Ligand
to enzymologists interested in biotin-containing
IgG (specific)
enzymes. Avidin invariably inhibits these enzymes
and inhibition by avidin is diagnostic of a biotin-
containing protein. Recently, avidin and streptavidin IgG•L
*mouse
have found widespread application in affinity Anti IgG* *rabbit
chromatography, in immunoassays, and in the *goat
staining of cells and tissues.d,k– p These uses are all Biotin Stable
mixture
based on the ability to attach biotin covalently to
side chain groups of proteins, polysaccharides, and Biotin•Anti IgG•IgG•L
other substances. The carboxyl group of the biotin
Streptavidin•biotinylated enzyme*
“arm,” which lies at the surface of the complex with
avidin or streptovidin, can be converted to any of a
series of reactive derivatives. For example, p-nitro- *Alkaline phophatase
e.g. *β-Galactosidase
phenyl or N-hydroxysuccinimide esters of biotin can
*Horseradish peroxidase
be used to attach biotin to amino groups of proteins
to form biotinylated proteins. Streptavidin•biotin•anti-IgG•IgG•L
+
Free biotinylated enzyme (active)
O
O
Biotin C Color
O N
Avidin technology can also be applied to the
H2N Protein
isolation of proteins and other materials from cells.
O Because the irreversibility of the binding of biotin
may be a problem, photocleavable biotin derivatives
have been developed.q In the following structure,
O
O the biotin derivative has been joined to a protein
(as in the first equation in this box) and is ready for
Biotin C
separation, perhaps on a column containing immo-
HO N N Protein
H bilized avidin or streptavidin. After separation the
Biotinylated protein biotin together with the linker and photocleavable
O group are cut off by a short irradiation with ultra-

--- Page 732 ---

729
BOX 14-B (continued)
violet light, leaving the protein in a free form. d Wilchek, M., and Bayer, E. A. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14,
408–412
e Punekar, N. S., and Lardy, H. A. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 6714–
6719
Biotin
f Henderson, W. A., Pähler, A., Smith, J. L., Satow, Y., Merritt, E.
A., and Phizackerley, R. P. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
C O
86, 2190–2194
g Weber, P. C., Pantoliano, M. W., and Thompson, L. D. (1992)
H N
Biochemistry31, 9350–9354
h Schmidt, T. G. M., Koepke, J., Frank, R., and Skerra, A. (1996)
J. Mol. Biol.255, 753–766
i Weber, P. C., Ohlendorf, D. H., Wendoloski, J. J., and Salemme,
Spacer F. R. (1989) Science243, 85–88
hν
j Sano, T., and Cantor, C. R. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
O 92, 3180–3184
k Bayer, E. A., and Wilchek, M. (1980) Meth. Biochem. Anal.26,
H3C C N Protein
1–46
H
O C CH O l Childs, G. V., Naor, Z., Hazum, F., Tibolt, R., Westlund, K. N.,
and Hancock, M. B. (1983) J. Histochem. Cytochem.31, 1422–
N H
1425
mWilchek, M., and Bayer, E. A., eds. (1990) Methods in Enzymol-
CH2 NO2
ogy, Vol. 184, Academic Press, San Diego, California
n Savage, M. D., Mattson, G., Desai, S., Nielander, G. W.,
Morgensen, S., and Conklin, E. J. (1992) Avidin-Biotin Chemis-
Photocleavable group try: A Handbook, Pierce, Rockford, Illinois
o Donnelson, J. E., and Wu, R. (1972) J. Biol. Chem.247, 4661–
4668
p Laundon, C. H., and Griffith, J. D. (1987) Biochemistry26, 3759–
a Livnah, O., Bayer, E. A., Wilshek, M., and Sussman, J. L. (1993)
3762
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 5076–5080 q Olejnik, J., Sonar, S., Krzymañska-Olejnik, E., and Rothschild,
b Pugliese, L., Coda, A., Malcovati, M., and Bolognesi, M. (1993)
K. J. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 7590–7594
J. Mol. Biol.231, 698–710
c Meslar, H. W., Camper, S. A., and White, H. B., III. (1978) J. Biol.
Chem.253, 6979–6982
carboxylase and transcarboxylase both catalyze elimi-
3. Control Mechanisms
nation of HF from β-fluoropropionyl-CoA to form the
unsaturated acrylyl-CoA.67 The elimination presum-
Most pyruvate carboxylases of animal and of yeast
ably occurs via an enolate anion intermediate as in
are allosterically activated by acetyl-CoA, but those of
Eq. 13-28.
bacteria are usually not. The enzyme from chicken
A bound divalent metal ion, usually Mn2+, is
liver has almost no activity in the absence of acetyl-CoA,
required in the transcarboxylation step. A possible
which appears to increase greatly the rate of formation
function is to assist in enolization of the carboxyl
of carboxyphosphate and to slow the side reaction by
acceptor. However, measurement of the effect of the
which carboxyphosphate is hydrolyzed to bicarbonate
bound Mn2+ on 13C relaxation times in the substrate
and phosphate.70 The acetyl-CoA carboxylases of rat
for pyruvate carboxylase indicated a distance of ~0.7
or chicken liver aggregate in the presence of citrate to
nm between the carbonyl carbon and the Mn2+, too
form ~ 8000-kDa rods. Citrate is an allosteric activator
great for direct coordination of the metal to the carbonyl
for this enzyme but it acts only on a phosphorylated
oxygen.68 Another possibility is that the metal binds
form and the primary control mechanism.71,72 This
to the carbonyl of biotin as indicated in Eq. 14-11.
enzyme in plants is a target for a group of herbicides
Pyruvate carboxylase utilizes two divalent metal ions
that are selectively toxic to grasses.73
and at least one monovalent cation.68a
What is the role of the sulfur atom in biotin? Per-
haps it interacts with CO , helping to hold it in a correct
2 4. Pumping Ions with the Help of Biotin
orientation for reaction. Perhaps it helps to keep the
ureido ring of biotin planar, or perhaps it has no special
Biotin-dependentdecarboxylases act as sodium
function.69
ion pumps in Klebsiella74and in various anaerobes.22,75
For example, oxaloacetate is converted to pyruvate and
bound carboxybiotin.74,74a The latter is decarboxylated

--- Page 733 ---

730 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
to CO at the same time that two Na+ ions are transported unstable form of the thiamin anion, is an example of a
2
from the inside to the outside of the cell. The function cooperative two-proton dissociation with linked
of this pump, like that of the Na+, K+-ATPase (Fig. 8-25) structural changes. A very low concentration of the
is to provide an electrochemical gradient that drives
the transport of other ions and molecules through the
This hydrogen
membrane. Similar ion pumps are operated by decar-
dissociates as
b
C bi
o
o o
x
A t
y
in .
l
7
a
7 a
t i
n Y
o
d e
n
a r
o
s e
f
t q
m
( u S i
e
a re
t
c
h
c s h
y
a a
l
n
m
ro u m
a
n
l
y
o
u c
n
s e
y
u s
l
a c
-C
l e l r y
o
e v
A
la is
7
r i
6
g a
a
e e )
n
a c
d
m a n
g
o
l
n u
u
o n
t
t
a
t m
c
o
o
f a
n
t k
y
h e
l
e
- H
ca
+
ta
d
ly
u
s
r
i
i
s
ng
H 2
1
S 5
CH2
CH2
O
O P O–
O
P
O
O–
3 4 OH
v
ot
it
h
a
e
m
r
i
c
n
o m
w
p
he
o
n
u n
u
d
re
s
a
a
,
r
a
e
l l
s
a
u
n
p
to
p
i
l
n
ie
,
d
al
a
la
s
n
t
t
h
o
e
ic
s
a
o
c
le
id
s
,
o
a
u
n
r
d
ce
c e
o
r
f
tain
H2N
N+
CH3
nitrogen for growth. The reason is that in this organism 4' CH2
3' 5'
urea must first be carboxylated by the biotin-containing N Thiamin diphosphate
urea carboxylase78(see Eq. 24-25) before it can be
2'
6'
hydrolyzed to NH 3 and CO 2 . H3C 1'N+
H
D. Thiamin Diphosphate Protonation occurs
here with pKa ~ 4.9
In Chapter 13 we considered the breaking of a
bond between two carbon atoms, one of which is also intermediate“pseudobase” is present during the titra-
bonded to a carbonyl group. These β cleavages are tion. This property, which is unusual among small
catalyzed by simple acidic and basic groups of the molecules, was instrumental in leading Williams et al.
protein side chains. On the other hand, the decarboxy- to the correct structure for the vitamin.89 A still unan-
lation of 2-oxo acids (Eq. 14-13) and the cleavage and swered question is, What biological significance is
formation of α-hydroxyketones (Eq. 14-14) depend associated with these reactions? Perhaps the thiol form
upon thiamin diphosphate (TDP).79– 85 These reactions depicted in Eq. 14-15 or the “yellow form” (Eq. 7-19)
represent a second important method of making and becomes attached to active sites of some proteins
breaking carbon–carbon bonds which we will designate through disulfide linkages.
(cid:2) condensation and (cid:2) cleavage. The common
feature of all thiamin-catalyzed reactions is that the
bond broken (or formed) is immediately adjacent to the
C2H4OH
S
carbonyl group, not one carbon removed, as in β cleavage
reactions. No simple acid–base catalyzed mechanisms
can be written; hence the need for a coenzyme.
N+ CH3
R + OH–
Thiazolium form
O O
C2H4OH
R C COO– + H+ R CH + CO2 S
(14-13)
H
HO
N CH3
HO O O O
R – H+
R C C R’ R C H + H C R’
Intermediate”pseudobase”
H
(14-14) C2H4OH
–S
H
C
1. Chemical Properties of Thiamin O N CH3
R
The weakly basic portion of thiamin or of its coen-
Thiol form (14-15)
zyme forms is protonated at low pH, largely on N-1 of
the pyrimidine ring.86– 88 The pK value is ~ 4.9. In basic
a
solution, thiamin reacts in two steps with an opening Thiamin is unstable at high pH90,91 and is destroyed
of the thiazole ring (Eq. 14-15) to give the anion of a by the cooking of foods under mildly basic conditions.
thiol form which may be crystallized as the sodium The thiol form undergoes hydrolysis and oxidation
salt.79,84 This reaction, like the competing reaction by air to a disulfide. The tricyclic form (Eq. 7-19) is
described in Eq. 7-19, and which leads to a yellow oxidized to thiochrome, a fluorescent compound

--- Page 734 ---

D. Thiamine Diphosphate 731
whose formation from thiamin by treatment with alka- A similar cleavage is catalyzed by thiamin-degrad-
line hexacyanoferrate (III) (ferricyanide; Eq. 14-16) is ing enzymes known as thiaminases which are found in
the basis of a much used fluorimetric assay. a number of bacteria, marine organisms, and plants.
In a bacterial thiaminase, group Y of Eq. 14-18 is a
cysteine– SH.92,92a
CH2CH2OH
S
NH2
S
HN N CH3 CH2 N+
N
N
C2H4OH
Tricyclic form of thiamin N
H CH3
Y
H
N Fe(CN)6 3– Adduct
OH– CH2CH2OH
S
Thiazole
N N
H+
CH3
NH –O–SO2H
N CH2
N
Products
N H
N
Thiochrome (14-16) Y
H (14-18)
Treatment of thiamin with boiling 5N HCl deaminates Thiamin is synthesized in bacteria, fungi, and
it to the hydroxy analogueoxythiamin, a potent antag- plants from 1-deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate (Eq. 25-21),
onist.Pyrithiamin, another competitor containing which is also an intermediate in the nonmevalonate
pathway of polyprenyl synthesis. However, thiamin
diphosphate is a coenzyme for synthesis of this inter-
+ mediate (p. 736), suggesting that an alternative path-
N
way must also exist. Each of the two rings of thiamin
is formed separately as the esters 4-amino-5-hydroxy-
H3C CH2CH2OH methylpyrimidine diphosphate and 4-methyl-5-(β-
hydroxyethyl) thiazole monophosphate. These
in place of the thiazolium ring, is very toxic especially precursors are joined with displacement of pyrophos-
to the nervous system. phate to form thiamin monophosphate.92b In eukary-
In a solution of sodium sulfite at pH 5, thiamin is otes this is hydrolyzed to thiamin, then converted to
cleaved by what appears to be a nucleophilic displace- thiamin diphosphate by transfer of a diphospho group
ment reaction on the methylene group to give the free from ATP.92b,c In bacteria thiamin monophosphate is
thiazole and a sulfonic acid. converted to the diphosphate by ATP and thiamin
monophosphate kinase.92b
Thiamin HSO3 –
2. Catalytic Mechanisms
NH2
H+
The first real clue to the mechanism of thiamin-
N CH2SO3 – N S dependent cleavage came in about 1950 when Mizuhara
showed that at pH 8.4 thiamin catalyzes the nonenzy-
matic conversion of pyruvate into acetoin (Eq. 14-19).93
N
H3C C2H4OH Following Mizuhara’s lead, Breslow investigated the
(14-17) same reaction using the then new NMR method.94
He made the surprising discovery that the hydrogen
In fact the mechanism of the reaction is more complex atom in the 2 position of the thiazolium ring, between
and is evidently initiated by addition of a nucleophile the sulfur and the nitrogen atoms, exchanged easily
Y, such as –OH or bisulfite, followed by elimination of with deuterium of 2H O. The pK of this proton has
2 a
the thiazole (Eq. 14-18). been estimated as ~ 18, low enough to permit rapid

--- Page 735 ---

732 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
O Acidic CH2CH2 O PP
hydrogen S
2 CH3 C COO– pK a ~ 18
2 H+
H N+ CH3
S
NH2 a
2 CO2
CH2 –
H N N+
CH3 C C CH3
CH2
O OH (14-19) H3C N
Thiazolium
dipolar ion (ylid)
dissociation and replacement with
2H.84,95,96 The resulting thiazolium O O OH
dipolar ion (or ylid ) formed by this
R C COO– R C C R'
dissociation (Eq. 14-20, step a) is stabi-
b’
lized by the electrostatic interaction H
of the adjacent positive and negative b
charges. Breslow suggested that this H
dipolar ion is the key intermediate in O O– O R' H
reactions of thiamin-dependent en-
zymes.94,97 The anionic center of the C C
dipolar ion can react with a substrate S S
Adducts
such as an 2-oxo acid or 2-oxo alcohol formed by
HO C HO C
by addition to the carbonyl group thiamin and N+ N+
substrates
(Eq. 14-20, step b or 14-20, step b’). R R
The resulting adducts are able to CH2 CH2
undergo cleavage readily, as indicated
by the arrows showing the electron α-Lactylthiamin
flow toward the =N+– group. H
Below the structures of the adducts
O O– O
in Eq. 14-20 are those of a 2-oxo acid
and a β-ketol with arrows indicating Compare with C C
β-oxo acid
the electron flow in decarboxylation
andβ-oxo-
and in the aldol cleavage. The similari- alcohol which C C
ties to the thiamin-dependent cleavage undergo easy C C
β cleavage
reaction are especially striking if one
O O
remembers that in some aldolases and (14-20)
decarboxylases the substrate carbonyl
group is first converted to an N-proto-
nated Schiff base before the bond cleavage. –O CH3 S α
di
-
p
L
h
ac
o
t
s
y
p
l
h
th
a
i
t
a
e
m
.
in
We see that the essence of the action of thiamin diphos-
C C Intermediate
phate as a coenzyme is to convert the substrate into a form arising from
in which electron flow can occur from the bond to be broken O OH + N pyruvate
into the structure of the coenzyme. Because of this alter- CH2 CO2
ation in structure, a bond breaking reaction that would
a
not otherwise have been possible occurs readily. To
complete the catalytic cycle, the electron flow has to be
H3C S
+H C C Enamine
reversed again. The thiamin-bound cleavage product
(an enamine) from either of the adducts in Eq. 14-20 HO N
b
can be reconverted to the thiazolium dipolar ion and
an aldehyde as shown in step b of Eq. 14-21 for decar-
CH2
CH3 S
boxylation of pyruvate to acetaldehyde.
H
The adducts α-lactylthiamin and α-lactylthiamin C Thiazolium
diphosphate have both been synthesized.84,98– 100 As H O N dipolar ion
+
long as α-lactylthiamin is kept as a dry solid or at low CH3
pH, it is stable. However, it decarboxylates readily in
CH2
C
neutral solution (Eq. 14-21). Decarboxylation is much
H O (14-21)

--- Page 736 ---

D. Thiamine Diphosphate 733
more rapid in methanol, a fact that was predicted O R'
by Lienhard and associates.101 They suggested that Substrate C S
decarboxylation is easier in a solvent of low polarity
R
because the transition state has a lower polarity than H
does lactylthiamin. An enzyme could assist the reac- H N+
tion by providing a relatively nonpolar environment. N
The crystal structures of thiamin-dependent en-
zymes (see next section) as well as modeling102,103 N
suggest that lactylthiamin pyrophosphate has the
conformation shown in Eq. 14-21. If so, it would be
formed by the addition of the ylid to the carbonyl of
H3C N
pyruvate in accord with stereoelectronic principles, H B-protein
and the carboxylate group would also be in the correct
orientation for elimination to form the enamine in
Eq. 14-21, step b.82–83a A transient 380- to 440-nm Crystallographic studies show that the catalytic base
absorption band arising during the action of pyruvate (:B-protein) is the carboxylate group of a conserved
decarboxylase has been attributed to the enamine. glutamate side chain (E59' in Fig. 14-2). Kern et al.
What is the role of the pyrimidine portion of the used NMR spectroscopy of thiamin diphosphate
coenzyme in these reactions? The pyrimidine ring has present in native and mutant pyruvate decarboxylase
a large inductive effect on the basicity of the thiazolium and transketolase to monitor the exchange rates of the
nitrogen and may increase the rate of dissociation of the C2-H proton of the thiazolium ring.109a The results
C-2 proton somewhat.104 More significant is the fact confirmed the importance of the conserved glutamate
that the – NH group is properly placed to function as a side chain for dissociation of the C2-H proton. Partici-
2
basic catalyst in the generation of the thiazolium dipolar pation of other catalytic groups from the enzyme may
ion. However, the amino group of thiamin is not very also be important. However, these groups are not con-
basic (pK ~ 4.9) and the site of protonation at low pH served in the whole family of enzymes. For example,
a
is largely N-1 of the pyrimidine ring. In the protonated glutamine 122, which is within hydrogen-bonding
form the –NH group is even less basic because of distance of both the substrate and thiamin amino
2
electron withdrawal into the ring. Studies of thiamin group, is replaced by histidine in transketolase.110 A
analogs suggested another possibility. Schellenberger105 variety of kinetic studies involving mutants,111,111a
found pyruvate decarboxylase inactive when TDP was alternative substrates,112,113 and isotope effects in
substituted by analogs with modified aminopyrimidine substrates114 – 116 and solvent117,118 have not yet resolved
rings, e.g., with methylated or dimethylated amino the details of the proton transfers that occur within the
groups or with N1 of the ring replaced by carbon (an active site.
aminopyridyl analog). More recently the experiment
has been repeated with additional enzymes106 and
X-ray studies have shown that the analogs bind into 3. Structures of Thiamin-Dependent Enzymes
the active site of transketolase in a normal way.107 Of
the compounds studied only an aminopyridyl analog of By 1998, X-ray structures had been determined for
TDP having a nitrogen atom at 1' (but CH at 3') had four thiamin diphosphate-dependent enzymes: (1) a
substantial catalytic activity. Jordan and Mariam showed bacterial pyruvate oxidase,119,120 (2) yeast and bacterial
thatN-1'-methylthiamin is a superior catalyst in non- pyruvate decarboxylases,121–122c (3) transketolase,110,123,124
enzymatic catalysis.108 These results are consistent and (4) benzoylformate decarboxylase.124a The reactions
with the speculative scheme illustrated in the following catalyzed by these enzymes are all quite different, as
drawing from the first edition of this book.109 The – NH are the sequences of the proteins. However, the thiamin
2
group of the N1-protonated aminopyrimidine has lost diphosphate is bound in a similar way in all of them.
a proton to form a normally minor tautomer in which the A conserved pattern of hydrogen bonds holds the
resulting imino group would be quite basic. Assisted diphosphate group to the protein and also provides
by a basic group from the protein, it could abstract the ligands to a metal ion. This is normally Mg2+,which
proton from the thiazolium ring to form the ylid. is held in nearly perfect octahedral coordination by
two phosphate oxygen atoms, a conserved aspartate
carboxylate, a conserved asparagine amide, and a
water molecule. The thiamin rings are in a less polar
region. The amino group of the pyrimidine is adjacent
to the 2 – CH of the thiazole and N1' of the pyrimidine
is apparently protonated and hydrogen bonded to the
carboxylate group of a conserved glutamate side

--- Page 737 ---

734 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
chain. This is shown in Fig. 14-2. Substitution of the
4. The Variety of Enzymatic Reactions
corresponding glutamate 51 of yeast pyruvate decar-
Involving Thiamin
boxylase by glutamine or alanine greatly reduced or
eliminated catalytic activity.125
Most known thiamin diphosphate-dependent
reactions (Table 14-2) can be derived from the five half-
reactions, a through e, shown in Fig. 14-3. Each half-
reaction is an α cleavage which
leads to a thiamin- bound enamine
(center, Fig. 14-3) The decarboxyla-
A
tion of an α-oxo acid to an aldehyde
is represented by step b followed
bya in reverse. The most studied
enzyme catalyzing a reaction of this
type is yeast pyruvate decarboxy-
lase, an enzyme essential to alcoholic
fermentation (Fig. 10-3). There are
two ~ 250-kDa isoenzyme forms,
one an α tetramer and one with an
4
(αβ) quaternary structure. The iso-
2
lation of α-hydroxyethylthiamin
diphosphate from reaction mixtures
of this enzyme with pyruvate52
provided important verification of
B the mechanisms of Eqs. 14-14, 14-15.
Other decarboxylases produce alde-
FAD hydes in specialized metabolic path-
O ways: indolepyruvate decarboxylase126
N in the biosynthesis of the plant hor-
N N H moneindole-3-acetate and ben-
zoylformate decarboxylase in the
F121’ mandelate pathway of bacterial
N O metabolism (Chapter 25).124a,127
Q122’ Formation of α-ketols from α-oxo
acids also starts with step b of Fig.
14-3 but is followed by condensation
0.42 nm
R264 with another carbonyl compound
H89’ F479 in step c, in reverse. An example is
N 3’ H N H CH 3 decarboxylation of pyruvate and
N HO
N 2’ condensation of the resulting active
2
H N1’
N
S
O
a
m
c
o
et
l
a
e
l
c
d
u
e
le
h y
to
d e
g i
w
ve
it h
R -
a
α
s
-
e
a
c
c
o
e
n
to
d
l a
p
c
y
ta
r
t
u
e
v
,
a
a
te
O H O O
O S36’ O P P reaction catalyzed by acetohydroxy
O acid synthase (acetolactate syn-
O thase).128 Acetolactate is the precur-
E59’ sor to valine and leucine. A similar
E483 ketol condensation, which is cata-
lyzed by the same synthase, is
O
Figure 14-2 (A) Stereoscopic view of the active site of pyruvate oxidase from
the bacterium Lactobacillus plantarium showing the thiamin diphosphate as C COO–
well as the flavin part of the bound FAD. The planar structure of the part of H3C C
the intermediate enamine that arises from pyruvate is shown by dotted lines.
Only some residues that may be important for catalysis are displayed: G35', HO CH3
S36', E59', H89', F121', Q122', R264, F479, and E483. Courtesy of Georg E.
R-α-Acetolactate
Schulz.119 (B) Simplified view with some atoms labeled and some side chains
omitted. The atoms of the hypothetical enamine that are formed from pyru- required in the biosynthesis of
vate, by decarboxylation, are shown in green. isoleucine (Fig. 24-17). Since this

--- Page 738 ---

D. Thiamine Diphosphate 735
C O
C O
H
R
C O
R HO
2
a
H+ C
O O– HO O HO C OH
C b HO S d
O P P C O
C O C
CO R R
R 2 N
Pyrimidine
e
c HS
C OH C O + H+ H+ + S Acyl-
S
dihydro-
C O S C O lipoyl
group
R
R
C O
Figure 14-3 Half-reactions making up the thiamin-dependent α cleavage and α condensation reactions.
TABLE 14-2 synthase is not present in mammals it is a popular
Enzymes Dependent upon Thiamin Diphosphate target for herbicides.129,130 It is inhibited by many of the
as a Coenzyme most widely used herbicides including sulfometuron
methyl, whose structure is shown here.
1. Nonoxidative
Pyruvate decarboxylase* H3C CH3
Indolepyruvate decarboxylase
Benzoylformate decarboxylase* N N
Glyoxylate carboligase
Acetohydroxy acid synthase (acetolactate synthase) O NH
C
1-Deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase
Transketolase* NH
O O
Phosphoketolase
O S
2. Oxidative decarboxylase
C
Pyruvate oxidase (FAD)* H3CO
Pyruvate dehydrogenase (Lipoyl, FAD, NAD+)
multienzyme complex
Sulfometuron methyl
Pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase
Indolepyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase Acetolactate is a β-oxo acid and is readily decar-
boxylated to acetoin, a reaction of importance in bacterial
* Three-dimensional structures for these enzymes had been
determined by 1998. fermentations (Eq. 17-26). Acetoin, of both R and S

--- Page 739 ---

736 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
HO S organisms. This reaction is usually formulated as the
reverse of step e of Fig. 14-3, which shows the cleavage
C
of an acyl-dihydrolipoyl derivative. However, there
H3C N
is a possibility that the lipoyl group functions not as
Pyrimidine shown in Fig. 14-3 but as an oxidant that converts the
TDP enamine to 2-acetylthiamin diphosphate (Eq. 14-
H+ + 2e– 22)134,135 and only after that as an acyl group carrier.
A related reaction that is known to proceed through
O S acetyl-TDP is the previously mentioned bacterial
C pyruvate oxidase. As seen in Fig. 14-2, this enzyme
H3C N+ has its own oxidant, FAD, which is ready to accept the
two electrons of Eq. 14-22 to produce bound acetyl-
Pyrimidine TDP. The electrons may be able to jump directly to the
2-Acetylthiamin diphosphate (14-22) FAD, with thiamin and flavin radicals being formed
at an intermediate stage.135a The electron transfers as
well as other aspects of oxidative decarboxylation are
configurations, is also formed by pyruvate decarboxy- discussed in Chapter 15, Section C.
lases acting on acetaldehyde.103,131 The ketol conden- A reaction that is related to that of transketolase but
sation of two molecules of glyoxylate with decarboxy- is likely to function via acetyl-TDP is phosphoketolase,
lation to form tartronic semialdehyde (see Fig. 17-6) is whose action is required in the energy metabolism of
an important reaction in bacterial metabolism. It is some bacteria (Eq. 14-23). A product of phosphoketolase is
catalyzed by glyoxylate carboligase,132 another acetyl phosphate, whose cleavage can be coupled to
thiamin diphosphate-dependent enzyme. Formation synthesis of ATP. Phosphoketolase presumably cata-
of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate, an intermediate in lyzes an α cleavage to the thiamin-containing enamine
the nonmevalonate pathway of isoprenoid synthesis, shown in Fig. 14-3. A possible mechanism of formation
is formed in a thiamin diphosphate-catalyzed conden- of acetyl phosphate is elimination of H O from this
2
sation of pyruvate with glyceraldehyde 3-phosophate enamine, tautomerization to 2-acetylthiamin, and
(Fig. 22-2)132a However, there is an unresolved prob- reaction of the latter with inorganic phosphate.
lem. As previously mentioned, the same intermediate
is thought to be a precursor to thiamin diphosphate
(Eq. 25-21). This suggests the presence of an alternative
CH2OH
Pi
CH3
pathway.
C O C O
Ketols can also be formed enzymatically by cleavage
of an aldehyde (step a, Fig. 14-3) followed by conden- HO C H OPO3 2–
O H
sation with a second aldehyde (step c, in reverse). An Acetyl
R C
phosphate
enzyme utilizing these steps is transketolase (Eq.
17-15),132b which is essential in the pentose phosphate R ADP
pathways of metabolism and in photosynthesis.
α-Diketones can be cleaved (step d) to a carboxylic ATP
acid plus active aldehyde, which can react either via CH3 COO–
a or c in reverse. These and other combinations of
(14-23)
steps are often observed as side reactions of such
enzymes as pyruvate decarboxylase. A related thia-
min-dependent reaction is that of pyruvate and acetyl- 6. Thiamin Coenzymes in Nerve Action
CoA to give the α-diketone,diacetyl, CH COCOCH .133
3 3
The reaction can be viewed as a displacement of the The striking paralysis caused by thiamin deficiency
CoA anion from acetyl-CoA by attack of thiamin- together with studies of thiamin analogs as metabolites
bound active acetaldehyde derived from pyruvate suggested a special action for this vitamin in nerves.136
(reverse of step d, Fig. 14-3 with release of CoA). The thiamin analog pyrithiamin (p. 731) both induces
paralytic symptoms and displaces thiamin from nerve
preparations. The nerve poison tetrodotoxin (Chap-
5. Oxidative Decarboxylation and ter 30) blocks nerve conduction by inhibiting inward
2-Acetylthiamin Diphosphate diffusion of sodium, but it also promotes release of
thiamin from nerve membranes. Evidence for a meta-
The oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to bolic significance of thiamin triphosphate comes from
form acetyl-CoA or acetyl phosphate plays a central identification of soluble and membrane-associated
role in the metabolism of our bodies and of most other thiamin triphosphatases137 as well as a kinase that

--- Page 740 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 737
forms protein-bound thiamin triphosphate in the Amino acid 1
brain.138 Mono-, tri-, and tetraphosphates also occur
First half-reaction
naturally in smaller amounts. One might speculate
about a possible role for the rapid interconversion of Oxoacid 1
cationic and yellow anionic forms of thiamin via the PMP-Enzyme PLP-Enzyme
tricyclic form (Eq. 7-19) in some aspect of nerve con- Oxoacid 2
duction.
Second half-reaction
Amino acid 2
E. Pyridoxal Phosphate
Sum: Amino acid 1 + oxoacid 2
The phosphate ester of the aldehyde form of vitamin oxoacid 1 + amino acid 2 (14-25)
B ,pyridoxal phosphate (pyridoxal-P or PLP), is
6
required by many enzymes catalyzing reactions of
amino acids and amines. The reactions are numerous, At about the same time, Gunsalus and coworkers
and pyridoxal phosphate is surely one of nature’s most noticed that the activity of tyrosine decarboxylase
versatile catalysts. The story begins with biochemical produced by lactic acid bacteria was unusually low
transamination, a process of central importance in when the medium was deficient in pyridoxine. Addi-
nitrogen metabolism. In 1937, Alexander Braunstein tion of pyridoxal plus ATP increased the decarboxylase
and Maria Kritzmann, in Moscow, described the trans- activity of cell extracts.146 PLP was synthesized and
amination reaction by which amino groups can be was found to be the essential coenzyme for this and a
transferred from one carbon skeleton to another.139,140 variety of other enzymes.147
For example, the amino group of glutamate can be
transferred to the carbon skeleton of oxaloacetate to
form aspartate and 2-oxoglutarate (Eq. 14-24). 1. Nonenzymatic Models
Pyridoxal or PLP, in the complete absence of en-
–OOC COO– –OOC COO–
zymes, not only undergoes slow transamination with
C C
amino acids but also catalyzes many other reactions
H NH3 + O of amino acids that are identical to those catalyzed by
l-Glutamate Oxaloacetate PLP-dependent enzymes. Thus, the coenzyme itself can
be regarded as the active site of the enzymes and can be
Transamination studied in nonenzymatic reactions. The latter can be
thought of as models for corresponding enzymatic
reactions. From such studies Snell and associates
–OOC COO– COO– drew the following conclusions.148
C –OOC C
O H NH3 + a. The aldehyde group of PLP reacts readily and
2-Oxoglutarate l-Aspartate reversibly with amino acids to form Schiff bases
(14-24)
(Fig. 14-4) which react further to give products.
This transamination reaction is a widespread process b. For an aldehyde to be a catalyst, a strong electron-
of importance in many aspects of the nitrogen metabo- attracting group, e.g., the ring nitrogen of pyridine
lism of organisms. A large series of transaminases (as in PLP), must be ortho or para to the – CHO
(aminotransferases), for which glutamate is most group. A nitro group, also strongly electron
often one of the reactants, have been shown to catalyze attracting, can replace the pyridine nitrogen in
the reactions of other oxoacids and amino acids.141– 143 model reactions.
In 1944, Esmond Snell reported the nonenzymatic
conversion of pyridoxal into pyridoxamine (Box 14-C)
by heating with glutamate. He recognized that this CHO CHO
was also transamination and proposed that pyridoxal
might be a part of a coenzyme needed for aminotrans-
ferases and that these enzymes might act via two half- vs
reactions that interconverted pyridoxal and pyridox-
N
amine (Eq. 14-25). The hypothesis was soon verified
and the coenzyme was identified as pyridoxal 5'-phos- NO2
phate or pyridoxamine 5'-phosphate (Fig. 14-5).144,145

--- Page 741 ---

738 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
BOX 14-C THE VITAMIN B FAMILY: PYRIDOXINE, PYRIDOXAL, AND PYRIDOXAMINE
6
Isonicotinyl hydrazide (INH), one of the most
O
– O HC in pyridoxal effective drugs against tuberculosis, is inhibitory to
O
in pyridoxal pyridoxal kinase, the enzyme that converts pyridoxal
P phosphate
– O 4’ OH NH 3 + t t o o P fo L r P m .c a A h p y p d a r r a e z n o t n ly e , w th h e i d ch ru b g lo r c e k a s c t t s h w e e it n h z p y y m r e id . oxal
HC HC
H 2 2 Pyridoxal kinase is not the primary target of INH
4 –
O HC O in mycobacteria. However, patients on long-term
2 3 in pyridoxamine
5 isonicotinyl hydrazide therapy sometimes suffer
6 2 symptoms of vitamin B
6
H
1
N+ CH
3
deficiency.g
NH
H PLP-dependent enzymes 2
Pyridoxine (pyridoxol) are inhibited by a great variety NH
Vitamin B alcohol
6 of enzyme-activated inhibitors
C O
that react by several distinctly
Pyridoxine, the usual commercial form of different chemical mechanisms.h
vitamin B , was isolated and synthesized in 1938. Here are a few. The naturally
6
However, studies of bacterial nutrition soon indicated occurringgabaculline mimics
the existence of other naturally occurring forms of γ-aminobutyrate (Gaba) and
N
the new vitamin which were more active than pyri- inhibitsγ-aminobutyrate amino- Isonicotinyl hydrazide
doxine in promoting growth of certain lactic acid transferase as well as other PLP- (isoniazid)
bacteria. The amine pyridoxamine and the aldehyde dependent enzymes. The inhi-
pyridoxal were identified by Snell, who found that bitor follows the normal catalytic pathway as
pyridoxal could be formed from pyridoxine by mild far as the ketimine. There, a proton is lost from the
oxidation and that pyridoxamine could be formed inhibitor permitting formation of a stable benzene
from pyridoxal by heating in a solution with gluta- ring and leaving the inhibitor stuck in the active site:
mic acid via a transamination reaction. These simple
experiments also suggested the correct structures of
– –
the new forms of vitamin B . Animal tissues contain COO COO
6
largely pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and their phosphate
esters. The lability of the aldehyde explains the ease H
of destruction of the vitamin by excessive heat or by +HN
3 PLP H
light. On the other hand, plant tissues contain mostly γ-Aminobutyrate H NH+
3
pyridoxine, which is more stable. Kinases use ATP (Gaba) Gabaculline
to form the phosphate esters, which are intercon-
vertible within cells.a–e Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate can As in Eq. 14-28,
be oxidized to PLPd,e,f and the latter may undergo reverse
transamination to PMP. The acid–base chemistry – –
COO COO
and tautomerism of pyridoxine were discussed in
Chapter 6, Section E,2.
H
Many poisonous substances as well as useful
H
drugs react with PLP-requiring enzymes. Thus,
+ +
much of the toxic effect of the “carbonyl reagents” N NH
2
HC H HC
hydroxylamine, hydrazine, and semicarbazide 2 2
stems from their formation of stable derivatives – –
O O
analogous to Schiff bases with PLP.
H O NH2, R O NH2 N + CH 3 N + CH 3
H H
Hydroxylamines
Stably bound
O inhibitor
H H H
H
N N N N C NH2
H H H
Hydrazine Semicarbazide

--- Page 742 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 739
BOX 14-C (continued)
Beta-chloroalanine and serine O-sulfate can ium contains one of the same compounds. It is said
undergo β elimination (as in Eq. 14-29) in active sites of to impart two interesting properties to the mush-
glutamate decarboxylase or aspartate aminotrans- room: a delicious flavor and a lethal action on flies
ferase. The enzymes then form free aminoacrylate, that alight on the mushroom’s surface!l
a reactive molecule that can undergo an aldol-type The substituted cysteine derivative L-penicil-
condensation with the external aldimine to give the lamine causes convulsions and low glutamate decar-
following product.i boxylase levels in the brain, presumably because
the Schiff base formed with PLP can then undergo
HN COO– cyclization, the SH group adding to the C = N to
C Lysine (enzyme) form a stable thiazolidine ring.
H
H2C NH
C H COO–
H3C H
PLP H3C C
NH3 +
H3C
C
COO–
S N
H3C SH PLP
Nucleophilic groups from enzymes can add to C
l-Penicillamine H
double bonds, e.g., in an aminoacrylate Schiff base,
or to multiple bonds present in the inhibitor. An
example is γ-vinylγ-aminobutyrate (4-amino-5- PLP
hexenoic acid), another inhibitor of brain γ-amino-
butyrate aminotransferase which is a useful anti- Toxopyrimidine, the alcohol derived from the
convulsant drug. pyrimidine portion of the thiamin molecule, is a
Another enzyme-activated inhibitor is the structural analog of pyridoxal. When fed to rats or
streptomyces antibiotic D-cycloserine (oxamycin), mice it induces running fits which can be stopped
an antitubercular drug that resembles D-alanine in by administration of vitamin B . Phophorylation of
6
structure. A potent inhibitor of alanine racemase, it toxopyrimidine by pyridoxal kinase may produce
also inhibits the non-PLP, ATP-dependent, D-alanyl- an antagonistic analog of PLP. In a similar fashion,
D-alanine synthetase which isneeded in the bio- 4-deoxypyridoxine, which was tested as a possible
synthesis of the peptidoglycan of bacterial cell walls. anticancer drug, caused convulsions and other
symptons of vitamin B deficiency in humans. A
6
host of synthetic PLP derivatives have been made,
H some of which are effective in blocking PLP enzymes.h
N O N O
O –O
a Lepkovsky, S. (1979) Fed. Proc.38, 2699–2700
b McCormick, D. B., Gregory, M. E., and Snell, E. E. (1961) J. Biol.
H NH2 H NH3 +
Chem.236, 2076–2084
d-Cycloserine c Snell, E. E., and Haskell, B. E. (1970) Comprehensive Biochemistry
21, 47–71
d McCormick, D. B. and Chen, H. (1999) J. Nutr. 129, 325–327
L-Cycloserine inhibits many PLP enzymes and e Hanna, M. L., Turner, A. J., and Kirkness, E. F. (1997) J. Biol.
Chem.272, 10756–10760
is toxic to humans. This observation led Khomutov
f Ngo, E. O., LePage, G. R., Thanassi, J. W., Meisler, N., and
et al. to synthesize the following more specific “cyclo-
Nutter, L. M. (1998) Biochemistry37, 7741–7748
glutamates,” structural analogs of glutamic acid g Lui, A., and Lumeng, L. (1986) in Vitamin B, Pyridoxal
6
with fixed conformations.j,k Nature apparently Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical Aspects, Vol. 1B
(Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and Avramovíc, O., eds), pp.
anticipated the synthetic chemist, because it has
601–674, Wiley, New York
been reported that the mushroom Tricholoma muscar-
h Walsh, C. T. (1986) in Vitamin B, Pyridoxal Phosphate: Chemical,
6
Biochemical and Medical Aspects, Vol. 1B (Dolphin, D., Poulson,
R., and Avramovíc, O., eds), pp. 43–70, Wiley, New York
N O O O O N i Likos, J. J., Ueno, H., Fedhaus, R. W., and Metzler, D. E. (1982)
H
Biochemistry21, 4377–4386
–O C O– C O– j Khomutov, R. M., Koveleva, G. K., Severin, E. S., and Vdovina,
–O
L. V. (1967) Biokhim.32, 900–907
H3 +N H H3 +N H k Sastchenko, L. P., Severin, E. S., Metzler, D. E., and Khomutov,
A cycloglutamate that inhibits An isomeric cycloglutamate tricholomic R. M. (1971) Biochemistry10, 4888–4894
aspartate aminotransferase acid found in certain mushrooms l Iwasaki, H., Kamiya, T., Oka, O., and Veyanagi, J. (1969) Chem.
Pharm. Bull.17, 866–872

--- Page 743 ---

740 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
c. The presence of an – OH group adjacent to the
2. A General Mechanism of Action of PLP
– CHO group greatly enhances the catalytic activity.
Since certain metal ions, such as Cu2+ and Al3+,
Based upon consideration of the various known
increase the rates in model systems and are known
PLP-dependent enzymes of amino acid metabolism,
to chelate with Schiff bases of the type formed
Braunstein and Shemyakin in 1952 proposed a general
with PLP, it was concluded that either a metal ion
mechanism of PLP action151,152 which, in most details,
or a proton formed a chelate ring and helped to
was the same as the one proposed independently by
hold the Schiff base in a planar conformation
Snell and associates on the basis of the nonenzymatic
(Fig. 14-6). However, such a function for metal ions
reactions.148 The general mechanism, which has been
has not been found in PLP-dependent enzymes.
verified by studies of many enzymes, can be stated as
follows:Pyridoxal phosphate reacts to convert the amino
d. In model systems the 5-hydroxymethyl and
group of a substrate into a Schiff base that is electronically
2-methyl groups are not needed for catalysis.
the equivalent of an adjacent carbonyl (Fig. 14-4). However,
However, in enzymes the 5-CH OH group is
2 a Schiff base of an amino acid with a simple aldehyde
essential for attachment of the phosphate handle.
(for example, acetaldehyde) has the opposite polarity
The 2-CH group is usually not necessary for
3 from that of C = O (see the following structures). Such
coenzymatic activity.
an imine could not substitute for a carbonyl group in
activating an α-hydrogen nor in facilitating C–C bond
Many investigations of nonenzymatic reactions of
cleavage in the amino acid. It is necessary to have the
PLP and related compounds have been and are still
strongly electron-attracting pyridine group conjugated
being conducted149,150
with the C = N group in such a way that electrons can
flow from the substrate into the coenzyme.
Carbonyl group reacts
with amino group to
form a Schiff base R H COO– Bridging H+
O H C R H COO– h π- o s l y d s s t e c m on p ju l g an at a e r d
–O
O– H
5’
H C NH3 + C
P C 4 O– H N
5 +
O O C H
3
6
2
2–O3P CH2 O–
+N1 CH3 O
H
Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) exists Phosphate
mainly as the dipolar ion handle +N CH3
H
Strong electron-attracting
group assists in stabilizing
transition state
H
R COO–
C
H N
C H
This proton can be
2–O3P CH2 O
replaced by M2+
O
in model reactions
+N CH3
H
Schiff base
(two resonance forms)
Figure 14-4 Pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP), a special coenzyme for reactions of amino acids.

--- Page 744 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 741
H
H R COO– 3. The Variety of PLP-Dependent Reactions
R COO– C
C In Fig. 14-5 the reactions of PLP-amino acid Schiff
H N bases are compared with those of β-oxo-acids. Beta-
C C hydroxy-α-oxo acids and Schiff bases of PLP with
O
Carbonyl
CH3 β-hydroxy-α-amino acids can react in similar ways.
The reactions fall naturally into three groups (a,b,c)
group Schiff base with
acetaldehyde depending upon whether the bond cleaved is from the
α-carbon of the substrate to the hydrogen atom, to the
carboxyl group, or to the side chain. A fourth group of
reactions of PLP-dependent enzymes (d) also involve
Before discussing the reactions of Schiff bases of
removal of the α-hydrogen but are mechanistically
PLP we should consider one fact that was not known
more complex. Some of the many reactions catalyzed
in 1952. PLP is bound into an enzyme’s active site as
by these enzymes are listed in Table 14-3.
a Schiff base with a specific lysine side chain before
a substate binds . This is often called the internal
Loss of the (cid:2)-hydrogen (Group a). Dissociation
aldimine. When the substrate binds it reacts with
of the α-hydrogen from the Schiff base leads to a
the internal Schiff base by a two-step process called
quinonoid–carbanionic intermediate whose struc-
transimination (Eq. 14-26) to form the substrate Schiff
ture in depicted in Fig. 14-5. The name reflects the
base, which is also called the external aldimine.
characteristics of the two resonance forms drawn.
Like an enolate anion, this intermediate can react in
several ways (1-4).
H
R COO–
C (1) Racemization. A proton can be added back
Lysine
side to the original alpha position but without stereospeci-
chain NH3 + ficity. A racemase which does this is important to
l-Amino acid substrate
2–O3P N
bacteria. They must synthesize D-alanine and D-glu-
O HC
tamic acid from the corresponding L-isomers for use
in formation of their peptidoglycan envelopes.153–154a
O–
The combined actions of alanine racemase plus D-alanine
aminotransferase, which produces D-glutamate as a
product, provide bacteria with both D amino acids.
N+ CH3 A fungal alanine racemase is necessary for synthesis
H
of the immunosuppresant cyclosporin (Box 9-F).155,155a
“Internal” enzyme-coenzyme
Schiff base High concentrations of free D-alanine are found in
HN certain regions of the brain and also in various glands.156
H H
+
2–O3P H NH The carboxyl group of an amino acid can also
O C R C COO– activate the α-hydrogen. This may be the basis for an
O– aspartate racemase and other racemases that are not
dependent upon PLP.156– 158 See also Chapter 13,
Section B,4.
N+ CH3
Lysine H (2) Cyclization. A second kind of reaction is
side Adduct, a geminal diamine represented by the conversion of S-adenosylmethionine
chain H S configuration
toaminocyclopropanecarboxylic acid, a precursor
R COO–
NH2 C to the plant hormone ethylene (see Chapter 24).159
The quinonoid intermediate cyclizes with elimination
2–O3P N+
of methylthioadenosine to give a Schiff base of the
O HC H
product (Eq. 14-27).160–161a The cyclization step appears
O– to be a simple S 2-like reaction.162
N
(3) Transamination. A proton can add to the
N+ CH3 carbon attached to the 4 position of the PLP ring (Fig.
H 14-5) to form a second Schiff base, often referred to as
“External” substrate-coenzyme
aketimine(Eq. 14-28). The latter can readily undergo
Schiff base (14-26)
hydrolysis to pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP) and
anα-oxo acid. This sequence represents one of the

--- Page 745 ---

742 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
(Chapter 18). The sequences of the
Compare the reactions of the
two proteins differ greatly, with
PLP Schiff bases (below) with
H those of this ketone only 50% of the residues being the
HO H a (a) Removal of α—H to form enolate anion same in both isoenzymes. However,
R C C COO– and loss of —OH (α,β elimination) these differences are largely on the
c b (b) Decarboxylation (of a β-oxoacid) outside surface, the folding pattern
C (c) Aldol cleavage (Fig. 2-6) and internal structure (Fig.
O
14-6) are almost identical.142,163– 167a
Three-dimensional structures of
Y H H a aspartate aminotransferases of E.
C COO– Bonds around the α-carbon atom of the coli, yeast, chickens, and mammals
R C
c b Schiff base can also be cleaved in 3 ways are extremely similar, even though
by withdrawal of electrons into
H N+ the coenzyme sequence identity may be as low as
C H (a) Removal of α—H as H+ to yield 20%.167a Most other transaminases
O– quinonoid intermediate shown below also use the L-gutamate–oxoglut-
2–O3PO (
(
b
c)
) D
A
e
ld
c
o
ar
l
b
c
o
le
x
a
y
v
l
a
a
g
ti
e
o n
(if Y is OH)
arate pair as one of the product–
reactant pairs but a few prefer
smaller substrates with uncharged
H N + CH3 T cl h e e a v q a u g i e n o a n t o a i c d a n in r te e r a m ct e i d n i v at a e r i f o o u rm s w ed a y b s y (1–4) side chains. An example is serine:
Schiff base (aldimine) pyruvate (or alanine:glyoxylate)
aminotransferase, an important mito-
(1) H+ can be added back
chondrialand peroxisomal enzyme
(nonstereospecifically)
(2) Cyclization to cause racemization (4) Y– can be eliminated in both animals and plants.168 Other
(Eq. 14-27)
specialized aminotransferases act
O O on aromatic amino acids,168a the
Y
H H+
C O– Y
H
– C O– branched chain amino acids valine,
C C leucine, and isoleucine,168b,c and
R C R C
(3) H+ can add here H+ D-amino acids.168d Many of them are
to form ketimine. H N+ H N+ highly specific for individual amino
Subsequent reactions C H C H acids such as phosphoserine,168e
lead to transamination
O– O– ornithine,168f,gN-acetylornithine,168h,i
2–O3PO 2–O3PO and 8-amino-7-oxononanoate (see
banner, p. 719).168j An apparently
internal transamination, which
N CH3 N+ CH3
requires PMP and PLP, converts
H H glutamate-1-semialdehyde into
Quinonoid–carbanionic structure δ-aminolevulinate (see Eq. 24-44)
(analogous to an enolate anion)
in the pathway of porphyrin bio-
synthesis used by bacteria and
plants.168k
Figure 14-5 Some reactions of Schiff bases of pyridoxal phosphate. (a)
Formation of the quinonoid intermediate, (b) elimination of a β substituent, (4) Elimination and (cid:1) replace-
and (c) transamination. The quinonoid–carbanionic intermediate can react
ment. When a good leaving group
in four ways (1–4) if enzyme specificity and substrate structure allow. is present in the β position of the
amino acid it can be eliminated
(Fig. 14-5, Eq. 14-29).170 A large
number of enzymes catalyze such
two half-reactions (Eqs. 14-24 and 14-25) required for reactions. Among them are serine and threonine
enzymatic transamination. dehydratases, which eliminate OH – as H O;171 – 173a
2
Transaminases participate in metabolism of most tryptophan indole-lyase (tryptophanase) of bacteria,
of the amino acids, over 60 different enzymes have which eliminates indole;174–176c tyrosine phenol-lyase
been identified.142,163 Best studied are the aspartate (elimination of phenol);177–178a and alliinase of garlic
aminotransferases, a pair of cytosolic and mitochon- (elimination of 1-propenylsulfenic acid).179,180 Cysta-
drial isoenzymes which can be isolated readily from thionine, a precursor to methionine, eliminates L-homo-
animal hearts. Their presence in heart muscle and cysteine through the action of cystathionine (cid:1) lyase
brain in high concentration is thought to be a result (cystathionase).181,182 Ammonia is eliminated from the β
of their functioning in the malate–aspartate shuttle position of 2,3-diaminopropionate by a bacterial lyase.183

--- Page 746 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 743
TABLE 14-3 H3C
Some Enzymes That Require Pyridoxal Phosphate S+ CH2 COO–
as a Coenzyme H
R CH2 CH2 C
5'
(a) Removing alpha hydrogen as H+
Adenosyl
NH3 +
(1) Racemization
S-Adenosylmethionine
Alanine racemase*
(2) Cyclization PLP
Aminocyclopropane carboxylate synthase
(3) Amino group transfer
Aspartate aminotransferase*
Alanine aminotransferase
D-Amino acid aminotransferase*
H3C
Branched chain aminotransferase S+ CH2
Gamma-aminobutyrate aminotransferase
Adenosyl
ω-Amino acid:pyruvate aminotransferase* CH2 C COO–
Tyrosine aminotransferase
Serine:pyruvate aminotransferase
Adenosyl-S-CH3 N
(4) Beta elimination or replacement HC
D- and L- Serine dehydratases (deaminases)
CH2
Tryptophan indole-lyase (tryptophanase)*
T
A
y
ll
r
i
o
in
si
a
n
s
e
e
phenol-lyase* H2C C COO– Quino
in
n
t
o
e
i
r
d
m
–
e
c
d
ar
ia
b
t
a
e
nionic
Cystathionineβ-lyase (cystathionase)* NH+
O-Acetylserine sulfhydrylase (cysteine
HC
synthase)
Cystathionineβ-synthase
CH2
(b) Removal T o r f y a p l t p o h p a h c a a n r b sy o n xy th la a t s e e * as CO Schiff base PLP H2C C COO–
2
Diaminopimelate decarboxylase NH3 +
Glycine decarboxylase (requires lipoyl group) Aminocyclopropane
Glutamate decarboxylase carboxylate (ACC)
Histidine decarboxylase (14-27)
Dopa decarboxylase
Ornithine decarboxylase*
T D y ia ro lk s y in lg e l d y e ci c n a e rb d o e x c y a l r a b s o e xylase (a decarboxylating R COO– R C COO–
C
transaminase)*
H2O
(c) Removal or replacement of side chain (or –H) by aldol +H N+ N+
cleavage H H2C H
Serine hydroxymethyltransferase
Threonine aldolase O– O–
δ-Aminolevulinate synthase
Serine palmitoyltransferase
2-Amino-3-oxobutyrate-CoA ligase
(d) Reactions of ketimine intermediates H
N CH3
+H
N CH3
Aspartateγ-decarboxylase
Quinonoid–carbanionic Ketimine
Selenocysteine lyase form (second Schiff base)
Nif S protein of nitrogenase
Gamma elimination and replacement
Cystathionineγ-synthase NH3 +
Cystathionineγ-lyase H2C
R COO–
Threonine synthase O– C
(e) Other enzymes
Lysine 2,3-aminomutase O
Glycogen phosphorylase* α-Oxo acid
Pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP) in synthesis of N CH3
+H
3,6-dideoxy hexoses
Pyridoxamine phosphate
(PMP) (14-28)
* The three-dimensional structures of these and other PLP-
dependent enzymes were determined by 2000.

--- Page 747 ---

744 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
Y70 Beta replacement is catalyzed by such enzymes
K258 of amino acid biosynthesis as tryptophan synthase
G38 (Chapter 25),184O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase
O N (cysteinesynthase),185–186a and cystathionine (cid:1)-synthase
H
– O Y225 H (Chapter 24).187–188c In both elimination and β replace-
O +
H P N ment an unsaturated Schiff base, usually of aminoacryl-
N – O O H S H O ate or aminocrotonate, is a probable intermediate (Eq.
– H 14-29). Conversion to the final products is usually
G108 H O
S223 H N O assumed to be via hydrolysis to free aminoacrylate,
N H tautomerization to an imino acid, and hydrolysis of the
N N194
H N latter, e.g., to pyruvate and ammonium ion (Eq. 14-29).
T109 N+ CH 3 H N O However, the observed stereospecific addition of a
O H
a W140 H193
O– N
H189 140 N H
D222 H b N COO–
N C
N H H N
d
H
N+
N H O N HC H Quinonoid–carbanionic
T139
BH+
O–
i
t
n
au
te
t
r
o
m
m
e
e
d
r
i
i
a
z
t
e
e
d
w
in
it
d
h
ole ring
H143 H 3 C
N
Figure 14-6 Drawing showing pyridoxal phosphate (shaded)
and some surrounding protein structure in the active site of H
cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase. This is the low pH
form of the enzyme with an N-protonated Schiff base linkage
of lysine 258 to the PLP. The tryptophan 140 ring lies in front proton at the β-C atom of 2-oxobutyrate189 suggests
of the coenzyme. Several protons, labeled H, H , and H are
a b d, that these steps may occur with the participation of
represented in 1H NMR spectra by distinct resonances whose
groups from the enzyme. Before indole can be elim-
chemical shifts are sensitive to changes in the active site.169
inated by tryptophan indolelyase the indole ring must
presumably be tautomerized to the following form of
the quinonoid intermediate. The same species may
+H H H be created by tryptophan synthase upon addition of
Y indole to the enzyme-bound aminoacrylate. The green
COO– C COO– arrows on the structure indicate the tautomerization
R C R C
that would occur to convert the indole ring to the
N + YH N+ Schiff base of structure found in tryptophan. The three-dimensional
H H aminoacrylate structure of tryptophan synthase is shown in Fig. 25-3.
(R=H) or It is a complex of two enzymes with a remarkable
O– O– aminocrotonate
tunnel through which the intermediate indole can
(R=CH3)
pass.184,190 An unusual PLP-dependent β replacement
is used to synthesize a transfer RNA ester of seleno-
N H CH3 N H+ CH3 cysteine prior to its insertion into special locations in
a few proteins (Chapter 15, Section G, and Chapter 29).
Transimination
RCH C COO– Decarboxylation(Group b). The bond to the car-
boxyl group of an amino acid substrate is broken in reac-
NH2 tionscatalyzed by amino acid decarboxylases.191,192
Aminoacrylate or RCH2 C COO– Thesealso presumably lead to a transient quinonoid-
aminocrotonate
carbanionic intermediate. Addition of a proton at the
H2O NH
original site of decarboxylation followed by breakup
Imino acid
+ of the Schiff base completes the sequence. Decarboxy-
NH4
lation of amino acids is nearly irreversible and frequently
RCH2 C COO– appears as a final step in synthesis of amino compounds.
For example, in the brain glutamic acid is decarboxy-
O lated to (cid:3)-aminobutyric acid (Gaba),193– 196b while
Pyruvate or
2-oxobutyrate (14-29) 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (dopa) and 5-hydroxy-

--- Page 748 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 745
tryptophan are acted upon by an aromatic amino O
acid decarboxylase to form, respectively, the neuro- CoA Succinyl-CoA
C
transmittersdopamine and serotonin.197– 199b Histi- –OOC S
dine is decarboxylated to histamine.200– 202 However, HCH
not all histidine decarboxylases use PLP as a coen-
zyme (Section F). N
Glycine
Arginine is converted by a PLP-dependent decar- HC
boxylase to agmatine (Fig. 24-12) which is hydrolyzed PLP CO2
to1,4-diaminopropane.191 This important cell con-
stituent is also formed by hydrolysis of arginine to Quinonoid-carbanionic
intermediate
ornithine (Fig 24-10) and decarboxylation of the lat-
ter.203– 206c Lysine is formed in bacteria by decarboxyla-
tion of meso-diamino-pimelic acid (Fig. 24-14). Glycine CoA-SH
O
is decarboxylated oxidatively in mitochondria in a
H
sequence requiring lipoic acid and tetrahydrofolate as C
well as PLP (Fig. 15-20).207– 209b A methionine decar- –OOC C H
boxylase has been isolated in pure form from a fern.210
N
The bacterial dialkylglycine decarboxylase is both a
HC PLP
decarboxylase and an aminotransferase which uses
pyruvate as its second substrate forming a ketone and O
Schiff base
L-alanine as products (See Eq. 14-37)210a, 210b
C
–OOC CH2 NH2
Side chain cleavage (Group c). In a third type δ-Aminolevulinate
of reaction the side chain of the Schiff base of Fig. 14-5 (14-32)
undergoes aldol cleavage. Conversely, a side chain can
be added by β condensation. The best known enzyme in Eq. 14-32 for the second known pathway for biosyn-
of this group is serine hydroxymethyltransferase, thesis of (cid:4)-aminolevulinic acid, an intermediate in
which converts serine to glycine and formaldehyde.211–213b porphyrin synthesis (Chapter 24).216– 218b The enzyme
The latter is not released in a free form but is transferred does not catalyze decarboxylation of glycine in the
by the same enzyme specifically to tetrahydrofolic absence of succinyl-CoA, and the decarboxylation
acid (Eq. 14-30), with which it forms a cyclic adduct. probably follows the condensation as indicated in Eq.
14-32.219 In a similar reaction in the biosynthesis of
sphingosine serine is condensed with palmitoyl-CoA
l-Serine THF (Tetrahydrofolate)
and decarboxylated to form an aminoketone interme-
diate (Fig. 21-6).219a 8-Amino-7-oxonanonoate synthase
See Fig 15-18
forms a precursor of biotin (see banner, p. 719).220
Glycine N5, N10-Methylene-THF
(14-30)
Ketimine intermediate as electron acceptor
(Group d). The fourth group of PLP-dependent reac-
Threonine is cleaved to acetaldehyde by the same tions are thought to depend upon formation of the
enzyme. A related reaction is indicated in Fig. 24-27 ketimine intermediate of Eq. 14-28. In this form the
(top). In a more important pathway of degradation originalα-hydrogen of the amino acid has been
of threonine the hydroxyl group of its side chain is removed and the C = NH+ bond of the ketimine is
dehydrogenated to form 2-amino-3-oxobutyrate which polarized in a direction that favors electron with-
is cleaved by a PLP-dependent enzyme to glycine and drawal from the amino acid into the imine group.
acetyl-CoA (Eq. 14-31).214,215 This permits another series of enzymatic reactions
analogous to those of the β-oxo acid shown at the top
of Fig. 14-5. Both elimination and C– C bond cleavage
H NH3 + α,β to the C = N group of the ketimine can occur.
H3C
C
C COO–
Glycine subs
E
ti
n
tu
zy
en
m
t
e
s
s
f r
o
o
f
m
th
a
is
m
g
i
r
n
o
o
u
a
p
c i
c
d
a
s
ta
a
l
s
y z
il
e
l u
e
s
li
t
m
ra
i
t
n
ed
at i
i
o
n
n
F
o
ig
f
.
γ
CoA-SH Acetyl-S-CoA 14-7. Eliminated groups may be replaced by other
O (14-31) substituents, either in the α or the β positions. The
ketimine formed initially by such an enzyme (step a)
Conversely, ester condensation reactions join acyl undergoes elimination of the γ substituent (β with
groups from CoA derivatives to Schiff bases derived respect to the C = N group) along with a proton from
from glycine or serine. Succinyl-CoA is the acyl donor theβ position of the original amino acid to form an

--- Page 749 ---

746 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
unsaturated intermediate which can O
H COO–
react in one of three ways, depending
C C
upon the enzyme. Addition of HY’
leads to γ replacement (step c), while
Cysteine –OOC O NH3 +
O-Succinylhomoserine
addition of a proton at the α position γ Replacement
leads, via reaction step d, to an α,β-
unsaturated Schiff base. The latter can
COO– H COO– H COO–
react by addition of HY’ (β replace- –OOC C C
ment, step e) or it can break down to an
Succinate H3 +N CH2 S NH3 +
α-oxo acid and ammonium ion (step f), Cystathionine
just as in the β elimination reactions of β Elimination
Eq. 14-29. An important γ replacement Pyruvate + NH 4 +
reaction is conversion of O-acetyl-,
H COO–
O-succinyl-, or O-phosphohomoserine
C
to cystathionine (Eq. 14-33). This
cystathionine (cid:3)-synthasereaction220a
HS NH3 +
Homocysteine
lies on the pathway of biosynthesis of
methionine by bacteria, fungi, and
(14-33)
Methionine
H
Y COO– higher plants. Subsequent reactions include β elimina-
tion from cystathionine of homocysteine220b which is
+ then converted to methionine (Eq. 14-33). Threonine is
NH3
formed from O-phosphohomoserine via γ elimina-
E—PLP tion followed by β replacement with HO –, a reaction
a
catalyzed by threonine synthase (Fig. 24-13).220c
The loss of a β-carboxyl group as CO can also occur
2
H H through a ketimine or quinonoid intermediate. For
Y COO– b COO– example, the bacterial aspartate(cid:1)-decarboxylase221
Elimination H2C converts aspartate to alanine and CO
2
. Selenocysteine
N + N + is utilized to create the active sites of several enzymes
H2C H HY H2C H (Chapter 15). Excess selenocysteine is degraded by the
PLP-dependentselenocysteine lyase,222–223b which
evidently eliminates elemental selenium from a ket-
imine or quinonoid state of an intermediate Schiff base
Ketimine d
HY’ (Eq. 14-34). A similar reaction may occur in the bio-
c γ Replacement synthesis of iron–sulfur clusters. The Nif S protein is
essential for formation of Fe S clusters in the nitrogen-
COO– 4 4
fixing enzyme nitrogenase. This enzyme is in some
H3C H
Y' COO– way involved in transferring the sulfur atom of cysteine
H N + into an iron–sulfur cluster.224 Alanine is the other
H + product suggesting transfer of S0into the cluster using
HY’
NH3
the sequence of Eq. 14-34.
β Replacement Another related reaction that goes through a ket-
Schiff base e Y’ H imine is the conversion of the amino acid kynurenine
H to alanine and anthranilic acid.225 It presumably depends
f COO–
upon hydration of the carbonyl group prior to β cleav-
HO
H3C
2 age (Eq. 14-35). An analogous thiolytic cleavage utilizes
+
NH3 CoA to convert 2-amino-4-ketopentanoate to acetyl-
+
E—PLP NH 4 CoA and alanine.226
2-Oxobutyrate
Glycogen phosphorylase. While PLP is ideally
designed to catalyze reactions of amino compounds
Figure 14-7 Some PLP-dependent reactions involving it was surprising to find it as an essential cofactor for
elimination of a γ substituent. Replacement by another γ
glycogen phosphorylase (Fig. 11-5). The PLP is linked
substituent or by a substituent in the β position is possible,
as is deamination to an α-oxo acid. as a Schiff base in the same way as in other PLP-depen-

--- Page 750 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 747
–Se CH2 H COO– E—PLP –Se CH2 COO– 4. Pyridoxamine Phosphate as a Coenzyme
If PLP is a cofactor designed to react with amino
NH3 + N + groups of substrates, might not pyridoxamine phosphate
Selenocysteine
H2C H
(PMP) act as a coenzyme for reactions of carbonyl
compounds? An example of this kind of function has
been found228– 230 in the formation of 3,6-dideoxyhexoses
H + Ketimine
needed for bacterial cell surface antigens (Fig. 4-15).
Se0
H2C COO– Elemental selenium Glucose (as cytidine diphosphate glucose; CDP-glu-
cose) is first converted to 4-oxo-6-deoxy-CDP-glucose.
The conversion of the latter to 3,6-dideoxy-CDP-glucose
N
(Eq. 14-36) requires PMP as well as NADH or NADPH.
H2C H
O
CH3
O
H3C COO–
HO
E—PLP
OH P P Cytidine
N+ O
l-Alanine
H2C H
NADH + H+
PMP
(14-34)
NADH+
O
CH3
O O
C CH2 COO– H
C P P Cytidine
H H O
(14-36)
NH3+
NH2
Kynurenine
The student may find it of interest to propose a
H2O, PLP mechanism for this reaction, taking into account the
expected direct transfer of a hydrogen from NADH as
H O OH
described in Chapter 15, before consulting published
C CH2 COO– papers. Part of the reaction cycle appears to involve a
C free radical derived from the PMP. This is discussed
N+ further in Chapter 20 together with free radical-form-
H ing PLP enzymes
Ketimine
COO– 5. Stereochemistry of PLP-Requiring Enzymes
Alanine
According to stereoelectronic principles, the bond
NH3+ in the substrate amino acid that is to be broken by a
Anthranilic acid (14-35) PLP-dependent enzyme should lie in a plane perpen-
dicular to the plane of the cofactor–imineπ system
(Fig. 14-8). This would minimize the energy of the
transition state by allowing maximum σ–π overlap
dent enzymes, but there is no obvious function for the between the breaking bond and the ring–imineπ system.
coenzyme ring. As suggested in Chapter 12, the phos- It also would provide the geometry closest to that of
phate group probably acts as an acid–base catalyst. It the planar quinonoid intermediate to be formed, thus
has been estimated that 50% of the vitamin B in our minimizing molecular motion in the approach to the
6
body is present as PLP in muscle phosphorylase.227 transition state. Figure 14-8 shows three orientations
Studies of vitamin B -deficient rats suggest that PLP of an amino acid in which the α-hydrogen, the carboxyl
6
in phosphorylase serves as a reserve supply, much of group, and the side chain, respectively, are positioned
which can be taken for other purposes during times for cleavage. For each orientation shown, another
of deficiency. geometry suitable for cleavage of the same bond is

--- Page 751 ---

748 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
In each case the bond to be broken lies perpendicular to π system of Schiff base
a b c
α-Hydrogen is —COO– is positioned Side chain is positioned
positioned for for decarboxylation for aldol cleavage
removal as H+,
H
e.g., in an
H
H* aminotransferase H O
–OOC R COO– C
Addition of R H H COO–
proton from
+N
si-face
H CH (toward
reader)
–O D
2
O 3H
2
O
CO tritiated
2
HO
D D en e t u e t r e s rium 2 ( C tr H an 2 O sferred to
N + R H pro-R tetrahydrofolic
H
position acid)
NH2
Tritium-
containing
–OOC R H* position
H COO– ispro-S
H* pro-S
+N
H C
H NH2
–O
N
+
H
Figure 14-8 Some stereochemical aspects of catalysis of PLP-requiring enzymes.
obtained by rotating the amino acid through 180°. COO– Alkyl H COO–
Dunathan suggested that this stereoelectronic H3C CH3 binding –OOC CH3 H CH3
requirement explains certain side reactions observed C site C C
with PLP-requiring enzymes. The idea also received
N N N
support from experiments with a bacterial α-dialkyl-
glycinedecarboxylase.231,232 The enzyme ordinarily
l-Alanine d-Alanine
catalyzes, as one half-reaction, the combination decarb-
oxylation–transamination reaction shown in Eq. 14-37.
It also acts on both D- and L-alanine, decarboxylating Glycine is unreactive, suggesting that occupation of
the former but catalyzing only removal of the α-H the alkyl binding site is required for catalysis.
According to Dunathan’s postulate, there are only
two possible orientations of the amino acid substrate
COO–
H3C CH3 H3C CH3 in an aminotransferase. One is shown in Fig. 14-8.
C
CO2
C
In the other, the amino acid is rotated 180° so that the
α-hydrogen protrudes behindthe plane of the paper.
NH3 + O Dunathan studied pyridoxamine:pyruvate amino-
PLP PMP (14-37) transferase, an enzyme closely related to PLP-requir-
ing aminotransferases and which catalyzes the trans-
from L-alanine. The results can be rationalized by amination of pyridoxal with L-alanine to form pyridox-
assuming that the enzyme possesses a definite site for amine and pyruvate. The same reaction is catalyzed
one alkyl group but that the position of the second by the apoenzyme of aspartate aminotransferase. In
alkyl group can be occupied by – H or – COO – and that both cases, when the alanine contained 2H in the α
the group labilized lies perpendicular to the π system: position the 2H was transferred stereospecifically into

--- Page 752 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 749
thepro-Sposition at C-4' of the pyridoxam- NH3 + NH3 +
ine (indicated by asterisks in Fig. 14-8).233
The results suggested that a group from CH2 CH2
the protein abstracts a proton from the α O– OH
position and transfers it on the same side 2–O3PO 2–O3PO
of the π system (suprafacial transfer),
adding it to the si face of the C = N group
N
+
CH3 N CH3
as shown in Fig. 14-8. Later, the same H
stereospecific proton transfer was demon- Minor non-dipolar ionic tautomer
Dipolar ionic form
strated for the PLP present in the holoen- I 283 nm
I 327 nm
zyme.234 Not surprisingly, the D-amino II 253 nm
acid aminotransferase adds the proton to III 217 nm (14-38)
there face of the C = N group.235
When a decarboxylase acts on an
amino acid in 2H O, an atom of 2H is incorporated in to 294 nm and if both groups are deprotonated the
2
thepro-Rposition, the position originally occupied by resulting anion absorbs at 312 nm. Thus, observation
the carboxyl group (Fig. 14-8). Cleavage of serine by of the absorption spectrum of the coenzyme bound to
serine hydroxymethyltransferase in 3H-containing an enzyme surface can tell us whether particular groups
water leads to incorporation of 3H in the pro-S position. are protonated or unprotonated. The peak of bound
Stereospecific introduction of 2H or 3H has been ob- PMP at 330 nm in aspartate aminotransferase (Fig. 14-9)
served in the β position of 2-oxobutyrate formed in is indicative of the dipolar ionic form (Eq. 14-38). How-
β or γ elimination reactions. Conversion of serine to ever, the 5-nm shift from the position of free PMP sug-
tryptophan by tryptophan synthetase occurs without gests a distinct change in environment.
inversion at C-3.236 These and many other observations
on PLP-dependent enzymes189,237,238 can be generalized
by saying that enzymatic reactions of PLP Schiff bases
usually take place on only one face of the relatively planar structure. This is the si face at C-4' of the coen-
zyme (see Fig. 14-8). This result is expected if a single
10 acid–base group serves as proton acceptor in one step
and as proton donor in a later step. This leads naturally
to the observed retention of configuration in steps 8
involving replacement and the suprafacial transfer of
protons from one position on that face to another.
6
6. Seeing Changes in the Optical Properties 4
of the Coenzyme
2
The absorption of light in the ultraviolet and visible
regions is a striking characteristic of many coenzymes.
It can be measured accurately and displayed as an 0
18 22 26 30 34
absorption spectrum and may also give rise to circular Wave number, cm–1× 10-3
dichroism and to fluorescence (Chapter 23). The optical
properties of the vitamin B coenzymes are sensitive to 500 400 300
6
changes both in environment and in the state of proto- Wavelength, nm
nation of groups in the molecule. For example, PMP
in the neutral dipolar ionic form, which exists at pH 7,
has three strong light absorption bands centered at Figure 14-9 Absorption spectra of various forms of aspar-
327, 253, and 217 nm.239 The other ionic forms of PMP tate aminotransferase compared with that of free pyridoxal
and other derivatives of vitamin B also each have phosphate. The low pH form of the enzyme observed at pH
6
three absorption bands spaced at roughly similar < 5 is converted to the high pH form with pK a ~ 6.3. Addi-
tion of erythro-3-hydroxyaspartate produces a quinonoid
intervals, but with varying positions and intensities.
form whose spectrum here is shown only 1/3 its true height.
The minor tautomer of PMP containing an uncharged
The spectrum of free PLP at pH 8.3 is also shown . The
ring (Eq. 14-38) has its low-energy (long-wavelength)
spectrum of the apoenzyme (---) contains a small amount of
band at 283 nm. When both the ring nitrogen and
residual absorption of uncertain origin in the 300- to 400-nm
phenolic oxygen are protonated, the band shifts again region.
3-01
×
,tneiciffeoc
noitcnitxe
raloM
Strong
absorption
bands of
aromatic
amino acids
psA-HO-β-orhtyre+
mn
005
Hp
woL
034
3.8
Hp
PLP
eerF
093
Hp
hgiH
363
mrof
PMP
033
12

--- Page 753 ---

750 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
Pyridoxal phosphate exists in an equilibrium enzyme promotes a rapid exchange of the α-hydrogen
between the aldehyde and its covalent hydrate (as in of the alanine with 2H of 2H O. Serine hydroxymethyl-
2
Eq. 13-1). The aldehyde has a yellow color and absorbs transferase gives a 495 - to 500-nm band with both
at 390 nm (Fig. 14-9), while the hydrate absorbs at nearly D-alanine and the normal product glycine.241 Similar
the same position as does PMP. The absorption bands spectra have been produced in nonenzymatic model
of Schiff bases of PLP are shifted even further to longer reactions242 and probably represent the postulated
wavelengths, with N-protonated forms absorbing at quinonoid–carbanionic intermediates.
415– 430 nm. Forms with an unprotonated C = N
group absorb at shorter wavelengths.149,240
7. Atomic Structures
Imine groups in free enzymes. When, in 1957,
W. T. Jenkins examined one of the first highly purified The three-dimensional structures of aspartate
aspartate aminotransferase preparations he noted a aminotransferases from E. coli to humans are very
surprising fact: The bound coenzyme, at pH 5, absorbed similar.163–167a The folding pattern (Fig. 2-6) and active
not at 390 nm, as does PLP, but at 430 nm, like a Schiff site structure (Figs. 14-6 and 14-10) are completely
base (Fig. 14-9). When the pH was raised, the absorp- conserved. The major domain of the protein contains
tion band shifted to 363 nm. The result suggests disso- a central β sheet surrounded by helices with coenzyme
ciation of a proton (with a pK of ~ 6.3) from the attached to a lysine at the C terminus of one of the β
a
hydrogen-bonded position in a Schiff base of the type strands. The protein is a dimer with the two major
shown in Fig. 14-6. It was quickly demonstrated for domains held together by both polar and nonpolar
this enzyme and for many other PLP-dependent en- interactions. The two active sites are located at the
zymes that reduction with sodium borohydride caused interface between the subunits and residues from both
the spectrum to revert to one similar to that of PMP subunits participate in forming the active site (Fig. 14-10).
and fixed the coenzyme to the protein. After complete The internal Schiff base is formed with Lys 258. The
HCl digestion of such borohydride-reduced proteins a protonated ring nitrogen of the dipolar ionic PLP
fluorescent amino acid containing the reduced pyridoxyl forms an ion pair with the carboxylate of Asp 222
group was obtained and in every case was identified as which protrudes from a central seven-stranded β sheet.
ε-pyridoxyl-lysine. Thus, PLP-containing enzymes in The phenolic –O– forms a hydrogen bond with the
the absence of substrates usually exist as Schiff bases –OH of Tyr 225. The interactions of Asp 222 and Tyr
with lysine side chains of the proteins. Even the PLP 225 fix the ring as the dipolar ionic tautomer.
in glycogen phosphorylase is joined in this way. The phosphate group of the coenzyme, which 31P
However, its absorption maximum at 330 nm shows NMR shows to be predominantly dianionic,243 forms
an ion pair with the side chain of Arg 266 and hydrogen
bonds to a backbone N– H at the N terminus of a long
CH2OH
helix where it can interact with the positive end of the
H COO– helix dipole. In addition, the phosphate forms hydro-
N
H+N H2C C gen bonds to four OH groups of Ser, Thr, and Tyr side
H
chains. In front of the coenzyme ring are two guani-
NH3+
dinium groups from the side chains of Arg 386 and of
H3C O– Arg 292* (from the second subunit). These have been
ε-Pyridoxyllysine shown by X-ray crystallography to bind the two car-
boxylate groups of a substrate such as glutamate,
that in phosphorylase it is present as the nondipolar 2-oxoglutarate, aspartate, oxaloacetate, or cysteine
ionic tautomer with a 3-OH group on the ring as in sulfinate; of quasi-substrates such as 2-methylaspartate
Eq. 14-38. anderythro-β-hydroxyaspartate; or of dicarboxylic
inhibitors (Fig. 14-10).
Absorption bands at 500 nm. With many PLP Comparison of amino acid sequences suggests
enzymes certain substrates and inhibitors cause the that many other PLP-dependent enzymes have folding
appearance of intense and unusually narrow bands patterns similar to those of aspartate aminotransferase
at ~ 500 nm. Such a band is observed with aspartate but that there are four or more additional different
aminotransferases acting on erythro-3-hydroxyaspartate folding patterns.205,243a,b Among the enzymes resem-
(Fig. 14-9). This substrate undergoes transamination bling aspartate aminotransferase are ω-amino acid:
very slowly, and the 500-nm absorbing form which pyruvate aminotransferase,244 2,3-dialkylglycine decar-
accumulates is probably an intermediate in the normal boxylase,232 tyrosine phenol-lyase,177 a bacterial orni-
reaction sequence. A similar spectrum is produced thine decarboxylase,182,204 and cystathionine β-lyase.182
by tryptophan indole-lyase acting on the competitive The tryptophan synthase β subunit has a second folding
inhibitorL-alanine. Under the same conditions the pattern,184 while alanine racemase153 and eukaryotic

--- Page 754 ---

E. Pyridoxal Phosphate 751
ornithinedecarboxylases205 have (αβ) -barrel structures K258
8
resembling that in Fig. 2-28. A fourth structural pattern H
is that of D-amino acid aminotransferase.235 It is anti-
C H
c w ip il a l t h e a d v t e h a a t s t im he i l b a r r a s n t c u h c e tu d r - e c . h a G in ly a c m og i e n n o t p ra h n o s s f p e h ra o s r e y 2 l 4 a 5 se 2–O 3 P O O C N +NH C O H N R386
O 3 O– + N
(Fig 11-5) has a fifth folding pattern. H 2 C O– H N H
H
8. Constructing a Detailed Picture of the
N CH 3 Michaelis complex
Action of a PLP Enzyme
H+
Consider the number of different steps that must
a
occur in about one-thousanths of a second during the
action of an aminotransferase. First, the substrate
K258
binds to form the “Michaelis complex.” Then the
transimination (Eq. 14-26) takes place in two steps and H
is followed by the removal of the α-hydrogen to form C H
t a h re e n q e u e in d o e n d o t i o d f i o n r t m er m th e e d k i e a t t i e m . i A n n e, a t d o d h i y ti d o r n o a l l y f z o e u i r t , s a te n p d s 2–O 3 P O O O C :N N + H 2 H C O O – H N + N R386
to release the oxoacid product to give the PMP form HC O– H N H
2
of the enzyme. The reaction sequences in some of the H
other enzymes are even more complex. How can one
enzyme do all this? N CH 3 After proton transfer
The first step in the sequence is the binding of the
H+
substrate to form the “Michaelis complex.” The posi-
tive charges on Arg 386 and Arg 292 doubtless attract b
the carboxylate groups of the substrate and aid in
guiding it toward a correct fit. In a similar manner the
K258
– O – of the coenzyme, which is distributed by resonance H
into the – C = N of the Schiff base linkage, attracts the C H
– NH + of the substrate. When a substrate or inhibitor O C HN C O H N
binds 3 to the two guanidinium groups a small structural 2–O 3 P O O H C N H+ O– + N R386
H H N H
domain of the enzyme moves and closes around the O–
H
substrate which now has very little contact with the
N CH
external solvent. In the initial “Michaelis complex” 3
the– NH + group of the substrate lies directly in front H+ Geminal diamine (14-39)
3
of the C-4' carbon of the coenzyme (Fig. 14-10), where
it can initiate the transimination reaction of Eq. 14-26.
However, before this can happen a proton must be process that at the same time increases the electrophilic
removed to convert the – NH + to – NH . properties of the carbon atom of the imine group. This
3 2
Long before the three-dimensional structures were favors the immediate addition of – NH to – C = N+H– to
2
known, Ivanov and Karpeisky246 suggested that in the give the adduct a geminal diamine (Eq. 14-39, step b),
free enzyme the positively charged group (Arg 386) which is shown in three dimensions in Fig. 14-10B.
that binds the α-carboxylate of the substrate interacts Notice that each step in the overall sequence
electrostatically with the – O – of the coenzyme. This is changes the electronic or steric characteristics of the
one of the factors that keeps the pK of the – CH=N+H– complex in a way that facilitates the next step.246 This
a
that is conjugated with this – O – at a low value of is an important principle that is applicable throughout
~ 6.3 (at 0.1 M anion concentration). However, in the enzymology: For an enzyme to be an efficient catalyst
Michaelis complex this interaction of the + charge of each step must lead to a change that sets the stage for the
Arg 386 with the imine group must be weakened next. These consecutive steps often require proton
because of the pairing of the α– COO – of the substrate transfers, and each such transfer will influence the
with the + charge. This will increase the basicity of the subsequent step in the sequence. Some steps also
imine nitrogen and will also cause a decrease in the require alterations in the conformation of substrate,
pK of the substrate – NH +, making is easier for a coenzyme, and enzyme. One of these is the transimi-
a 3
proton to jump from the – NH + to the imine group. nation sequence (Eqs. 14-26, 14-39). On the basis of
3
This proton transfer is shown in Eq. 14-39, step a. the observed loss of circular dichroism in the external
Thus, the nucleophilic – NH group is generated by a aldimine, Ivanov and Karpeisky suggested that a
2

--- Page 755 ---

752 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
groups of the substrate remain
A
bound in their initial positions.
That the coenzyme really
does change its orientation was
suggested by a dramatic change
in the absorption spectrum of
a crystal recorded with plane
polarized light (linear dichroism)
when 2-methylaspartate was
soaked into a crystal (Fig. 23-9).247
X-ray crystallography confirmed
rotation of the ring by ~30°.163,242,247
To complete the transimination
sequence, which is shown only
partially by Eq. 14-39, another
B proton transfer is needed to move
the positive charge on the sub-
strate– N+H – to that of lysine
2
258, whose amino group is then
eliminated. This requires addi-
tional tilting of the ring. The
crystal structure of the external
aldimine with α-methylaspartate
has been determined248 as have
those of ketimines with glutamate
and aspartate,249,250 a carbinol-
amine,251 and quinonoid com-
plexes of related enzymes.212a
Theε-amino group, which is
C eliminated in Eq. 14-26, is basic
and functions in the next several
steps of catalysis, including the
abstraction of the α-hydrogen
and in its transfer to the 4'-carbon
(Eq. 14-28). This amino group
can be seen in Fig. 14-10C, where
it is positioned beside a water
molecule that is needed to hydro-
lyze the ketimine. From this
figure it can be seen that the
group is able to move from site
to site on one side of the planar
external aldimine, quinonoid–
Figure 14-10 Models of catalytic intermediates for aspartate aminotransferase in a carbanionic, and nearly planar
half-transamination reaction from aspartate to oxalocetate. For clarity, only a selec- ketimine forms. If the Lys 258
tion of the active site groups are shown. (A) Michaelis complex of PLP enzyme with amino group is the catalytic base
aspartate. (B) Geminal diamine. (C) Ketimine intermediate. The circle indicates a for these reactions it must be
bound water molecule. See Jansonius and Vincent in Jurnak and McPherson.163
present at pH 7. What is its pK ?
Courtesy of J.N. Jansonius. a
And why doesn’t this pK show
a
up in the plot of V vs pH as in
max
Fig 9-9? In fact, the maximum
rotation of the coenzyme occurs as the – NH of the velocity of aspartate aminotransferase and many other
2
substrate adds to the C = N bond during transimination PLP-dependent enzymes is independent of pH over a
(Eq. 14-39, step b). This accomplishes the essential broad range. The answer is probably that the pK ’sof
a
shortening by ~ 0.15 nm of the distance between C-4' both the – NH groups of Lys 258 and the aminoacid in
2
and the N atom from a van der Waals contact distance the Michalis complex are high when there is no posi-
to a covalent bond distance while the carboxylate tive charge on the adjacent Schiff base – C = N – but

--- Page 756 ---

F. Pyruvoyl Groups and Other Unusual Electrophilic Centers 753
very low when the Schiff base is protonated (– C = act as built-in sensors able to detect small changes in
NH+–). This is a result of the large electrostatic effect the electronic environment. For example, when the
of a closely adjacent charge in a medium of low dielec- Schiff base proton dissociates around the pK of ~ 6.2
a
tric constant (see Chapter 7, Section A). When the the NMR resonance of H shifts upfield from 17.2 to
a
Schiff base is unprotonated, as in the first structure of 15.2 ppm as a result of donation of electons into the
Eq. 14-39, the adjacent amino group has a high pK and ring from the – O –of the coenzyme.169 This shift illus-
a
is mostly protonated. However, the proton can jump trates the reality of the strong electrostatic forces that
as in step a of that equation to give a protonated Schiff operate across heterocyclic aromatic rings within
base. Now the unprotonated – NH group has a very active sites of proteins. In alanine racemase a different
2
low pK , but it is still strongly nucleophilic and can histidine cluster is present beneath the active site and
a
readily add to the Schiff base double bond in step b of constitutes part of the “solvent” in which the catalyzed
Eq. 14-39. In a similar fashion the amino group of Lys reaction takes place. At least in the case of aspartate
258 will alternately be unprotonated and then proto- aminotransferase, none of the histidines are absolutely
nated, its microscopic pK alternating between low essential for activity but the hydrogen-bonded network,
a
and high, as it catalyzes the steps of abstracting the α- which can be altered in mutant forms, may be important.
hydrogen and forming and hydrolyzing the ketimine. The detailed description of a reaction sequence
Only two microscopic pK values, one very high and given here has to be altered for each specific enzyme.
a
one very low appear in the V vs pH profile. This A vast amount of work, only a little of which is cited
max
alternation of microscopic pK valuesmay be a com- here, has been done on PLP enzymes.253– 254a These
a
mon characteristic of enzymes that bind ionized sub- studies involve calorimetry,255 kinetics,210,256– 259 crystal-
strates and can make good use of the strong lography, optical spectroscopy,188,260,261 NMR,243,262– 264
electrostatic effects that arise in the active sites to and genetic engineering and chemical modifica-
facilitate essential proton transfers. tion.178,185,186,265
Aspartate aminotransferases are distinguished
from most other PLP-dependent enzymes including
transaminases by the relatively low pK of ~ 6.3 for the F. Pyruvoyl Groups and Other Unusual
a
free enzyme. The unprotonated Schiff base in the free Electrophilic Centers
enzyme can then react with the protonated amino
group of the substrate. How can other PLP enzymes A few enzymes that might be expected to have
react with amino acids when they have protonated PLP at their active sites have instead a prosthetic
Schiff bases even at relatively high pH? A logical answer group consisting of pyruvic acid bound by an amide
is that some basic group with a low pK is close to the linkage, a pyruvoyl group (Table 14-4). These and
a
Schiff base and acts to deprotonate the substrate –NH + several apparently related enzymes are the subject of
3
so that transimination can occur. Clausen et al. sug- this section.
gested that in cystathionine β-lyase this is probably
tyrosine (Y111), which is adjacent to the Schiff base
– C = NH+– of the external aldimine and is thought to TABLE 14-4
be ionized in the active enzyme.182 NMR evidence Some Pyruvoyl Enzymes
suggests that protonation of an adjacent catalytic base
occurs upon substrate binding in D-serine dehydratase Decarboxylases Product
as well.252 Many other variations in active site environ-
Histidine (bacterial)
ments are seen among PLP-dependent enzymes. As
S-Adenosylmethionine
with aspartate aminotransferases, there is often an
essential carboxylate group that holds a proton onto Aspartateα- decarboxylase β-Alanine
the pyridine ring of the coenzyme. However, in alanine Phosphatidylserine Phosphatidyl-
racemase a guanidinium group from arginine is hydro- ethanolamine
gen bonded to the coenzyme ring.153
4' - Phosphopantothenylcysteine 4' - Phosphopan-
Below the active site of aspartate aminotransferase,
tetheine
as shown in Fig. 14-6, is a cluster of three buried his-
tidine side chains in close contact with each other. The
imidazole of H143 is hydrogen bonded to the D222 Reductases (clostridial)
carboxylate, the same carboxylate that forms an ion
Proline
pair with the coenzyme. This system looks somewhat
Glycine
like the catalytic triad of the serine proteases in reverse.
As with the serine proteases, the proton-labeled H in
b Adapted from van Peolje and Snell.267
Fig. 14-6 can be “seen” by NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 3-30).
So can the proton H on the PLP ring. These protons
a

--- Page 757 ---

754 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
carry the N-terminal pyruvoyl group, which was formed
1. Decarboxylases
from Ser 82. The activation occurs spontaneously by
incubations of the proenzyme for 24 – 48 h at pH ~ 7 in
Mammalianhistidine decarboxylase contains
the presence of divalent metal ions.
PLP but the enzyme from many bacteria contains a
Substituted serine residues under mildly alkaline
pyruvoyl group, as do a few other decarboxylases
conditions readily undergo α,β elimination to form
both of bacterial and eukaryotic origin.266,267 These
dehydroalanine residues. When prohistidine decarb-
enzymes are inhibited by carbonyl reagents and by
oxylase containing 18O in its serine side chains was
borohydride. When 3H-containing borohydride was
activated18O was found in the carboxylate group of
used to reduce the histidine decarboxylase of Lactoba-
Ser 81 of the β chains. It was shown that it had been
cillus,3H was incorporated and was recovered in lactic
transferred from the side chain of Ser 82. This suggested
acid following hydrolysis. This suggested the presence
the formation of an intermediate oxygen ester of Ser 81
of a pyruvoyl group attached by an amide linkage and
during formation of the pyruvoyl group (Eq. 14-41).272
undergoing the chemical reactions that are shown in
S-Adenosylmethionine decarboxylase is the
Eq. 14-40. Reduction in the presence of the substrate
first enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway to spermi-
histidine resulted in covalent binding of the histidine
dine (Chapter 24). Whether isolated from bacteria,
to the bound pyruvate. Thus, as with the PLP-contain-
yeast, animals, or other eukaryotes, this enzyme always
ing decarboxylases, a Schiff base is formed with the
contains a bound pyruvoyl group.273–274b Both the
substrate. Decarboxylation is presumably accomplished
by using the electron-attracting properties of the car-
bonyl group of the amide:
H
O 82
O
–O C CH3
NH
H
co
i
m
sti
b
d
in
in
e
e
d as
H
N
O
C
CCH
C
H22H
N
H
C
N H N Schiff base C N C
C H2C H H O
Bound pyruvate 81
O C CH3
OH
NH
Enzyme H –O O CCHH22H
H
N C C N
C N C
+
When14C-labeled serine was fed to organisms H2
H2C H O
producing histidine decarboxylase, 14C was incorporated
into the bound pyruvoyl group (Fig. 14-11). Thus, OH
serine is a precursor of the bound pyruvate. The
O
H
enzyme is manufactured in the cell as a longer 307-
H H
residue proenzyme which associates as hexamers N C CCHH22
N
(designatedπ ). The active enzyme was found to be C O C C
6
f
S
o
e
r
r
m
82
ed
to
b
f
y
o
c
rm
lea
2
v
2
a
6
g
-
e
re
o
s
f
i d
th
u
e
e
π
α
c
c
h
h
a
a
i
i
n
n
s
s
b
a
e
n
t
d
w
8
e
1
e
-
n
r e
S
s
e
i
r
d
8
u
1
e
a
β
nd H2C H
H2N O
chains which associate as (αβ) .270,271 The α chains OH
6
HH22 CC H
N
O
3H
H
C C
HO N COO– H2N
Pyruvoyl C CH3 NaBH4 C CH3 C O
group O C O C H2C H Dehydroalanine
NH NH Tautomerization
Acid OH NH4 + and hydrolysis
Enzyme hydrolysis Enzyme
HH33 CC H
N
C C
HO 3H
O
C H3 +N-Enzyme O
–OOC CH3
Lactate (14-40) Pyruvoyl group (14-41)

--- Page 758 ---

F. Pyruvoyl Groups and Other Unusual Electrophilic Centers 755
E197 K155 This enzyme also contains an N-terminal pyruvoyl
residue as does one subunit of a selenium-containing
NH glycine reductase which utilizes a dithiol to convert
+ 3
O D63’ glycine into acetate with coupled formation of ATP:
O
O(H) O O Y62’ Glycine + ADP + P + 2 e– →
i
acetate- + NH + + ATP (14-43)
4
O O
F195
N H O O O In both cases it has been proposed that the pyruvoyl
O
E66’ group forms a positively charged Schiff base with the
Prv O
substrate. The bond-breaking mechanisms are not
CH S81
3 O obvious but some ideas have been proposed.281– 283a
O O oxygen The ATP may arise from reaction with an intermediate
nitrogen acetyl phosphate.282 See Eq. 15-61.
HN
2 N76’ carbon
3. Dehydroalanine and Histidine and
Phenylalanine Ammonia-Lyases
Figure 14-11 Schematic diagram of the active site of the
pyruvoyl enzyme histidine decarboxylase showing key polar
interactions between the pyruvoyl group and groups of the Catabolism of histidine in most organisms proceeds
inhibitorO-methylhistidine and surrounding enzyme groups. via an initial elimination of NH 3 to form urocanic acid
Aspartate 63 appears to form an ion pair with the imidazolium (Eq. 14-44). The absence of the enzyme L-histidine
group of the substrate.268 Hydrogen bonds are indicated by ammonia-lyase (histidase) causes the genetic disease
dotted lines. See Gallagher et al.269 histidinemia.284,285 A similar reaction is catalyzed by the
important plant enzyme L-phenylalanine ammonia-
lyase. It eliminates – NH + along with the pro-S
3
hydrogen in the β position of phenylalanine to form
mammalian enzyme and that from E. coli are (αβ) 4 trans-cinnamate (Eq. 14-45). Tyrosine is converted to
tetramers formed in a manner similar to that of bacte- p-coumarate by the same enzyme. Cinnamate and
rial histidine decarboxylase. Other pyruvoyl decarbo- coumarate are formed in higher plants and are con-
xylases are phosphatidylserine decarboxylase,275,276 verted into a vast array of derivatives (Box 21-E,
an intrinsic membrane protein used to form phospha- Fig. 25-8).
tidylethanolamine,aspartate(cid:2)-decarboxylase,277
The reactions of Eqs. 14-44 and 14-45 are unusual
which forms β alanine needed for biosynthesis of because the nucleophilic substituent eliminated is on
coenzyme A, and 4'-phosphopantethenoylcysteine theα-carbon atom rather than the β. There is nothing
decarboxylase,278the second of two decarboxylases in the structures of the substrates that would permit an
required in the synthesis of coenzyme A. Because of
the lack of a primary amino group, its mechanism
+
must be somewhat different from that of other en- H3N H N
zymes in this group.267
NH
–OOC
H+
5'
2. Proline and Glycine Reductases
HS HR
N
An enzyme required in the anaerobic breakdown NH
of proline by clostridia utilizes a dithiol-containing
NH4 + –OOC
Urocanate
protein to reductively open the ring (Eq. 14-42).279,280 (14-44)
+
COO– COO– H3N H
H3 +N
N 2H H –OOC H+
H2 + H 2H2O
HR HS
SH SH S S
NH4 +
–OOC
trans-cinnamate
protein protein (14-42)
(14-45)

--- Page 759 ---

756 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special ReagenFts. Pyruvoyl Groups and Other Unusual Electrophillic Centers
easy elimination of the α-amino group. Thus, it Both enzymes are inhibited by sodium borohydride
should not be surprising that both enzymes contain a and also by nitromethane. After reduction with NaB3H
special active center. When 2H is introduced into the β and hydrolysis, 3H-containing alanine was isolated. 4
position of phenylalanine, no isotope effect on the rate This suggested that they contain dehydroalanine,
is observed. Rather, the rate-limiting step appears to which could arise by dehydration of a specific serine
be the release of ammonia from the coenzyme group. residue.286,287 For phenylalanine ammonia-lyase from
It appears that the enzyme must in some way make Pseudomonas putida this active site residue has been
the amino group a much better leaving group than it identified as S143. Replacement by cysteine in the
would be otherwise. S143C mutant also gave active enzyme while S143A
BOX 14-D DIETARY REQUIREMENTS FOR B VITAMINS
It is difficult to determine the amounts of vita- been reported, and rare metabolic diseases are
mins needed for good health and they may differ knownd– f in which specific enzymes, such as cysta-
considerably from one individual to another. The thionine synthase, have a reduced affinity for PLP.
quantities listed below are probably adequate for Patients with these diseases also benefit from a higher
most young adults but must be increased during than normal intake of the vitamin. Excessive excre-
pregnancy and lactation and after very strenuous tion of the vitamin may also occur, an example
exercise. being provided by a strain of laboratory mice that
Pantothenic acid: 10– 15 mg/day. Deficiency require twice the normal amount of vitamin B and
6
causes apathy, depression, impaired adrenal function, which die in convulsions after a brief period of
and muscular weakness. ω -Methylpantothenic acid vitamin B depletion.d Dietary supplementation
6
is a specific antagonist. The calcium salt, calcium with large amounts of vitamin B for treatment of
6
pantothenate, is the usual commercial form. medical conditions such as carpal tunnel syndrome
Biotin: 0.15 – 0.3 mg/day. The discovery that has been controversial.g Amounts of pyridoxine
biotin deficiency in young chickens can lead to over 50 mg per day may damage peripheral nerves,
sudden death resulted in a recommendation to probably because of the chemical reactivity of pyri-
supplement infant formulations with biotin.a doxal and PLP.
Desthiobiotin, in which the sulfur has been re- Nicotinamide: About 7.5 mg/day. Tryptophan
moved and replaced by two hydrogen atoms, can can substitute to some extent. See also Box 15-A.
replace biotin in some organisms and appears to lie Riboflavin: About 1.5 mg/day. See also Box 15-B.
on one pathway of biosynthesis.b,c Oxybiotin, in Folic acid: About 0.2 – 0.4 mg/day. See also
which the sulfur has been replaced by oxygen, is Box 15-D.
active for many organisms and partially active for Vitamin B : About 2 µg/day. See also Box
12
others. No evidence for conversion to biotin itself 16-B.
has been reported, and oxybiotin may function Vitamin C (ascorbic acid): 50– 200 mg/day.
satisfactorily in at least some enzymes. See also Box 18-D.
Thiamin: 0.23 mg or more per 1000 kcal of food
consumed and a minimum total of 0.8 mg/day. a Parry, R. J., and Kunitni, M. G. (1976) J. Am. Chem. Soc.98,
Replacement of the methyl group on the pyrimidine 4024–4025
b Gibson, K. J., Lorimer, G. H., Rendina, A. R., Taylor, W. S.,
ring by ethyl, propyl, or isopropyl gives compounds
Cohen, G., Gatenby, A. A., Payne, W. G., Roe, D. C., Lockett, B.
with some vitamin activity, but replacement by hydro-
A., Nudelman, A., Marcovici, D., Nachum, A., Wexler, B. A.,
gen cuts activity to 5% of the original. The butyl Marsilii, E. L., Turner, S., IM, Howe, L. D., Kalbach, C. E., and
analog is a competitive inhibitor. Chi, H. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10976–10984
c Huang, W., Jia, J., Gibson, K. J., Taylor, W. S., Rendina, A. R.,
Vitamin B : 1.5 – 2 mg/day; 0.4 mg/day for
6 Schneider, G., and Lindqvist, Y. (1995) Biochemistry34,
infants. Vitamin B is widely distributed in foods,
6 10985–10995
and symptoms of severe deficiency are seldom d Mudd, S. H., Levy, H. L., and Skovby, F. (1995) in The Metabolic
observed. However, a number of cases of convul- and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 1 (Scriver,
C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp.
sions have been attributed to partial destruction of
1279–1327, McGraw-Hill, New York
vitamin B 6 in infant liquid milk formulas. Convul- e Bell, R. R., and Haskell, B. E. (1971) Arch. Biochem. Biophys.147,
sions occurred when the vitamin B content was 588–601
6
reduced to about one-half that normally present in f Pascal, T. A., Gaull, G. E., Beratis, N. G., Gillam, B. M., Tallan,
H. H., and Hirschhorn, K. (1975) Science190, 1209–1211
human milk.
g Bender, D. A. (1999) Br. J. Nutr.81, 7–20
Several cases of children with an abnormally
high vitamin B requirement (2 – 10 mg/day) have
6

--- Page 760 ---

F. Pyruvoyl Groups and Other Unusual Electrophilic Centers 757
was inactive.288,289 These results support the formation et al. proposed that the histidine reacts with the
of dehydroalanine. One proposed mechanism of action electrophilic carbon in the pyruvoyl center as in
of the enzymes involved addition of the substrate Eq. 14-47.290,291 However, this chemistry, too, was
amino group to the C = C bond of the dehydroalanine unprecedented in enzymology. Determination of the
followed by elimination (Eq. 14-46). Dissociation of three-dimensional structure of histidine ammonia-
the C – H bond in this step would be assisted by the lyase292 led to the discovery of a new prosthetic group
electron-accepting properties of the adjacent aromatic and a solution to the problem. Two dehydration steps,
ring. However, the proposed chemistry was not (Eq. 14-47) convert an Ala-Gly-Ser sequence within the
convincing. Noting that a 5-nitro substituent on the protein into 4-methylidine-imidazole-5-one (MIO),
histidine greatly enhances the rate of reaction, Langer a modified dehydroalanine with enhanced electron-
accepting properties. The proposed mechanism of
action is portrayed in Eq. 14-48.
COO–
H2N
H
C
H
H
H2C
H
H H + 3N H N
N
N
N –OOC
H
O H H
H+ CH2
+
H
a
Dehydroalanine O
N
N
+
HH COO–
142 144
N
H
H2C C
H
HS H
N
+
N B
H
N
O
H b H
Cinnamate H H
CH2
H+
OH
NH2 N
H2C
N
N
H
O– (14-46)
+ H
H3N H N
H
A
N
la 142
O
142
–OOC
H
N
H H H
H3C H N N CH2
N
Gl 1 y 44 143 OH 144 N OH O H
H2O N
Ser
O O
O N
142
H (14-48)
N H2O
N
144 CH2
O
4-Methylidene-imidazole-5-one (MIO) (14-47)

--- Page 761 ---

758 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
References
1. Moodie, S. L., Mitchell, J. B. O., and Thornton, 28. Wang, X., Wurtele, E. S., Keller, G., McKean, 48. Tanaka, K. (1981) N. Engl. J. Med.304, 839–840
J. M. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.263, 486–500 A. L., and Nikolau, B. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 49. Craft, D. V., Goss, N. H., Chandramouli, N.,
2. Lipmann, F. (1945) J. Biol. Chem.160, 173–190 269, 11760–11769 and Wood, H. G. (1985) Biochemistry24, 2471–
3. Roskoski, R. N., Jr. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci. 28a. McKean, A. L., Ke, J., Song, J., Che, P., 2476
12, 136–138 Achenbach, S., Nikolau, B. J., and Wurtele, E. 50. Chauhan, J., and Dakshinamurti, K. (1986) J.
3a. Bentley, R. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 302– S. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 5582–5590 Biol. Chem.261, 4268–4275
305 29. Weaver, L. M., Lebrun, L., Wurtele, E. S., and 51. Alberts, A. W., and Vagelos, P. R. (1972) in The
4. Martin, D. P., and Drueckhammer, D. G. Nikolau, B. J. (1995) Plant Physiol.107, 1013– Enzymes, 3rd ed., Vol. 6 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp.
(1992)J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 7287–7288 1014 37–82, Academic Press, New York
5. Baraniak, J., and Frey, P. A. (1988) J. Am. Chem. 30. Al-Feel, W., Chirala, S. S., and Wakil, S. J. 52. Kumar, G. K., Beegen, H., and Wood, H. G.
Soc.110, 4059–4060 (1992)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 4534– (1988)Biochemistry27, 5972–5978
6. Richter, D., and Hilz, H. (1979) Trends Biochem. 4538 53. Lynen, F., Knappe, J., Lorch, E., Jutting, G.,
Sci.1, N123–N124 31. Lamzin, V. S., Dauter, Z., Popov, V. O., and Ringelmann, E. (1959) Angew. Chem. Int.
7. Ohlrogge, J. B., Jaworski, J. G., and Post- Harutyunyan, E. H., and Wilson, K. S. (1994) Ed. Engl.71, 481–486
Beittenmiller, D. (1993) in Lipid Metabolism in J. Mol. Biol.236, 759–785 54. Wood, H. G. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4,
Plants (Moore, T. S., Jr., ed), pp. 3–32, CRC 32. Roessler, P. G., and Ohlrogge, J. B. (1993) J. N300–N302
Press, Boca Raton, Florida Biol. Chem.268, 19254–19259 55. Polakis, S. E., Guchhait, R. B., and Lane, M. D.
8. Pavela-Vrancic, M., Pfeifer, E., Schröder, W., 32a. Abu-Elheiga, L., Almarza-Ortega, D. B., (1972)J. Biol. Chem.247, 1235–1337
von Döhren, H., and Kleinkauf, H. (1994) J. Baldini, A., and Wakil, S. J. (1997) J. Biol. 55a. Chapman-Smith, A., Forbes, B. E., Wallace, J.
Biol. Chem.269, 14962–14966 Chem.272, 10669–10677 C., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.
9. Haese, A., Pieper, R., von Ostrowski, T., and 32b. Abu-Elheiga, L., Brinkley, W. R., Zhong, L., 272, 26017–26022
Zocher, R. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.243, 116–122 Chirala, S. S., Woldegiorgis, G., and Wakil, S. 55b. Reddy, D. V., Shenoy, B. C., Carey, P. R., and
10. Pieper, R., Ebert-Khosla, S., Cane, D., and J. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 1444– Sönnichsen, F. D. (2000) Biochemistry39, 2509–
Khosla, C. (1996) Biochemistry35, 2054 –2060 1449 2516
11. Cortes, J., Wiesmann, K. E. H., Roberts, G. A., 32c. Nikolskaya, T., Zagnitko, O., Tevzadze, G., 56. Tipton, P. A., and Cleland, W. W. (1988) J. Am.
Brown, M. J. B., Staunton, J., and Leadlay, P. F. Haselkorn, R., and Gornicki, P. (1999) Proc. Chem. Soc.110, 5866–5869
(1995)Science268, 1487–1489 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 14647–14651 57. Tipton, P. A., and Cleland, W. W. (1988)
12. Brambl, R., and Plesofsky-Vig, N. (1986) Proc. 32d. Schulte, W., Töpfer, R., Stracke, R., Schell, J., Biochemistry27, 4317– 4325
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 3644–3648 and Martini, N. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 58. Ogita, T., and Knowles, J. R. (1988) Biochemistry
13. Berg, M., Hilbi, H., and Dimroth, P. (1996) U.S.A.94, 3465–3470 27, 8028–8033
Biochemistry35, 4689–4696 32e. Jitrapakdee, S., Booker, G. W., Cassady, A. I., 58a. Branson, J. P., and Attwood, P. V. (2000)
14. Dimroth, P. (1987) Microbiol. Rev.51, 320–340 and Wallace, J. C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, Biochemistry39, 7480–7491
14a. Hoenke, S., Wild, M. R., and Dimroth, P. 20522–20530 59. Perrin, C. L., and Dwyer, T. J. (1987) J. Am.
(2000)Biochemistry39, 13223–13232 33. Lim, F., Morris, C. P., Occhiodoro, F., and Chem. Soc.109, 5163–5167
15. Jackowski, S., and Rock, C. O. (1984) J. Biol. Wallace, J. C. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 11493– 60. Kluger, R., Davis, P. P., and Adawadkar, P. D.
Chem.259, 1891–1895 11497 (1979)J. Am. Chem. Soc.101, 5995–6000
15a. McAllister, K. A., Peery, R. B., Meier, T. I., 34. Kalousek, F., Darigo, M. D., and Rosenberg, L. 61. King, S. W., Natarajan, R., Bembi, R., and Fife,
Fischl, A. S., and Zhao, G. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. E. (1980) J. Biol. Chem.255, 60–65 T. H. (1992) J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 10715–10721
275, 30864–30872 35. Leon – Del-Rio, A., and Gravel, R. A. (1994) J. 62. Kluger, R., and Taylor, S. D. (1991) J. Am.
15b. Chirgadze, N. Y., Briggs, S. L., McAllister, K. Biol. Chem.269, 22964–22968 Chem. Soc.113, 996– 1001
A., Fischl, A. S., and Zhao, G. (2000) EMBO J. 36. Sasaki, Y., Hakamada, K., Suama, Y., Nagano, 63. Taylor, S. D., and Kluger, R. (1993) J. Am.
19, 5281–5287 Y., Furusawa, I., and Matsuno, R. (1993) J. Chem. Soc.115, 867 – 871
16. Whitty, A., Fierke, C. A., and Jencks, W. P. Biol. Chem.268, 25118–25123 64. Hoving, H., Crysell, B., and Leadbay, P. F.
(1995)Biochemistry34, 11678–11689 37. Gornicki, P., Podkowinski, J., Scappino, L. A., (1985)Biochemistry24, 6163–6169
17. Fierke, C. A., and Jencks, W. P. (1986) J. Biol. DiMaio, J., Ward, E., and Haselkorn, R. (1994) 65. O’Keefe, S. J., and Knowles, J. R. (1986)
Chem.261, 7603–7606 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, Biochemistry25, 6077– 6084
18. Langer, B. W., Jr., and Gyorgy, P. (1968) in The 6860–6864 66. Kuo, D. J., and Rose, I. A. (1993) J. Am. Chem.
Vitamins, 2nd ed., Vol. 2 (Sebrell, W. H., Jr., and 38. Nenortas, E., and Beckett, D. (1996) J. Biol. Soc.115, 387–390
Harris, R. S., eds), pp. 294–322, Academic Chem.271, 7559–7567 67. Stubbe, J., Fish, S., and Abeles, R. H. (1980) J.
Press, New York 39. Waldrop, G. L., Rayment, I., and Holden, H. Biol. Chem.255, 236–242
19. Bentley, R. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 51–56 M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 10249–10256 68. Reed, G. H., and Scrutton, M. G. (1974) J. Biol.
20. DeTitta, G. T., Edmonds, J. W., Stallings, W., 39a. Blanchard, C. Z., Lee, Y. M., Frantom, P. A., Chem.249, 6156–6162
and Donohue, J. (1976) J. Am. Chem. Soc.98, and Waldrop, G. L. (1999) Biochemistry38, 68a. Werneburg, B. G., and Ash, D. E. (1997)
1920–1926 3393–3400 Biochemistry36, 14392–14402
20a. Garton, S. D., Temple, C. A., Dhawan, I. K., 40. Li, S.-J., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1992) J. Biol. 69. DeTitta, G. T., Blessing, R. H., Moss, G. R.,
Barber, M. J., and Rajagopalan, K. V. (2000) J. Chem.267, 855–863 King, H. F., Sukumaran, D. K., and Roskwital-
Biol. Chem.275, 6798–6805 41. Li, S.-J., and Cronan, J. E. J. (1992) J. Biol. ski, R. L. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 6485–
20b. McIver, L., Baxter, R. L., and Campopiano, D. Chem.267, 16841–16847 6493
J. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 13888–13894 42. Ha, J., Daniel, S., Broyles, S. S., and Kim, K.- 70. Legge, G. B., Branson, J. P., and Attwood, P. V.
21. Wright, L. D., Cresson, E. L., Skeggs, H. R., H. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 22162–22168 (1996)Biochemistry35, 3849–3856
Peck, R. L., Wolf, D. E., Wood, T. R., Valent, J., 43. Wood, H. G., Harmon, F. R., Wuhr, B., 71. Mabrouk, G. M., Helmy, I. M., Thampy, K. G.,
and Folkers, K. (1951) Science114, 635–636 Hubner, K., and Lynen, F. (1980) J. Biol. Chem. and Wakil, S. J. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 6330–
22. Knowles, J. R. (1989) Ann. Rev. Biochem.58, 255, 7397–7409 6338
195–221 44. Shenoy, B. C., and Wood, H. G. (1988) FASEB 72. Kim, K.-H., López-Casillas, F., Bai, D. H., Luo,
23. López-Casillas, F., Bai, D.-H., Luo, X., Kong, I. J.2, 2396–2401 X., and Pape, M. E. (1989) FASEB J.3, 2250–
S., Hermodson, M. A., and Kim, K.-H. (1988) 45. Wilson, K. P., Shewchuk, L. M., Brennan, R. 2256
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 5784–5788 G., Otsuka, A. J., and Matthews, B. W. (1992) 73. Harwood, J. L. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci.13,
24. Browner, M. F., Taroni, F., Sztul, E., and Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 330– 331
Rosenberg, L. E. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 9257–9261 74. LauBermair, E., Schwarz, E., Oesterhelt, D.,
12680–12685 46. Wolf, B. (1995) in The Metabolic and Molecular Reinke, H., Beyreuther, K., and Dimroth, P.
25. Samols, D., Thornton, C. G., Murtif, V. L., Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 2 (1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 14710–14715
Kumar, G. K., Haase, F. C., and Wood, H. G. (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and 74a. Jockel, P., Schmid, M., Choinowski, T., and
(1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 6461–6464 Valle, D., eds), pp. 3151–3177, McGraw-Hill, Dimroth, P. (2000) Biochemistry39, 4320–4326
26. León-Del-Rio, A., Leclerc, D., Akerman, B., New York 75. Laussermair, E., Schwarz, E., Oesterhelt, D.,
Wakamatsu, N., and Gravel, R. A. (1995) Proc. 47. Taroni, F., and Rosenberg, L. E. (1991) J. Biol. Reinke, H., Beyreuther, K., and Dimroth, P.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 4626–4630 Chem.266, 13267– 13271 (1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 14710–14715
27. Ahmad, P. M., and Ahmad, F. (1991) FASEB J. 47a. Reche, P., and Perham, R. N. (1999) EMBO J. 76. Huder, J. B., and Dimroth, P. (1993) J. Biol.
5, 2482–2485 18, 2673–2682 Chem.268, 24564–24571

--- Page 762 ---

759
References
77. Bendrat, K., and Buckel, W. (1993) Eur. J. 107. König, S., Schellenberger, A., Neef, H., and 131. Stivers, J. T., and Washabaugh, M. W. (1993)
Biochem.211, 697–702 Schneider, G. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 10879– Biochemistry32, 13472 – 13482
78. Ahmad, F., Lygre, D. G., Jacobson, B. E., and 10882 132. Chang, Y.-Y., Wang, A.-Y., and Cronan, J. E., Jr.
Wood, H. G. (1972) J. Biol. Chem.247, 6299– 108. Jordan, F., and Mariam, Y. H. (1978) J. Am. (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 3911–3919
6305 Chem. Soc.100, 2534 –2541 132a.Kuzuyama, T., Takahashi, S., Takagi, M., and
79. Metzler, D. E. (1960) in The Enzymes, 2nd ed., 109. Metzler, D. E. (1977) Biochemistry; The Seto, H. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 19928–19932
Vol. 2 (Boyer, P. D., Lardy, H., and Myrback, Chemical Reactions of Living Cells, Academic 132b.Wikner, C., Nilsson, U., Meshalkina, L.,
K., eds), pp. 295–337, Academic Press, New Press, New York (440 –441) Udekwu, C., Lindqvist, Y., and Schneider, G.
York 109a.Kern, D., Kern, G., Neef, H., Tittmann, K., (1997)Biochemistry36, 15643–15649
80. Schellenberger, A., and Schowen, R. L., eds. Killenberg-Jabs, M., Wikner, C., Schneider, G., 133. Chuang, L. F., and Collins, E. B. (1968) J.
(1988)Thiamin Pyrophosphate Biochemistry, and Hübner, G. (1997) Science275, 67–70 Bacteriol.95, 2083–2089
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (2 Vols.) 110. Singleton, C. K., Wang, J. J.-L., Shan, L., and 134. Gruys, K. J., Datta, A., and Frey, P. A. (1989)
81. Krampitz, L. O. (1970) Thiamin Diphosphate Martin, P. R. (1996) Biochemistry35, 15865– Biochemistry28, 9071–9080
and Its Catalytic Functions, Dekker, New York 15869 135. Flournoy, D. S., and Frey, P. A. (1989) Biochem-
82. Gubler, C. J., ed. (1976) Thiamine, Wiley, New 111. Guo, F., Zhang, D., Kahyaoglu, A., Farid, R. istry28, 9594–9602
York S., and Jordan, F. (1998) Biochemistry37, 135a.Tittmann, K., Proske, D., Spinka, M., Ghisla,
83. Gallo, A., Mieyal, J. J., and Sable, H. Z. (1978) 13379–13391 S., Rudolph, R., Hübner, G., and Kern, G.
Bioorg. Chem.4, 147–177 111a.Li, H., Furey, W., and Jordan, F. (1999) (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 12929–12934
83a. Jordan, F., Li, H., and Brown, A. (1999) Biochemistry38, 9992–10003 136. Matsuda, T., and Cooper, J. R. (1983) Biochem-
Biochemistry38, 6369–6373 112. Gish, G., Smyth, T., and Kluger, R. (1988) J. istry22, 2209–2213
84. Kluger, R. (1987) Chem. Rev.87, 863–876 Am. Chem. Soc.110, 6230–6234 137. Barchi, R. L., and Viale, R. O. (1976) J. Biol.
85. Sable, H. Z., ed., and Gubler, C. J., ed. (1982) 113. Annan, N., Paris, R., and Jordan, F. (1989) J. Chem.251, 193–197
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.378 Am. Chem. Soc.111, 8895–8901 138. Nishino, K., Itokawa, Y., Nishino, N., Piros,
86. Karlson, P. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 536– 114. Alvarez, F. J., Ermer, J., Hübner, G., Schellen- K., and Cooper, J. R. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258,
537 berger, A., and Schowen, R. L. (1991) J. Am. 1871–11878
87. Panijpan, B. (1979) J. Chem. Educ.56, 805–806 Chem. Soc.113, 8402–8409 139. Braunstein, A. E., and Kritzmann, M. G. (1937)
88. Suchy, J., Mieyal, J. J., Bantle, G., and Sable, H. 115. Alvarez, F. J., Ermer, J., Hübner, G., Schellen- Enzymologia2, 751–752
Z. (1972) J. Biol. Chem.247, 5905–5912 berger, A., and Schowen, R. L. (1995) J. Am. 140. Braunstein, A. E., and Kritzmann, M. G.
89. Williams, R. R., and Spies, T. D. (1938) Vitamin Chem. Soc.117, 1678–1683 (1937)Biokhim.2, 242– 262,859–874
B1 and Its Use in Medicine, Macmillan, New 116. Sun, S., Duggleby, R. G., and Schowen, R. L. 141. Braunstein, A. E. (1973) in The Enzymes, 3rd
York (1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 7317–7322 ed., Vol. 9 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 379–481,
90. Kluger, R., Lam, J. F., Pezacki, J. P., and Yang, 117. Harris, T. K., and Washabaugh, M. W. (1995) Academic Press, New York
C.-M. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 11383–11389 Biochemistry34, 13994–14000 142. Christen, P., and Metzler, D. E., eds. (1984)
91. Windheuser, J. J., and Higuchi, T. (1962) J. 118. Harris, T. K., and Washabaugh, M. W. (1995) Transaminases, Wiley, New York
Pharm. Sci.51, 354– 364 Biochemistry34, 14001–14011 143. Torchinsky, Y. (1986) in Vitamin B6, Pyridoxal
92. Costello, C. A., Kelleher, N. L., Abe, M., 119. Muller, Y. A., and Schulz, G. E. (1993) Science Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical
McLafferty, F. W., and Begley, T. P. (1996) J. 259, 965–967 Aspects, Vol. 1A (Dolphin, R., Poulson, R., and
Biol. Chem.271, 3445–3452 120. Muller, Y. A., Schumacher, G., Rudolph, R., and Avramovic, O., eds), pp. 169–221, Wiley,
92a. Campobasso, N., Costello, C. A., Kinsland, C., Schulz, G. E. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.237, 315–335 New York
Begley, T. P., and Ealick, S. E. (1998) 121. Dyda, F., Furey, W., Swaminathan, S., Sax, M., 144. Snell, E. E. (1944) J. Biol. Chem.154, 313–314
Biochemistry37, 15981–15989 Farrenkopf, B., and Jordan, F. (1993) Biochem- 145. Snell, E. E. (1986) in Vitamin B6, Pyridoxal
92b. Webb, E., and Downs, D. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. istry32, 6165–6170 Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical
272, 15702–15707 122. Arjunan, P., Umland, T., Dyda, R., Swami- Aspects, Vol. 1A (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and
92c. Nosaka, K., Onozuka, M., Nishino, H., nathan, S., Furey, W., Sax, M., Farrenkopf, B., Avramovíc, O., eds), pp. 1–12, Wiley, New York
Nishimura, H., Kawasaki, Y., and Ueyama, H. Gao, Y., Zhang, D., and Jordan, F. (1996) J. 146. Gunsalus, I. C., Bellamy, W. D., and Umbreit,
(1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 34129–34133 Mol. Biol.256, 590–600 W. W. (1944) J. Biol. Chem.155, 685–686
93. Mizuhara, S., and Handler, P. (1954) J. Am. 122a.Dobritzsch, D., König, S., Schneider, G., and 147. Snell, E. E. (1981) in Methods in Vitamin B6
Chem. Soc.76, 571–573 Lu, G. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 20196–20204 Nutrition (Leklem, J. E., and Reynolds, R. D.,
94. Breslow, R. (1958) J. Am. Chem. Soc.80, 3719– 122b.Chang, A. K., Nixon, P. F., and Duggleby, R. eds), pp. 1–19, Plenum, New York
3726 G. (2000) Biochemistry39, 9430–9437 148. Metzler, D. E., Ikawa, M., and Snell, E. E.
95. Hopmann, R. F. W., Brugnoni, G. P., and Fol, 122c.Li, H., and Jordan, F. (1999) Biochemistry38, (1954)J. Am. Chem. Soc.76, 648 –652
B. (1982) J. Am. Chem. Soc.104, 1341–1344 10004–10012 149. Kallen, R. G., Korpela, T., Martell, A. E.,
96. Washabaugh, M. W., and Jencks, W. P. (1989) 123. Wikner, C., Meshalkina, L., Nilsson, U., Matsushima, Y., Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E.,
J. Am. Chem. Soc.111, 683–692 Nikkola, M., Lindqvist, Y., Sundström, M., Morozov, Y. V., Ralston, I. M., Savin, F. A.,
97. Breslow, R., and McNelis, E. (1959) J. Am. and Schneider, G. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, Torchinsky, Y. M., and Ueno, H. (1984) in
Chem. Soc.81, 3080–3082 32144–32150 Transaminases (Christen, P., and Metzler, D. E.,
98. Kluger, R., Chin, J., and Smyth, T. (1981) J. 124. Nikkola, M., Lindqvist, Y., and Schneider, G. eds), pp. 37–106, Wiley, New York
Am. Chem. Soc.103, 884–888 (1994)J. Mol. Biol.238, 387–404 150. Leussing, D. L. (1986) in Vitamin B6, Pyridoxal
99. Kluger, R., and Smyth, T. (1981) J. Am. Chem. 124a.Hasson, M. S., Muscate, A., McLeish, M. J., Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical
Soc.103, 1216–1218 Polovnikova, L. S., Gerlt, J. A., Kenyon, G. L., Aspects, Vol. 1A (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and
100. Kluger, R., Karimian, K., Gish, G., Pangborn, Petsko, G. A., and Ringe, D. (1998) Biochemis- Avramovíc, O., eds), pp. 69–115, Wiley, New
W. A., and DeTitta, G. T. (1987) J. Am. Chem. try37, 9918–9930 York
Soc.109, 618–620 125. Killenberg-Jabs, M., König, S., Eberhardt, I., 151. Braunstein, A. E., and Kritzmann, M. G.
101. Crosby, J., Stone, R., and Lienhard, G. E. Hohmann, S., and Hübner, G. (1997) Biochem- (1952)Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR85, 1115–1118
(1970)J. Am. Chem. Soc.92, 2891–2900 istry36, 1900–1905 152. Braunstein, A. E., and Kritzmann, M. G.
102. Shin, W., Oh, D.-G., Chae, C.-H., and Yoon, 126. Koga, J., Adachi, T., and Hidaka, H. (1992) J. (1952)Biokhim.18, 393–411
T.-S. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 12238–12250 Biol. Chem.267, 15823–15828 153. Shaw, J. P., Petsko, G. A., and Ringe, D. (1997)
103. Lobell, M., and Crout, D. H. G. (1996) J. Am. 127. Hasson, M. S., Muscate, A., Henehan, G. T. Biochemistry36, 1329–1342
Chem. Soc.118, 1867–1873 M., Guidinger, P. F., Petsko, G. A., Ringe, D., 153a.Stamper, C. G. F., Morollo, A. A., and Ringe,
104. Gallo, A. A., and Sable, H. Z. (1974) J. Biol. and Kenyon, G. L. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 955–959 D. (1998) Biochemistry37, 10438–10445
Chem.249, 1382–1389 128. Ibdah, M., Bar-Ilan, A., Livnah, O., Schloss, J. 153b.Morollo, A. A., Petsko, G. A., and Ringe, D.
105. Schellenberger, A. (1967) Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. V., Barak, Z., and Chipman, D. M. (1996) (1999)Biochemistry38, 3293–3301
Engl.6, 1024–1035 Biochemistry35, 16282–16291 153c.Sun, S., and Toney, M. D. (1999) Biochemistry
106. Golbik, R., Neef, H., Hübner, G., König, S., 129. Bernasconi, P., Woodworth, A. R., Rosen, B. 38, 4058–4065
Seliger, B., Meshalkina, L., Kochetov, G. A., A., Subramanian, M. V., and Siehl, D. L. (1995) 154. Aswad, D. W., and Johnson, B. A. (1987)
and Schellenberger, A. (1991) Bioorg. Chem.19, J. Biol. Chem.270, 17381–17385 Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 155–158
10–17 130. Ott, K.-H., Kwagh, J.-G., Stockton, G. W., 154a.Watababe, A., Kurokawa, Y., Yoshimura, T.,
Sidorov, V., and Kakefuda, G. (1996) J. Mol. Kurihara, T., Soda, K., and Esaki, N. (1999) J.
Biol.263, 359–368 Biol. Chem.274, 4189–4194

--- Page 763 ---

760 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
References
155. Hoffmann, K., Schneider-Scherzer, E., 169. Kintanar, A., Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., 185a.Burkhard, P., Tai, C.-H., Jansonius, J. N., and
Kleinkauf, H., and Zocher, R. (1994) J. Biol. and Scott, R. D. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, Cook, P. F. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.303, 279–286
Chem.269, 12710–12714 17222–17229 186. Cook, P. F., Tai, C.-H., Hwang, C.-C., Woehl,
155a.Cheng, Y.-Q., and Walton, J. D. (2000) J. Biol. 170. Miles, E. W. (1986) in Vitamin B6, Pyridoxal E. U., Dunn, M. F., and Schnackerz, K. D.
Chem.275, 4906–4911 Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 25842–25849
156. Schnell, M. J., Cooper, O. B., and Snyder, S. H. Aspects, Vol. 1B (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and 186a.Benci, S., Vaccari, S., Mozzarelli, A., and
(1997)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 2013– Avramovíc, O., eds), pp. 253–310, Wiley, Cook, P. F. (1997) Biochemistry36, 15419–
2018 New York 15427
157. Yamauchi, T., Choi, S.-Y., Okada, H., Yohda, 171. Marceau, M., Lewis, S. D., Kojiro, C. L., and 187. Kery, V., Bukovska, G., and Kraus, J. P. (1994)
M., Kumagai, H., Esaki, N., and Soda, K. Shafer, J. A. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 2753–2757 J. Biol. Chem.269, 25283–25288
(1992)J. Biol. Chem.267, 18361–18364 172. Ogawa, H., Gomi, T., Konishi, K., Date, T., 188. Peracchi, A., Bettati, S., Mozzarelli, A., Rossi,
158. Yohda, M., Endo, I., Abe, Y., Ohta, T., Iida, T., Nakashima, H., Nose, K., Matsuda, Y., G. L., Miles, E. W., and Dunn, M. F. (1996)
Maruyama, T., and Kagawa, Y. (1996) J. Biol. Peraino, C., Pilot, H. C., and Fujioka, M. Biochemistry35, 1872–1880
Chem.271, 22017–22021 (1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 15818–15823 188a.Jhee, K.-H., McPhie, P., and Miles, E. W. (2000)
159. Li, N., and Mattoo, A. K. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 173. Obmolova, G., Tepliakov, A., Harutyunyan, J. Biol. Chem.275, 11541–11544
269, 6908 – 6917 E., Wahler, G., and Schnackerz, K. D. (1990) 188b.Taoka, S., Widjaja, L., and Banerjee, R. (1999)
160. Li, N., Jiang, X. N., Cai, G. P., and Yang, S. F. J. Mol. Biol.214, 641–642 Biochemistry38, 13155–13161
(1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 25738–25741 173a.Ogawa, H., Takusagawa, F., Wakaki, K., Kishi, 188c.Ojha, S., Hwang, J., Kabil, O., Penner-Hahn, J.
161. Hohenester, E., White, M. F., Kirsch, J. F., and H., Eskandarian, M. R., Kobayashi, M., Date, E., and Banerjee, R. (2000) Biochemistry39,
Jansonius, J. N. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.243, 947–949 T., Huh, N.-H., and Pitot, H. C. (1999) J. Biol. 10542–10547
161a.Capitani, G., Hohenester, E., Feng, L., Storici, Chem.274, 12855–12860 189. Palcic, M. M., and Floss, H. G. (1986) in
P., Kirsch, J. F., and Jansonius, J. N. (1999) J. 174. Snell, E. E. (1975) Adv. Enzymol.42, 287–333 Vitamin B6, Pyridoxal Phosphate: Chemical,
Mol. Biol.294, 745–756 175. Metzler, C. M., Viswanath, R., and Metzler, D. Biochemical and Medical Aspects, Vol. 1A
162. Ramalingam, K., Lee, K.-M., Woodard, R. W., E. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 9374–9381 (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and Avramovíc, O.,
Bleecker, A. B., and Kende, H. (1985) Proc. 176. Sloan, M. J., and Phillips, R. S. (1996) Biochem- eds), pp. 25–68, Wiley, New York
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 7820–7824 istry35, 16165–16173 190. Pan, P., Woehl, E., and Dunn, M. F. (1997)
163. Rhee, S., Silva, M. M., Hyde, C. C., Rogers, P. 176a.Isupov, M. N., Antson, A. A., Dodson, E. J., Trends Biochem. Sci.22, 22–27
H., Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., and Arnone, Dodson, G. G., Dementieva, I. S., 191. Sukhareva, B. S. (1986) in Vitamin B6, Pyridoxal
A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 17293–17302 Zakomirdina, L. N., Wilson, K. S., Dauter, Z., Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical
164. Malashkevich, V. N., Strokopytov, B. V., Lebedev, A. A., and Harutyunyan, E. H. Aspects, Vol. 1B (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and
Borisov, V. V., Dauter, Z., Wilson, K. S., and (1998)J. Mol. Biol.276, 603–623 Avramovíc, O., eds), pp. 325–353, Wiley, New
Torchinsky, Y. M. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.247, 111– 176b.Ikushiro, H., Hayashi, H., Kawata, Y., and York
124 Kagamiyama, H. (1998) Biochemistry37, 3043– 192. Sandmeier, E., Hale, T. I., and Christen, P.
165. McPhalen, C. A., Vincent, M. G., and Jansonius, 3052 (1994)Eur. J. Biochem.221, 997–1002
J. N. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.225, 495–517 176c.Phillips, R. S., Sundararaju, B., and Faleev, N. 193. Nathan, B., Hsu, C.-C., Bao, J., Wu, R., and
166. Kamitori, S., Okamoto, A., Hirotsu, K., G. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Soc.122, 1008–1014 Wu, J.-Y. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 7249–7254
Higuchi, T., Kuramitsu, S., Kagamiyama, H., 177. Antson, A. A., Demidkina, T. V., Gollnick, P., 194. Porter, T. G., and Martin, D. L. (1988) Biochim.
Matsuura, Y., and Katsube, Y. (1990) Dauter, Z., Von Tersch, R. L., Long, J., Biophys. Acta.874, 235–244
J. Biochem.108, 175–184 Berezhnoy, S. N., Phillips, R. S., 195. Bu, D.-F., Erlander, M. G., Hitz, B. C.,
167. Okamoto, A., Higuchi, T., Hirotsu, K., Harutyunyan, E. H., and Wilson, K. S. (1993) Tillakaratne, N. J. K., Kaufman, D. L.,
Kuramitsu, S., and Kagamiyama, H. (1994) J. Biochemistry32, 4195 –4206 Wagner-McPherson, C. B., Evans, G. A., and
Biochem.116, 95–107 177a.Sundararaju, B., Antson, A. A., Phillips, R. S., Tobin, A. J. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
167a.Jeffery, C. J., Barry, T., Doonan, S., Petsko, G. Demidkina, T. V., Barbolina, M. V., Gollnick, 89, 2115–2119
A., and Ringe, D. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 1380– P., Dodson, G. G., and Wilson, K. S. (1997) 196. Dirkx, R., Jr., Thomas, A., Li, L., Lernmark, Å.,
1387 Biochemistry36, 6502–6510 Sherwin, R. S., DeCamilli, P., and Solimena,
168. Uchida, C., Funai, T., Oda, T., Ohbayashi, K., 178. Chen, H. Y., Demidkina, T. V., and Phillips, R. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 2241–2246
and Ichiyama, A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, S. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12276–12283 196a.Qu, K., Martin, D. L., and Lawrence, C. E.
8846–8856 178a.Sundararaju, B., Chen, H., Shilcutt, S., and (1998)Protein Sci.7, 1092–1105
168a.Matsui, I., Matsui, E., Sakai, Y., Kikuchi, H., Phillips, R. S. (2000) Biochemistry39, 8546– 196b.Kanaani, J., Lissin, D., Kash, S. F., and
Kawarabayasi, Y., Ura, H., Kawaguchi, S.-i, 8555 Baekkeskov, S. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274,
Kuramitsu, S., and Harata, K. (2000) J. Biol. 179. Block, E. (1985) Sci. Am.252(Mar), 114–119 37200–37209
Chem.275, 4871–4879 180. Block, E., Gillies, J. Z., Gillies, C. W., Bazzi, A. 197. Malashkevich, V. N., Filipponi, P., Sauder, U.,
168b.Okada, K., Hirotsu, K., Sato, M., Hayashi, H., A., Putman, D., Revelle, L. K., Wang, D., and Dominici, P., Jansonius, J. N., and Voltattorni,
and Kagamiyama, H. (1997) J. Biochem.121, Zhang, X. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 7492– C. B. (1992) J. Mol. Biol.224, 1167–1170
637–641 7501 198. Dominici, P., Filipponi, P., Schinninà, M. E.,
168c.Davoodi, J., Drown, P. M., Bledsoe, R. K., 181. Gentry-Weeks, C. R., Spokes, J., and Thomp- Barra, D., and Voltattorni, C. B. (1990) Ann.
Wallin, R., Reinhart, G. D., and Hutson, S. M. son, J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 7695–7702 N.Y. Acad. Sci.585, 162–171
(1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 4982–4989 182. Clausen, T., Huber, R., Laber, B., Pohlenz, H.- 199. Reith, J., Benkelfat, C., Sherwin, A., Yasuhara,
168d.van Ophem, P. W., Peisach, D., Erickson, S. D., D., and Messerschmidt, A. (1996) J. Mol. Biol. Y., Kuwabara, H., Andermann, F., Bachneff,
Soda, K., Ringe, D., and Manning, J. M. (1999) 262, 202–224 S., Cumming, P., Diksic, M., Dyve, S. E.,
Biochemistry38, 1323–1331 183. Nagasawa, T., Tanizawa, K., Satoda, T., and Etinne, P., Evans, A. C., Lal, S., Shevell, M.,
168e.Hester, G., Stark, W., Moser, M., Kallen, J., Yamada, H. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 958–964 Savard, G., Wong, D. F., Chouinard, G., and
Markovic’-Housley, Z., and Jansonius, J. N. 184. Hyde, C. C., Ahmed, S. A., Padlan, E. A., Gjedde, A. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
(1999)J. Mol. Biol.286, 829–850 Miles, E. W., and Davies, D. R. (1988) J. Biol. 91, 11651–11654
168f. Storici, P., Capitani, G., Müller, R., Schirmer, Chem.263, 17857–17871 199a.Hayashi, H., Tsukiyama, F., Ishii, S.,
T., and Jansonius, J. N. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.285, 184a.Rhee, S., Miles, E. W., and Davies, D. R. (1998) Mizuguchi, H., and Kagamiyama, H. (1999)
297–309 J. Biol. Chem.273, 8553–8555 Biochemistry38, 15615–15622
168g.Shah, S. A., Shen, B. W., and Brünger, A. T. 184b.Weyand, M., and Schlichting, I. (1999) 199b.Nishino, J., Hayashi, H., Ishii, S., and
(1997)Structure5, 1067–1075 Biochemistry38, 16469–16480 Kagamiyama, H. (1997) J. Biochem.121, 604–
168h.Ledwidge, R., and Blanchard, J. S. (1999) 184c.Sachpatzidis, A., Dealwis, C., Lubetsky, J. B., 611
Biochemistry38, 3019–3024 Liang, P.-H., Anderson, K. S., and Lolis, E. 200. Bhattacharjee, M. K., and Snell, E. E. (1990) J.
168i. Smith, M. A., King, P. J., and Grimm, B. (1998) (1999)Biochemistry38, 12665–12674 Biol. Chem.265, 6664–6668
Biochemistry37, 319–329 184d.Rhee, S., Miles, E. W., Mozzarelli, A., and 201. Chudomelka, P. J., Ramaley, R. F., and Murrin,
168j. Käck, H., Sandmark, J., Gibson, K., Schneider, Davies, D. R. (1998) Biochemistry37, 10653– L. C. (1990) Neurochemical Research15, 17–24
G., and Lindqvist, Y. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.291, 10659 202. Yatsunami, K., Tsuchikawa, M., Kamada, M.,
857–876 185. Rege, V. D., Kredich, N. M., Tai, C.-H., Hori, K., and Higuchi, T. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.
168k.Contestabile, R., Angelaccio, S., Maytum, R., Karsten, W. E., Schnackerz, K. D., and Cook, 270, 30813–30817
Bossa, F., and John, R. A. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. P. F. (1996) Biochemistry35, 13485– 13493
275, 3879–3886

--- Page 764 ---

761
References
203. Osterman, A. L., Kinch, L. N., Grishin, N. V., 220a.Steegborn, C., Messerschmidt, A., Laber, B., 243a.Mehta, P. K., and Christen, P. (1998) in
and Phillips, M. A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, Streber, W., Huber, R., and Clausen, T. (1999) Advances in Enzymology and Related Areas of
11797–11802 J. Mol. Biol.290, 983–996 Molecular Biology, Vol. 74 (Purich, D. L., ed),
204. Momany, C., Ernst, S., Ghosh, R., Chang, N.- 220b.Steegborn, C., Clausen, T., Sondermann, P., Wiley, New York (pp. 129–184)
L., and Hackert, M. L. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.252, Jacob, U., Worbs, M., Marinkovic, S., Huber, 243b.Jansonius, J. N. (1998) Current Opinion in
643–655 R., and Wahl, M. C. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, Structural Biology8, 759–769
205. Osterman, A. L., Brooks, H. B., Jackson, L., 12675–12684 244. Watanabe, N., Yonaha, K., Sakabe, K., Sakabe,
Abbott, J. J., and Phillips, M. A. (1999) 220c.Laber, B., Gerbling, K.-P., Harde, C., Neff, K.- N., Aibara, S., and Morita, Y. (1991) in Enzymes
Biochemistry38, 11814–11826 H., Nordhoff, E., and Pohlenz, H.-D. (1994) Dependent on Pyridoxal Phosphate and Other
206. Viguera, E., Trelles, O., Urdiales, J. L., Matés, Biochemistry33, 3413–3423 Carbonyl Compounds as Cofactors (Fukui, T.,
J. M., and Sánchez-Jiménez, F. (1994) Trends 221. Tate, S. E., and Meister, A. (1971) Adv. Kagamiyama, H., Soda, K., and Wada, H.,
Biochem. Sci.19, 318–319 Enzymol.35, 503–543 eds), pp. 121–124, Pergamon Press, Oxford
206a.Almrud, J. J., Oliveira, M. A., Kern, A. D., 222. Mihara, H., Kurihara, T., Watanabe, T., 245. Huston, S. M., Bledsoe, R. K., Hall, T. R., and
Grishin, N. V., Phillips, M. A., and Hackert, Yoshimura, T., and Esaki, N. (2000) J. Biol. Dawson, P. A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 30344–
M. L. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.295, 7–16 Chem.275, 6195–6200 30352
206b.Jackson, L. K., Brooks, H. B., Osterman, A. L., 223. Esaki, N., Seraneeprakarn, V., Tanaka, H., and 246. Ivanov, V. I., and Karpeisky, M. Y. (1969) Adv.
Goldsmith, E. J., and Phillips, M. A. (2000) Soda, K. (1988) J. Bacteriol.170, 751–756 Enzymol.32, 21–53
Biochemistry39, 11247–11257 223a.Mihara, H., Maeda, M., Fujii, T., Kurihara, T., 247. Arnone, A., Christen, P., Jansonius, J. N., and
206c.Grishin, N. V., Osterman, A. L., Brooks, H. B., Hata, Y., and Esaki, N. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. Metzler, D. E. (1985) in Transaminases (Christen,
Phillips, M. A., and Goldsmith, E. J. (1999) 274, 14768–14772 P., and Metzler, D. E., eds), pp. 326–370, Wiley,
Biochemistry38, 15174–15184 223b.Fujii, T., Maeda, M., Mihara, H., Kurihara, T., New York
207. Kume, A., Koyata, H., Sakakibara, T., Esaki, N., and Hata, Y. (2000) Biochemistry39, 248. Rhee, S., Silva, M. M., Hyde, C. C., Rogers, P.
Ishiguro, Y., Kure, S., and Hiraga, K. (1991) J. 1263–1273 H., Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., and Arnone,
Biol. Chem.266, 3323–3329 224. Zheng, L., and Dean, D. R. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 17293–17302
208. Pasternack, L. B., Laude, D. A., Jr., and Appling, 269, 18723–18726 249. Metzler, C. M., Mitra, J., Metzler, D. E.,
D. R. (1992) Biochemistry31, 8713–8719 225. Phillips, R. S., and Dua, R. K. (1991) J. Am. Makinen, M. W., Hyde, C. C., Rogers, P., and
209. Kennard, O., and Salisbury, S. A. (1993) J. Biol. Chem. Soc.113, 7385–7388 Arnone, A. (1988) J. Mol. Biol.203, 197–220
Chem.268, 10701–10704 226. Dua, R. K., Taylor, E. W., and Phillips, R. S. 250. Malashkevich, V. N., Toney, M. D., and
209a.Okamura-Ikeda, K., Fujiwara, K., and (1993)J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 1264–1270 Jansonius, J. N. (1993) Biochemistry32, 13451–
Motokawa, Y. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 17471– 227. Krebs, E. G., and Fischer, E. H. (1964) Vitam. 13462
17477 Horm.(N. Y.)22, 399–410 251. von Stosch, A. G. (1996) Biochemistry35,
209b.Guilhaudis, L., Simorre, J.-P., Blackledge, M., 228. Rubenstein, P. A., and Strominger, J. L. (1974) 15260–15268
Marion, D., Gans, P., Neuburger, M., and J. Biol. Chem.249, 3776–3781 252. Metzler, C. M., Metzler, D. E., Kintanar, A.,
Douce, R. (2000) Biochemistry39, 4259–4266 229. Johnson, D. A., Gassner, G. T., Bandarian, V., Scott, R. D., and Marceau, M. (1991) Biochem.
210. Akhtar, M., Stevenson, D. E., and Gani, D. Ruzicka, F. J., Ballou, D. P., Reed, G. H., and Biophys. Res. Commun.178, 385–392
(1990)Biochemistry29, 7648–7660 Liu, H.-w. (1996) Biochemistry35, 15846–15856 253. Fukui, T., Kagamiyama, H., Soda, K., and
210a.Zhou, X., and Toney, M. D. (1999) Biochemistry 230. Gonzalez-Porqué, P. (1986) in Vitamin B6, Wada, H., eds. (1991) Enzymes Dependent on
38, 311–320 Pyridoxal Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and Pyridoxal Phosphate and Other Carbonyl
210b.Malashkevich, V. N., Strop, P., Keller, J. W., Medical Aspects, Vol. 1B (Dolphin, D., Poulson, Compounds as Cofactors, Pergamon Press,
Jansonius, J. N., and Toney, M. D. (1999) J. R., and Avramovíc, O., eds), pp. 391–419, Wiley, Oxford
Mol. Biol.294, 193–200 New York 254. Marino, G., Sannia, G., and Bossa, F., eds.
211. Scarsdale, J. N., Kazanina, G., Radaev, S., 231. Bailey, G. B., Chotamangsa, O., and Vuttivej, (1994)Biochemistry of Vitamin B6 and PQQ,
Schirch, V., and Wright, H. T. (1999) K. (1970) Biochemistry9, 3243–3248 Birkhäuser, Basel
Biochemistry38, 8347–8358 232. Toney, M. D., Hohenester, E., Cowan, S. W., 254a.Iriarte, A., Kagan, H. M., and Martinez-
212. Stover, P. J., Chen, L. H., Suh, J. R., Stover, D. and Jansonius, J. N. (1993) Science261, 756–759 Carrion, M., eds. (2000) Biochemistry and
M., Keyomarsi, K., and Shane, B. (1997) J. Biol. 233. Dunathan, H. C. (1971) Adv. Enzymol.35, 79– Molecular Biology of Vitamin B6 and PQQ-
Chem.272, 1842–1848 134 dependent Proteins, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel
212a.Szebenyi, D. M. E., Liu, X., Kriksunov, I. A., 234. Tobler, H. P., Gehring, H., and Christen, P. 255. Relimpio, A., Iriarte, A., Chlebowski, J. F., and
Stover, P. J., and Thiel, D. J. (2000) Biochemistry (1987)J. Biol. Chem.262, 8985–8989 Martinez-Carrion, M. (1981) J. Biol. Chem.256,
39, 13313–13323 235. Sugio, S., Petsko, G. A., Manning, J. M., Soda, 4478–4488
213. Webb, H. K., and Matthews, R. G. (1995) J. K., and Ringe, D. (1995) Biochemistry34, 256. Gloss, L. M., and Kirsch, J. F. (1995) Biochemis-
Biol. Chem.270, 17204–17209 9661–9669 try34, 12323–12332
213a.Jagath, J. R., Sharma, B., Appaji Rao, N., and 236. Syke, G. E., Potts, R., and Floss, H. G. (1974) J. 257. Hwang, C.-C., Woehl, E. U., Minter, D. E.,
Savithri, H. S. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 24355– Am. Chem. Soc.96, 1593–1595 Dunn, M. F., and Cook, P. F. (1996) Biochemis-
24362 237. Floss, H. G., and Vederas, J. C. (1982) in New try35, 6358–6365
213b.Scarsdale, J. N., Radaev, S., Kazanina, G., Comprehensive Biochemistry Stereochemistry, 258. Pan, P., and Dunn, M. F. (1996) Biochemistry
Schirch, V., and Wright, H. T. (2000) J. Mol. Vol. 3 (Tamm, C., ed), pp. 161–199, Elsevier, 35, 5002–5013
Biol.296, 155–168 Amsterdam 259. Anderson, K. S., Kim, A. Y., Quillen, J. M.,
214. Tong, H., and Davis, L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 238. Palcic, M. M., and Floss, H. G. (1986) in Sayers, E., Yang, X.-J., and Miles, E. W. (1995)
269, 4057–4064 Vitamin B6, Pyridoxal Phosphate: Chemical, J. Biol. Chem.270, 29936–29944
215. Tong, H., and Davis, L. (1995) Biochemistry34, Biochemical and Medical Aspects, Vol. 1A 260. Schnackerz, K. D., Tai, C.-H., Simmons, J. W.,
3362–3367 (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and Avramovíc, O., III, Jacobson, T. M., Rao, G. S. J., and Cook, P.
216. Cotter, P. D., Baumann, M., and Bishop, D. F. eds), pp. 25–68, Wiley, New York F. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12152 –12160
(1992)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 4028– 239. Metzler, D. E., Harris, C. M., Johnson, R. J., 261. Hayashi, H., and Kagamiyama, H. (1995)
4032 Siano, D. B., and Thomson, J. A. (1973) Biochemistry34, 9413–9423
217. Ferreira, G. C., Neame, P. J., and Dailey, H. A. Biochemistry12, 5377–5392 262. Mattingly, M. E., Mattingly, J. R., Jr., and
(1993)Protein Sci.2, 1959–1965 240. Metzler, C. M., Cahill, A. E., and Metzler, D. Martinez-Carrion, M. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257,
218. Cox, T. C., Bottomley, S. S., Wiley, J. S., E. (1980) J. Am. Chem. Soc.102, 6075–6082 8872–8878
Bawden, M. J., Matthews, C. S., and May, B. 241. Schirch, L., and Jenkins, W. T. (1964) J. Biol. 263. Metzler, D. E. (1997) Methods Enzymol.280,
K. (1994) N. Engl. J. Med.330, 675–679 Chem.239, 3801– 3807 30–40
218a.Hunter, G. A., and Ferreira, G. C. (1999) J. Biol. 242. Metzler, C. M., Harris, A. G., and Metzler, D. 264. Higaki, T., Tanase, S., Nagashima, F., Morino,
Chem.274, 12222–12228 E. (1988) Biochemistry27, 4923–4933 Y., Scott, A. I., Williams, H. J., and Stolowich,
218b.Hunter, G. A., and Ferreira, G. C. (1999) 243. Schnackerz, K. D. (1986) in Vitamin B6, N. J. (1991) Biochemistry30, 2519–2526
Biochemistry38, 3711–3718 Pyridoxal Phosphate: Chemical, Biochemical and 265. Goldberg, J. M., and Kirsch, J. F. (1996)
219. Williams, R. D., Nixon, D. W., and Merrill, A. Medical Aspects, Vol. 1A (Dolphin, D., Poulson, Biochemistry35, 5280 –5291
H., Jr. (1984) Cancer Research44, 1918–1923 R., and Avramovíc, O., eds), pp. 245–264, 266. Recsei, P. A., and Snell, E. E. (1984) Ann. Rev.
220. Webster, S. P., Alexeev, D., Campopiano, D. J., Wiley, New York Biochem.53, 357–387
Watt, R. M., Alexeeva, M., Sawyer, L., and 267. van Peolje, P. D., and Snell, E. E. (1990) Ann.
Baxter, R. L. (2000) Biochemistry39, 516–528 Rev. Biochem.59, 29–59

--- Page 765 ---

762 Chapter 14. Coenzymes: Nature’s Special Reagents
References
268. Pishko, E. J., and Robertus, J. D. (1993)
Biochemistry32, 4943– 4948
269. Gallagher, T., Snell, E. E., and Hackert, M. L.
(1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 12737–12743
270. Recsei, P. A., Huynh, Q. K., and Snell, E. E.
(1983)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.80, 973–977
271. Van Poelje, P. D., and Snell, E. E. (1988) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.85, 8449–8453
272. Huynh, Q. H., and Snell, E. E. (1986) J. Biol.
Chem.261, 1521–1524
273. Shirahata, A., and Pegg, A. E. (1986) J. Biol.
Chem.261, 13833–13837
274. Stanley, B. A., Shantz, L. M., and Pegg, A. E.
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 7901–7907
274a.Xiong, H., and Pegg, A. E. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.
274, 35059–35066
275. Clancey, C. J., Chang, S.-C., and Dowhan, W.
(1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 24580–24590
276. Satre, M., and Kennedy, E. P. (1978) J. Biol.
Chem.253, 479–483
277. Williamson, J. M., and Brown, G. M. (1979) J.
Biol. Chem.254, 8074–8082
278. Yang, H., and Abeles, R. H. (1987) Biochemis-
try26, 4076 –4081
279. Seto, B., and Stadtman, T. C. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.
251, 2435–2439
280. Seto, B. (1978) J. Biol. Chem.253, 4525–4529
281. Hodgins, D. S., and Abeles, R. H. (1969) Arch.
Biochem. Biophys.130, 274–285
282. Arkowitz, R. A., and Abeles, R. H. (1989)
Biochemistry28, 4639–4644
283. Stadtman, T. C., and Davis, J. N. (1991) J. Biol.
Chem.266, 22147–22153
283a.Kabisch, U. C., Gräntzdörffer, A., Schierhorn,
A., Rücknagel, K. P., Andreesen, J. R., and
Pich, A. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 8445–8454
284. Furuta, T., Takahashi, H., Shibasaki, H., and
Kasuya, Y. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 12600–
12605
285. Levy, H. L., Taylor, R. G., and McInnes, R. R.
(1995) in The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of
Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 1 (Scriver, C. R.,
Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds),
pp. 1107–1123, McGraw-Hill, New York
286. Havir, E. A., and Hanson, K. R. (1985)
Biochemistry24, 2959–2967
287. Consevage, M. W., and Phillips, A. T. (1985)
Biochemistry24, 301–308
288. Langer, M., Reck, G., Reed, J., and Rétey, J.
(1994)Biochemistry33, 6462–6467
289. Langer, M., Lieber, A., and Rétey, J. (1994)
Biochemistry33, 14034–14038
290. Langer, M., Pauling, A., and Rétey, J. (1995)
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.34, 1464–1465
291. Schuster, B., and Rétey, J. (1995) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 8433–8437
292. Schwede, T. F., Rétey, J., and Schulz, G. E.
(1999)Biochemistry38, 5355–5361

--- Page 766 ---

763
Study Questions
1. Discuss the role of biotin in metabolism and the 8. Illustrate, using structural equations, the chemical
chemical mechanism of its action. Illustrate with mechanisms of the following biochemical reactions.
examples.
a) L-Glutamate + oxaloacetate → 2-oxoglutarate +
2. Biotin has been shown to be an essential compo- L-aspartate
nent of a bacterial oxaloacetate decarboxylase that b) L-Serine→ pyruvate + NH
4
+
pumps two sodium ions out of a cell for each c) L-Serine + indole (from cleavage of indole-3-
oxaloacetate molecule decarboxylated. Propose a glycerol phosphate) → L-tryptophan
chemical mechanism for the functioning of biotin d) L-Serine + tetrahydrofolate → glycine + N5,
and also any ideas that you may have for the N10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate
operation of the sodium pump. e) L-Selenocysteine→ L-alanine + Se0
3. Write out the equation by which acetyl-CoA and 9. Threonine is formed by E. coli from homoserine
pyruvate can be converted into L-glutamate, via the intermediate γ-phosphohomoserine.
which can be observed in living animals by 13C Write out an abbreviated reaction sequence for
NMR. If [2-13C] sodium acetate were injected into its conversion to L-threonine by the action of
the animal what labeling pattern could be antici- threonine synthase.
pated in the L-glutamate?
10. Write out a plausible step-by-step mechanism by
4. Compare mechanisms and coenzyme requirements which 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate syn-
for biological decarboxylation of the following thase (ACC synthase) of plant tissues can form
three groups of compounds: ACC from S-adenosylmethionine. This reaction
requires a specific cofactor
β-oxoacids
α-oxoacids
+
α-amino acids NH 3
–
COO
5. Illustrate, using structural equations, the chemical
mechanisms of the following biochemical reactions.
11. Tissues of the mammalian central nervous system
a) Pyruvate → acetaldehyde + CO contain a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent gluta-
2
b) 2-Pyruvate →α-acetolactate + CO mate decarboxylase that catalyzes conversion of
2
c) Pyruvate + NAD+ + CoA-SH → acetyl-CoA + Glu to γ-aminobutyrate (GABA), an inhibitory
NADH + H+ + CO synaptic transmitter. GABA is degraded by trans-
2
d) Fructose 6-P + glyceraldehyde-3-P→ imination with α-oxoglutarate as the acceptor to
xylulose-5-P + erythrose-4-P yield succinic semialdehyde, which then is oxidized
to succinate by an NAD-linked dehydrogenase.
6. 3-Fluoropyruvate is converted quantitatively by
pyruvate decarboxylase from wheat germ into a) Show how these reactions can operate as a
acetate, fluoride (F –), and carbon dioxide. Propose shunt pathway that allows the citric acid cycle
a reaction mechanism. See Gish, G., Smyth, T., to function without the enzymes α-oxoglutarate
and Kluger, R. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 110, 6230- dehydrogenase and succinate thiokinase.
6234. b) Is the shunt more or less efficient than the
normal cycle from the standpoint of energy
7. In E. coliL-cysteine is formed from L-serine and recovery? Explain.
the sulfide ion S2– in a reaction that also requires
acetyl-CoA and is catalyzed by the consecutive
action of an acyl transferase and cysteine synthase.
Outline the mechanism of this conversion indicat-
ing participation of any essential coenzymes.

--- Page 767 ---

764 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Biological oxidation-reduction reactions rely upon many organic coenzymes and
transition metal ions. Left, a molecule of the hydrogen carrier pyrroloquinoline
quinone (PQQ, Fig. 15-23) is seen at the bottom of a 7-bladed β propeller of a bacterial
methanol dehydrogenase. In adrenodoxin reductase (right) the reducing power of
NADPH is passed to FAD and then to the small redox protein adrenodoxin. In this
stereoscopic view the pyridine ring of the oxidized coenzyme NADP+ and the tricyclic
flavin ring of FAD are seen stacked against each other in the center; the adenylate ends
stretching toward the top and bottom of the complex. From Ziegler and Schulz, (2000)
Biochemistry39, 10986-10995.
Contents
767 A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and 802 D. Tetrahydrofolic Acid and Other Pterin Coenzymes
Dehydrogenases 802 1. Structure of Pterins
768 1. Three-Dimensional Structures of Dehydrogenases 803 2. Folate Coenzymes
768 2. Stereospecificity and Mechanism 804 3. Dihydrofolate Reductase
770 One step or two-step transfer? 805 Inhibitors
771 Coenzyme and substrate analogs 805 Structure and mechanism
771 Conformational changes during dehydrogenase action 808 4. Single-Carbon Compounds and Groups in
772 Zinc-containing alcohol dehydrogenases Metabolism
774 Other alcohol dehydrogenases and aldo-keto reductases 808 Serine as a C1 donor
775 3. Dehydrogenation of Amino Acids and Amines 808 The glycine decarboxylase–synthetase system
775 4. Glyceraldehyde-3-Phosphate Dehydrogenase and 810 Starting with formate or carbon dioxide
the Generation of ATP in Fermentation Reactions 810 N5-Formyl-THF (leucovorin)
776 5. Reduction of Carboxyl Groups 810 Catabolism of histidine and purines
777 6. Reduction of Carbon–Carbon Double Bonds 810 Thymidylate synthase
777 7. Transient Carbonyl Groups in Catalysis 813 Synthesis of methyl groups
778 8. ADP Ribosylation and Related Reactions of NAD+ 813 E. Specialized Coenzymes of Methanogenic Bacteria
and NADP+ 815 F. Quinones, Hydroquinones, and Tocopherols
779 9. The Varied Chemistry of the Pyridine Nucleotides 815 1. Pyrroloquinoline Quinone (PQQ)
779 Addition to NAD+ and NADP+ 816 2. Copper Amine Oxidases
780 Modification of NADH in acid 816 Topaquinone (TPQ)
780 Other reactions of pyridine nucleotides 817 Lysine tyrosylquinone (LTQ)
780 B. The Flavin Coenzymes 817 Tryptophan tryptophanylquinone (TTQ)
783 1. Flavoproteins and Their Reduction Potentials 817 Three-dimensional structures
783 2. Typical Dehydrogenation Reactions Catalyzed by 817 Mechanisms
Flavoproteins 818 3. Ubiquinones, Plastoquinones, Tocopherols, and
788 3. More Flavoproteins Vitamin K
788 4. Modified Flavin Coenzymes 819 4. Quinones as Electron Carriers
789 5. Mechanisms of Flavin Dehydrogenase Action 820 5. Vitamin K and γ-Carboxyglutamate Formation
792 6. Half-Reduced Flavins 822 6. Tocopherols (Vitamin E) as Antioxidants
794 7. Metal Complexes of Flavins and 822 G. Selenium-Containing Enzymes
Metalloflavoproteins
794 8. Reactions of Reduced Flavins with Oxygen 828 References
795 C. Lipoic Acid and the Oxidative Decarboxylation 835 Study Questions
of(cid:1)-Oxoacids
795 1. Chemical Reactions of Lipoic Acid Boxes
796 2. Oxidative Decarboxylation of Alpha-Oxoacids 769 Box 15-A Nicotinic Acid and Nicotinamide
798 3. Other Functions of Lipoic Acid 783 Box 15-B Riboflavin
799 4. Additional Mechanisms of Oxidative 786 Box 15-C Thioredoxin and Glutaredoxin
Decarboxylation 802 Box 15-D Folic Acid (Pteroylglutamic Acid)
799 Pyruvate oxidase 812 Box 15-E Thymidylate Synthase, a Target Enzyme in
799 Pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase Cancer Chemotherapy
799 Oxidative decarboxylation by hydrogen peroxide 821 Box 15-F The Vitamin K Family
800 Pyruvate formate-lyase reaction 823 Box 15-G The Vitamin E Family: The Tocopherols
802 5. Cleavage of α-Oxoacids and Substrate-Level 826 Box 15-H Glutathione Peroxidase and Abnormalities
Phosphorylation of Red Blood Cells
Tables
766 Table 15-1 Some Biochemical Hydrogen Transfer
Reactions
784 Table 15-2 Some Dehydrogenation Reactions
Catalyzed by Flavoproteins
808 Table 15-3 Single-Carbon Compounds in Order of
Oxidation State of Carbon
825 Table 15-4 Selenium-Containing Proteins

--- Page 768 ---

765
15
Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Thedehydrogenation of an alcohol to a ketone or
aldehyde (Eq. 15-1) is one of the most frequent biological NAD+ + H C O H C O + NADH + H+
oxidation reactions. Although the hydrogen atoms
removed from the substrate are often indicated simply
This hydrogen is released as a proton, H+
as 2[H], it was recognized early in the twentieth century
that they are actually transferred to hydrogen-carrying This H is transferred directly to NAD+
(15-2)
coenzymes such as NAD+, NADP+, FAD, and riboflavin
The foregoing observations suggested that these
biological dehydrogenations may be viewed as removal
of a hydride ion (H–) together with a proton (H+) rather
H C OH C O + 2[H]
than as removal of two hydrogen atoms. NAD+ and
(15-1) NADP+ are regarded as hydride ion-accepting coen-
zymes. However, it has been impossible to establish
conclusively that the hydrogen atom and electron are
5'-phosphate (FMN). This chapter deals with these transferred simultaneously as H–. Transfer of the
coenzymes and also with a number of other organic hydrogen atom to or from these coenzymes may con-
oxidation–reduction coenzymes. They may be con- ceivably be followed by or preceded by transfer of an
sidered either as carriers of hydrogen or as carriers electron. The situation is even less clear for the flavin
of electrons (H = H+ + e–) in metabolic reactions. coenzymes FAD and riboflavin phosphate for which
When NAD+ becomes reduced by dehydrogena- intermediatefree radical oxidation states are known
tion of an alcohol, one of the hydrogen atoms removed to exist. However, regardless of the actual mechanism,
from the alcohol becomes firmly attached to the NAD+, it is convenient to classify most hydrogen transfer
converting it to NADH. The other is released as a reactions of metabolism as if they occurred by transfer
proton (Eq. 15-2). Study of 2H-labeled alcohols and of a hydride ion. The hydride ion can be regarded as a
their oxidation by NAD+ has shown that dehydrogenases nucleophile which can add to double bonds or can be elimi-
catalyze direct transfer to NAD+ ofthe hydrogen that is nated from substrates in reactions of types that we have
attached to carbon in the alcohol. There is never any already considered. Some of these reactions are listed
exchange of this hydrogen atom with protons of the in Table 15-1.
medium. At the same time, the hydrogen attached to Why are there four major hydrogen transfer coen-
the oxygen of the alcohol is released into the medium zymes, NAD+, NADP+, FAD, and riboflavin phosphate
as H+: (FMN), instead of just one? Part of the answer is that
thereduced pyridinenucleotides NADPH and
NADH are more powerful reducing agents than are
reduced flavins (Table 6-7). Conversely, flavin coen-
zymes are more powerful oxidizing agents than are

--- Page 769 ---

766 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
NAD+ and NADP+. This difference reflects the chemi- tend to accept hydrogen atoms from one substrate and
cal difference between the vitamins riboflavin and to pass them to a second substrate while attached to a
nicotinamide which form the oxidation–reduction single enzyme.
centers of the coenzymes. Another difference is that The oxidation–reduction potential of a pyridine
NAD+ and NADP+ tend to be present in free forms nucleotide coenzyme system is determined by the
within cells, diffusing from a site on one enzyme to a standard redox potential for the free coenzyme (Table
site on another. These coenzymes are sometimes tightly 6-8) together with the ratio of concentrations of oxi-
bound but flavin coenzymes are usuallyfirmly bound dized to reduced coenzyme ([NAD+] / [NADH], Eq.
to proteins, fixed, and unable to move. Thus, they 6-64). If these concentrations are known, a redox
TABLE 15-1
Some Biochemical Hydrogen Transfer Reactionsa
Reaction Example (oxidant)
A Dehydrogenation of an alcohol
HC OH H – + C O Alcohol dehydrogenase (NAD+)
H+
B Dehydrogenation of an amine
HC NH2 H – + C NH Amino acid dehydrogenases, amine oxidases
H+ H
2
O (NAD+ or flavin)
+
NH
4
C O
C Dehydrogenation of adduct of thiol and aldehyde
O OH
R SH + C H C SR Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
H (NAD+ or NADP+)
+
H
O
H – + C SR
D Dehydrogenation of acyl-CoA, acyl-ACP, or
carboxylic acid
H H H Acyl-CoA dehydrogenases (Flavin)
O O
R C R C
C C Y H – + C C Y Succinic dehydrogenase (Flavin)
H H+
H H
(Y = —S—CoA or —OH) Opposite: enoyl reductase (NADPH)
E Reduction of desmosterol to
cholesterol by NADPH
H
+
H H
H – + R C C R CH CH Reduction of desmosterol to cholesterol by NADPH
a Reaction type 9 A,B of Table on the inside cover at the end of the book: A hypothetical hydride ion H– is transferred from the substrate to a
coenzyme of suitable reduction potential such as NAD+, NADP+, FAD, or riboflavin 5’-phosphate. The reverse of hydrogenation is shown
for E. Many of the reactions are reversible and often go spontaneously in the reverse direction from that shown here.

--- Page 770 ---

A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and Dehydrogenases 767
potential can be defined for the NAD+ system within Pure NADP+ was isolated from red blood cells in
a cell. This potential may vary in different parts of the 1934 by Otto Warburg and W. Christian, who had been
cell because of differences in the [NAD+] / [NADH] studying the oxidation of glucose 6-phosphate by
ratio, but within a given region of the cell it is constant. erythrocytes.1a They demonstrated a requirement for
On the other hand, the redox potentials of flavoproteins a dialyzable coenzyme which they characterized and
vary. Since the flavin coenzymes are not dissociable, namedtriphosphopyridine nucleotide (TPN+, but
two flavoproteins may operate at very different poten- now officially NADP+; Fig. 15-1). Thus, even before
tials even when they are physically close together. its recognition as an important vitamin in human nutri-
Why are there two pyridine nucleotides, NAD+ tion, nicotinamide was identified as a component of
and NADP+, differing only in the presence or absence NADP+.
of an extra phosphate group? One important answer Warburg and Christian recognized the relationship
is that they are members of two different oxidation– of NADP+ and NAD+ (then called DPN+) and proposed
reduction systems, both based on nicotinamide but that both of these compounds act as hydrogen carriers
functionally independent. The experimentally measured through alternate reduction and oxidation of the pyri-
ratio [NAD+] / [NADH] is much higher than the ratio dine ring. They showed that the coenzymes could be
[NADP+] / [NADPH]. Thus, these two coenzyme reduced either enzymatically or with sodium dithionite
systems also can operate within a cell at different Na S O .
2 2 4
redox potentials. A related generalization that holds
much of the time is that NAD+is usually involved in
pathways of catabolism, where it functions as an oxidant, S O 2– + NAD+ + H+→ NADH + 2 SO (15-3)
2 4 2
while NADPH is more often used as a reducing agent in
biosynthetic processes. See Chapter 17, Section I for
further discussion. The reduced coenzymes NADH and NADPH were
characterized by a new light-absorption band at 340
nm. This is not present in the oxidized forms, which
A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and absorb maximally at 260 nm (Fig. 15-2). The reduced
Dehydrogenases forms are stable in air, but their reoxidation was found
In 1897, Buchner discovered
that“yeast juice,” prepared by
A hydride ion,
grinding yeast with sand and filter- H– adds here
during reduction
ing, catalyzed fermentation of sugar.
O H H O
This was a major discovery which
4
excited the interest of many other The vitamin, 4 C NH2 H – C NH2
biochemists.1 Among them were nicotinamide
Harden and Young, who, in 1904,
showed that Buchner’s cell-free yeast N+ N
juice lost its ability to ferment glucose CH2 O
to alcohol and carbon dioxide when O
Noteβ-glycosidic
Structure of reduced
linkage
O nicotinamide ring
it was dialyzed. Apparently, fer-
P
mentation depended upon a low- –O d-Ribose
OH OH
O
molecular-weight substance that
O NH2
passed out through the pores of the P
–O N
dialysis membrane. Fermentation O N
could be restored by adding back
to the yeast juice either the concen- AMP H2C N N NAD +
O
trated dialysate or boiled yeast juice
(in which the enzyme proteins had
2'
been destroyed). The heat-stable
material, which Harden and Young OH OH O–PO2– in NADP+
3
calledcozymase, was eventually
found to be a mixture of inorganic
phosphate ions, thiamin diphosphate,
Figure 15-1 The hydrogen-carrying coenzymes NAD+ (nicotinanide adenine
and NAD+. However, characteriza-
dinucleotide) and NADP+(nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate).
tion of NAD+ was not accomplished
We use the abbreviations NAD+ and NADP+, even though the net charge on
until 1935.
the entire molecule at pH 7 is negative because of the charges on oxygen atoms
of the phospho groups.

--- Page 771 ---

768 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
mouse,6 and for bacterial lactate dehydrogenases.6– 8
In all of these the polypeptide is folded nearly identi-
cally. The structures of the homologous cytosolic and
mitochondrial isoenzymes of malatedehydrogenase
are also similar,9–11 as are those of the bacterial en-
zyme.12,13 All of these proteins consist of two structural
domains and the NAD+ is bound to the nucleotide-
binding domain in a similar manner as is shown in
Fig. 2-13 for glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase.
The coenzyme-binding domains of the dehydrogenases
of known structures all have this nearly constant
structural feature (often called the Rossmann fold)
consisting of a six-stranded parallel sheet together
with several α helical coils14 (Figs. 2-13 and 2-27).
The coenzyme molecule curls around one end of
the nucleotide-binding domains in a “C” conformation
with the nicotinamide ring lying in a pocket (Figs. 2-13,
15-3). Even before the crystal structure of lactate dehy-
drogenase was known, the lack of pH dependence of
coenzyme binding from pH 5 to 10 together with
observed inactivation by butanedione suggested that
Figure 15-2 Absorption spectra of NAD+ and NADH. the pyrophosphate group of NAD+ binds to a guani-
Spectra of NADP+ and NADPH are nearly the same as these. dinium group of an arginine residue. This was identi-
The difference in absorbance between oxidized and reduced fied by X-ray diffraction studies as Arg 101. This ion
forms at 340 nm is the basis for what is probably the single
pairing interaction, as well as the hydrogen bond
most often used spectral measurement in biochemistry.
between Asp 53 and the 2' oxygen atom of a ribose ring
Reduction of NAD+ or NADP+ or oxidation of NADH or
(Fig. 15-3), is present in all of the lactate and malate
NADPH is measured by changes in absorbance at 340 nm in
dehydrogenases.
many methods of enzyme assay. If a pyridine nucleotide is
not a reactant for the enzyme being studied, a coupled The adenine ring of the coenzyme is bound in a
assay is often possible. For example, the rate of enzymatic hydrophobic pocket with its amino group pointed out
formation of ATP in a process can be measured by adding to into the solvent. A second structural domain holds
the reaction mixture the following enzymes and substrates: additional catalytic groups needed to form the active site.
hexokinase + glucose + glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
+ NADP+. As ATP is formed, it phosphorylates glucose via
the action of hexokinase. NADP+ then oxidizes the glucose
2. Stereospecificity and Mechanism
6-phosphate that is formed with production of NADPH,
whose rate of appearance is monitored at 340 nm.
When NAD+ is reduced in 2H O by dithionite
2
(Eq. 15-3) an atom of 2H is introduced into the reduced
pyridine. Chemical degradation showed the 2H to be
present at the 4 position of the ring para to the nitrogen
to be catalyzed by certain yellow enzymes which were
atom15 (see Fig. 15-1). As shown by Westheimer and
later identified as flavoproteins.
associates, during enzymatic reduction of NAD+ by
deuterium-containing ethanol, CH – C2H OH, one of
3 2
the2H atoms is transferred into the NADH formed,
1. Three-Dimensional Structures of
thus establishing the direct transfer of a hydrogen atom.16,17
Dehydrogenases
When the NAD2H formed in this way is reoxidized
enzymatically with acetaldehyde, with regeneration
Most NAD+- or NADP+- dependent dehydrogenases
of NAD+ and ethanol, the 2H is completely removed.
are dimers or trimers of 20- to 40-kDa subunits. Among
This was one of the first recognized examples of
them are some of the first enzymes for which complete
the ability of an enzyme to choose between two iden-
structures were determined by X-ray diffraction
tical atoms at a pro-chiral center (Chapter 9). The two
methods. The structure of the 329-residue per subunit
sides of the nicotinamide ring of NAD were designated
muscle (M ) isoenzyme of lactatedehydrogenases
4 A and B and the two hydrogen atoms at the 4 position
(see Chapter 11) from the dogfish was determined to
of NADH as H (now known as pro-R) and H (pro-S).
0.25 nm resolution by Rossmann and associates in A B
Alcohol dehydrogenase always removes the pro-R
1971.2– 4 More recently, structures have been determined
hydrogen. Malate, isocitrate, lactate, and D-glycerate
for mammaliam muscle and heart type (H ) isoen-
4 dehydrogenases select the same hydrogen. However,
zymes,5 for the testicular (C ) isoenzyme from the
4
3-01
×
,ytivitprosba
raloM
18
NAD+
15
12
9
6 NADH
3
0
20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48
Wave number, cm–1× 10-3
500 400 350 300 250 220
Wavelength, nm

--- Page 772 ---

A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and Dehydrogenases 769
BOX 15-A NICOTINIC ACID AND NICOTINAMIDE
O O diarrhea, mental disorders, and eventual death. At
that time pellagra was common in the United States,
C OH C NH
2 especially in the south. The U.S. Public Health
Service estimated that during 1912–1916 there
were 100,000 victims and 10,000 deaths a year.b,c
N N The daily requirement for an adult is about
Nicotinic acid Nicotinamide 7.5 mg. The amount is decreased by the presence
in the diet of tryptophan, which can be converted
partially to nicotinic acid (Chapter 25).d,e Trypto-
Nicotinic acid was prepared in 1867 by oxida-
phan is about 1/60 as active as nicotinic acid itself.
tion of nicotine. Although it was later isolated by
The one-time prevalence of pellagra in the southern
Funk and independently by Suzuki in 1911–1912
United States was a direct consequence of a diet
from yeast and rice polishings, it was not recog-
high in maize whose proteins have an unusually
nized as a vitamin. Its biological significance was
low tryptophan content.
established in 1935 when nicotinamide was identi-
fied as a component of NAD+ by von Euler and
a Schlenk, F. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 286 – 288
associates and of NADP+ by Warburg and Christian.a
b Wagner, A. F., and Folkers, K. (1964) Vitamins and Coenzymes,
Both forms of the vitamin are stable, colorless com- Wiley (Interscience), New York (p. 73)
pounds highly soluble in water. c Rosenkrantz, B. G. (1974) Science183, 949 – 950
d Teply, L. J. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1300
In 1937, Elvehjem and coworkers demonstrated
e Sauberlich, H. E. (1987) in Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes:
that nicotinic acid cured canine “blacktongue.” In
Chemical, Biochemical and Medical Aspects, Vol. B (Dolphin, D.,
the same year it was found to cure human pellagra, Avramovic‘, O., and Poulson, R., eds), pp. 599 – 626, Wiley
a terrible disease characterized by weakness, indi- (Interscience), New York
gestion, and loss of appetite followed by dermatitis,
H
R171 O N
H
HN H + H N N H H O O H CH3 N + O 31 O 99 NH O Adenin O e H O – O D53
C O – HN N H H O OH H H N O O H O C 29
D168 O H2N+ NH
O
O O
O P O P
O NH2 H
H195 HN O– O O–
N140 HNH
+ H
N
R101 N H H
R109
LOOP
Figure 15-3 Diagrammatic structure of NAD+ and L-lactate bound into the active site of lactate dehydrogenase. See
Eventhoff et al.5

--- Page 773 ---

770 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
dehydrogenases acting on glucose 6-phosphate, gluta- flexible, raising some doubts about the rigidity of the
mate, 6-phosphogluconate, and 3-phosphoglyceralde- reactants in the active site.12,25 Nevertheless, it is likely
hyde remove the pro-S hydrogen. By 1979 this stereo- that the coenzyme as well as bound substrates must
specificity had been determined for 127 dehydrogenases, assume very specific conformations before the enzyme
about half of which were found A-specific and half is able to move to the transition state for the reaction.
B-specific.18 Isotopically labeled substrates A great deal of effort has been expended in trying to
understand other factors that may explain the high
pro-R HA HB pro-S stereospecificity of dehydrogenases.12,22,26– 28
When a hydrogen atom is transferred by an enzyme
4
CONH2
from the 4 position of NADH or NADPH to an aldehyde
5 3
or ketone to form an alcohol, the placement of the
6 2
1 hydrogen atom on the alcohol is also stereospecific.
N Thus, alcohol dehydrogenase acting on NAD2H con-
verts acetaldehyde to (R)-mono-[2H]ethanol (Eq. 9-73).
Pyruvate is reduced by lactate dehydrogenase to
have usually been used for this purpose but a simple L-lactate, and so on. Even mutations that disrupt the
NMR method has been devised.19,20 binding of the carboxylate of lactate, e.g., substitution
How complete is the stereospecificity? Does the of arginine 171 (see Fig. 15-3) by tryptophan or phenyl-
enzyme sometimes make a mistake? Lactate dehydro- alanine and introduction of a new arginine on the other
genase displays nearly absolute specificity, transferring a side of the active site, do not alter the L-stereospecificity.
proton into the “incorrect”pro-S position no more than However, the specificity for lactate is lost.29
once in 5 x 107 catalytic cycles.21 This suggests a differ-
ence in transition-state energies of about 40 kJ / mol for One step or two-step transfer? Another major
the two isomers. X-ray structural studies suggested question about dehydrogenases is whether the hydro-
that a major factor determining this stereoselectivity gen atom that is transferred moves as a hydride ion,
might be the location of hydrogen-bonding groups as is generally accepted, or as a hydrogen atom with
that hold the – CONH group of the nicotinamide. If separate transfer of an electron and with an intermedi-
2
these are located in such a way that the nicotinamide ate NAD or NADPH free radical. In one study para-
ring has a syn orientation with respect to the ribose substituted benzaldehydes were reduced with NADH
ring to which it is attached (Fig. 15-4), the A face of the and NAD2H using yeast alcohol dehydrogenase as a
coenzyme will be against the substrate undergoing catalyst.30 This permitted the application of the Ham-
oxidation or reduction. If the ring has an anti confor- mett equation (Box 6-C) to the rate data. For a series
mation, the B side will be against the substrate.18,22 of benzaldehydes for which σ+ varied widely, a value
However, the explanation cannot be this simple. High
specificity is still retained when NADH is modified,
for example, by replacement of the –CONH on the
2
p α y -N ri A di D ne H r , i i n n g w w h i i t c h h – t h C e O r C ib H o 3 s e o – r n – i C co H ti O na o m r i b d y e u li s n e k o a f ge H S O H
isα instead of β as in normal NADH.23 C N H
H
An intriguing idea is that the enzyme selectively R
stabilizes one of the boat conformations of NADH or
NADPH. According to stereoelectronic principles the
axially oriented hydrogen in such a boat structure
(pro-R in Fig. 15-4) will be the most readily transferred.
On the basis of this principle, together with the idea N
that enzymes adjust the Gibbs energies of intermediate
CH
2
states to achieve optimum catalytic rates, the following
OH HO
prediction was made by Benner and associates:24 The
O
thermodynamically most easily reduced carbonyl compounds
will react by enzymatic transfer of the hydride ion from the
Figure 15-4 The nicotinamide ring of NADH in a syn boat
pro-R position of NADH. Conversely, the most difficultly conformation suitable for transfer of an axially oriented pro-R
reduced carbonyl compounds will receive the hydride hydrogen atom from its A face as H–. The flow of electrons
ion from the pro-S position of NADH. The proposal is shown by the solid arrows. The dashed arrows indicate
has been controversial and it has been argued that competing resonance which favors planarity of the ring and
evolutionary relationships play a dominant role in opposes the H– transfer. Hydrogen bonds from the protein
determining stereoselectivity.23 Theoretical computa- to the carboxamide group (dashed lines) affect both this
tendency and the conformation of the nucleotide.
tions suggest that the boatlike puckering of the ring is

--- Page 774 ---

A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and Dehydrogenases 771
ofρ = +2.2 was observed for the rate constant with linked to the substrate. In the following diagram,27
both NADH and NAD2H. Thus, electron-accepting NAD+ (I) is shown with L-lactate lying next to its A
substituents in the para position hasten the reaction. face, ready to transfer a hydride ion to the pro-R posi-
While the significance of this observation is not im- tion in NADPH. Also shown (II) is 5-(S)-lac-NAD+,
mediately obvious, the relatively low value of ρ is pro- with the covalently linked lactate portion in nearly the
bably incompatible with a mechanism that requires same position as in diagram I. This NAD derivative
complete transfer of a single electron from NADH to was used to obtain the first 0.27-nm structure with a
acetaldehyde in the first step. A primary isotope effect bound substrate-like molecule in lactate dehydro-
on the rates was k /k = 3.6, indicating that the C–H genase.37 Since then the structures of many complexes
H D
bond in NADH is broken in the rate-limiting step. with a variety of dehydrogenases have been studied.
The fact that the isotope effect is the same for all of the In coenzyme analog III the ring is bound to ribose
substituted benzaldehydes also argued in favor of a with a C – C bond and it lacks the positive charge on
hydride ion transfer. the nicotinamide ring in NAD+. It does not react with
Studies of the kinetics of nonenzymatic model substrate. However, it binds to the coenzyme site of
reactions of NADH with quinones31,32 have also been alcohol dehydrogenase and forms with ethanol a
interpreted to favor a single-step hydride ion transfer. ternary complex whose structure has been solved.38
Application of Marcus theory (Chapter 9, Section D,4) A related approach is to study complexes formed
to data from model systems also supports the hydride with normal NAD+ but with an unreactive second
transfer mechanism.33,34 Quantum mechanical tunneling substrate. An example is oxamate, which binds well
may be involved in enzymatic transfer of protons, to lactate dehydrogenase to form stable ternary com-
hydride ions, and electrons.35–36 Tunneling is often plexes for which equilibrium isotope effects have been
recognized by unusually large primary or secondary studied.39
kinetic isotope effects. According to semi-classical theory
O O
(Chapter 12), the maximum effects for deuterium and
C C
tritium are given by the following ratios:
–
H2N O
(k /k ) = ( k /k )3.3≈ 7. Oxamate
2H 1H 3H 2H
Higher ratios, which suggest tunneling, are frequently In the structure of the lactate dehydrogenase active
observed for dehydrogenases.36a,b Tunneling is apparently site shown in Fig. 15-3, the lactate carboxylate ion is
coupled to fluctuations in motion within the enzyme- held and neutralized by the guanidinium group of Arg
substrate complex. Study of effects of pressure on 171, and the imidazole group of His 195 is in position
reactions provides a new approach that can aid to serve as a general base catalyst to abstract a proton
interpretation.36c,36d from the hydroxyl group of the substrate (Eq. 15-4).
This imidazole group is also hydrogen bonded to the
Coenzyme and substrate analogs. The structures carboxylate of Asp 168 as in the “charge-relay” system
of enzyme·NAD+·substrate complexes (Fig. 15-3) may of the serine proteases (Fig. 12-10). The same features
be studied by X-ray crystallography under certain are present in the active site of malate dehydrogenases
conditions or can be inferred from those of various and have been shown essential by study of various
stable enzyme-inhibitor complexes or from enzyme mutant forms.11,40 – 42 The His:Asp pair of the dehydro-
reconstituted with NAD+ that has been covalently genases is not part of the nucleotide-binding domain
but is present in the second structural domain, the
“catalytic domain.” This is another feature reminiscent
O – O
C O – O of the serine proteases. A bacterial D-glycerate dehydro-
Lactate C genase also has a similar structure and the same cata-
H C O H 3C H lytic groups. However, the placement of the catalytic
O CH3 O H O O histidine and the arginine that binds the α-carboxylate
group of the substrate is reversed, allowing the enzyme
C C C
NH2 5 3 NH2 NH2
to act on the D-isomer.43
N
+ + Conformational changes during dehydrogenase
N N
NAD+ action. Dehydrogenases bind coenzyme and substrate
R R R in an ordered sequence. The coenzyme binds first,
R = Ribose-P-P-adenosine then the oxidizable or reducible substrate. The binding
of the coenzyme to lactate dehydrogenase is accom-
I II III
5-(S)-lac-NAD+, panied by a conformational change by which a loop,
(3S)-5-(3-carboxy-3 involving residues 98 – 120 and including one helix,
hydroxypropyl)-NAD+

--- Page 775 ---

772 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
ment of the positive charge toward the 4'
carbon of the ring, assisting in the transfer
R102 of the hydride ion (Eq. 15-4).41 At the end of
HN
this transfer both Arg 109 and His 196 are
R109 positively charged and electrostatic repulsion
HN
+ NH between them may help to move the loop
H and release the products. If the reaction pro-
HN H ceeds in the opposite direction the presence
O
H195 – O of two positive charges will assist in the
+ NH2 C NH2 hydride ion transfer. The importance of Arg
H2N
O C
H2C 109 is demonstrated by the fact that a mutant
H + with glutamine in place of Arg 109 has a value
N N C N
H O ofk only 1/ 400 that of native enzyme.45
– H cat
O C NAD+ The loop closure also causes significant
O – O changes in the Raman spectra of the bound
NAD+, especially in vibrational modes that
O H H
D168 involve the carboxamide group of the nicoti-
HN + NH namide ring. These have been interpreted as
indicating an increased ridigity of binding of
the coenzyme in the closed conformation.46
HN
R171 As with many other enzymes acting on polar
substrates, a characteristic of the pretransition
state complex appears to be formation of a
complex with a network of hydrogen bonds
extending into the protein, exclusion of most
water molecules, and tight packing of protein
R102 groups around the substrate. It is also signi-
HN
ficant that an overall net electrical charge on
R109
the ES complexes must be correct for tight
HN
+
NH binding of substrates to occur for lactate or
H malate dehydrogenase.44 Positive and negative
HN H
charges are balanced except for one excess posi-
O
–
H195 O tive charge which may be needed for catalysis.
+ NH2 C NH2
H2N
O C
H2C Zinc-containing alcohol dehydro-
+ N N C H N genases. Liver alcohol dehydrogenase is a
– H H O H relatively nonspecific enzyme that oxidizes
O C NADH ethanol and many other alcohols. The much
O – O
studied horse liver enzyme47–60 is a dimer of
O H H 374-residue subunits, each of which contains
D168 a“catalytic” Zn2+ ion deeply buried in a crevice
HN + NH
between the nucleotide-binding and catalytic
domains. The enzyme also contains a “struc-
HN tural” Zn2+ ion48 that is bound by four sulfur
R171 (15-4) atoms from cysteine side chains but does not
represent a conserved feature of all alcohol
dehydrogenases. The catalytic Zn2+ is ligated
folds over the coenzyme like a lid.41,44 This conforma- by sulfur atoms from cysteines 46 and 174 and by a
tional change must occur during each catalytic cycle, nitrogen atom of the imidazole group of His 67 (Fig. 15-
just as in the previously discussed cases of citrate 5). In the free enzyme a water molecule is thought to
synthase (Chapter 13) and aspartate aminotransferase occupy the 4th coordination position and its dissocia-
(Chapter 14). One effect of folding of the loop is to tion to form the Zn+–HO– complex (Eq. 15-5) may
bring the side chain of Arg 109 into close proximity account for a pK of 9.2 in the free enzyme and of 7.6
a
to His 195 and to the OH group of the bound lactate in the NAD+ complex.48 The apparent pK drops
a
(Eq. 15-4). The closing of the loop also forces the further to about 6.4 in the presence of the substrate
positively charged nicotinamide ring more deeply into
a relatively nonpolar pocket. This may induce a move- Zn2+–OH → Zn+–OH + H+ (15-5)
2

--- Page 776 ---

A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and Dehydrogenases 773
ethanol. The assignment of this pK value has been H
a
controversial.48,49 Histidine 51 (Fig. 15-5), Glu 68 and H3C
N C O
Asp 49 have side chains close to the zinc and, as we have
H3C
seen (Chapter 7), macroscopic pK values of proteins
a
++
can be shared by two or more closely placed groups. Zn
Substrate binding also induces a conformational
change in this enzyme. When both coenzymes and
substrate bind the “closed” conformation of the enzyme H
is formed by a rotation of the catalytic domains of the H3C + +
N C O Zn
two subunits relative to the coenzyme-binding do-
mains.50–51a Structures of ternary complexes with inhibi-
H3C
(15-6)
torsand with substrates have also been established.
For example, liver alcohol dehydrogenase was crystal-
lized as the enzyme·NAD+·p-bromobenzyl alcohol structure of the enzyme complexed with NAD+ and
complex with saturating concentrations of substrates 2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorobenzyl alcohol.53 From the crystal
in an equilibrium mixture51b and studied at low reso- structures of the NAD+·p-bromobenzyl alcohol com-
lution. Transient kinetic studies or direct spectroscopic plex and the previously mentioned complex with
determinations led to the conclusion that the internal ethanol and analog III it appears that the oxygen of the
equilibrium (E·NAD+·alcohol = E·NADH·aldehyde) alcohol substrate coordinates with the Zn2+, displacing
favors the NAD+·alcohol complex.52 Subsequently, the bound water. Binding of the chromophoric aldehyde
the complex was studied at higher resolution, and 4-trans-(N, N-dimethylamino) cinnamaldehyde shifts
the basic structural features were confirmed with a the wavelength of maximum absorbance by 66 nm,
suggesting that Zn2+ binds directly to the
oxygen of this ligand (Eq. 15-6).54 Reso-
D223 nance-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (Chap-
K228
ter 23) of the complex of dimethylamino-
O – O benzaldehyde with alcohol dehydrogenase
I224 H H H 3 N + also supports an intermediate in which the
O O O H Zn2+ becomes coordinated directly with the
F198 H + N NH 2 substrate oxygen (Eq. 15-6).55Rapid scanning
P O
N N O NH O O – N HN R47 s o p th e e c r tr c o h p r h o o m to o m ph e o tr r y ic o s f u c b o s m tr p at l e e , x 3 e - s h w yd it r h o x a y n - - 4-
N – H R369 nitrobenzyl alcohol, also suggested that the
O
N
O
H P O
HN
NH
O
alcohol first formed a complex with an undis-
NH 2 H O H + – E68 sociated alcoholic – OH group (Eq. 15-7, step
H 2 N H NH O a) and then lost a proton to form a zinc
H + N NH I269 O O H N H a re lc a o c h t o b l y a t h e y c d o r m id p e l i e o x n ( s tr te a p n s b f ) e 5 r 6 ( w st h e i p c h c ) c . ould
2
H H H51 Eklundet al. suggested that the side
HN O O H S48 D49 chains of Ser 48 and His 51 act as a proton relay
O
H N S C46 O system to remove the proton from the alcohol,
N + H Zn S C 174 – in step b of Eq. 15-7, leaving the transient
R271 O H H O N NH O zinc-bound alcoholate ion, which can then
317 O H67 transfer a hydride ion to NAD+, in step c.52
H
292 O H N O F93 The shaded hydrogen atom leaves as H+.
V294 The role of His 51 as a base is supported by
studies of the inactivation of the horse liver
I318
enzyme by diethyl pyrocarbonate57 and by
Br
directed mutation of yeast and liver enzymes.
L141
L57 When His 51 was substituted by Gln the pK
M306 S a
of 7 was abolished and the activity was
decreased ten-fold.58
The functioning of zinc ions in enzymes
Figure 15-5 Structure of the complex of horse liver alcohol dehy-
has been controversial and other mechanisms
drogenase with NAD+ and the slow substrate p-bromobenzyl alcohol.
have been proposed. Makinen et al. suggested
The zinc atom and the nicotinamide ring of the bound NAD+ are
a transient pentacoordinate Zn2+ complex
shaded. Adjacent to them is the bound substrate. Courtesy of Bryce
Plapp. Based on Ramaswamy et al.53 on the basis of EPR measurements on en-

--- Page 777 ---

774 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Enzyme NAD+ functions to reduce acetaldehyde in the fermentation
process. Alcohol dehydrogenase II is synthesized by
RCH2OH a
cells growing on such carbon sources as ethanol itself
S48
and needing to oxidize it to obtain energy. A third
N
S
CH2 isoenzyme is present in mitochondria. An alcohol
O dehydrogenase isoenzyme of green plants is induced
S
Zn H H by anaerobic stress such as flooding. It permits ethan-
O H N olic fermentation to provide energy temporarily to
H
C O H N submerged roots and other tissues.67 Some bacteria
H contain an NADP+-dependent, Zn2+-containing alcohol
R 51
O dehydrogenase.67a
+N H
O
O O C 269 Other alcohol dehydrogenases and aldo-keto
NH2
reductases. The oxidation of an alcohol to a carbonyl
b
H+ compound and the reverse reaction of reduction of a
carbonyl group are found in so many metabolic path-
S48
ways that numerous specialized dehydrogenases exist.
N
S
CH2 A large group of “short-chain” dehydrogenases and
S O reductases had at least 57 known members by 1995.68–69a
Zn H
Their structures and functions are variable. Most
–O H H N appear to be single-domain proteins with a large β
H N
C O sheet, a nucleotide-binding pocket, and a conserved
H
R 51 pair of residues: Tyr 152 and Lys 156. These may
O
+N H function in a manner similar to that of the His-Asp
O pair in lactate dehydrogenase. A possible role of a
O NH2 O C 269 cysteine side chain has been suggested for another
c member of this group, 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydro-
R CH=O genase, an enzyme of valine catabolism.70
Enzyme NADH (15-7) Dehydrogenases often act primarily to reduce a
carbonyl compound rather than to dehydrogenate an
alcohol. These enzymes may still be called dehydro-
zyme containing Co2+. Such a complex, in which the genases. For example, in the lactic acid fermentation
side chain of nearby Glu 68 would participate, would lactate is formed by reduction of pyruvate but we still
allow the coordinated water molecule to act as the call the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase. In our bodies
base in deprotonation of the alcohol.59 Molecular this enzyme functions in both directions. However, some
dynamics calculations indicate that Glu 68 can coordi- enzymes that act mainly in the direction of reduction
nate the zinc ion in this fashion, but Ryde suggests that are called reductases. An example is aldose reductase,
its function may be to assist the exchange of ligands, a member of a family of aldo-keto reductases71– 73
i.e., the release of an alcohol or aldehyde product.60 A which have (α /β) 8-barrel structures.74– 76
variety of kinetic and spectroscopic studies have pro- The normal physiological function of aldose reduc-
vided additional information that makes alcohol dehy- tase is uncertain but it can cause a problem in diabetic
drogenase one of the most investigated of all enzymes. persons by reducing glucose to sorbitol (glucitol),
Liver alcohol dehydrogenase is important to the ribose to ribitol, etc. The resulting sugar alcohols
metabolism of ethanol by drinkers. Human beings accumulate in the lens and are thought to promote
exhibit small individual differences in their rates of cataract formation and may also be involved in the
alcohol metabolism which may reflect the fact that severe damage to retinas and kidneys that occurs in
there are several isoenzymes and a number of genetic diabetes mellitus. Inhibitors of aldose reductase delay
variants whose distribution differs from one person development of these complications in animals but the
to the next as well as among tissues.61– 64 Inhibition of compounds tested are too toxic for human use.76
these isoenzymes by uncompetitive inhibitors, discussed The active sites of aldo-keto reductases contain
in Chapter 9, is a goal in treatment of poisoning by meth- an essential tyrosine (Tyr 48) with a low pK value.
a
anol or ethylene glycol. Inhibition of the dehydrogenases The nearby His 110, Asp 43, and Lys 77 may also
slows the two-step oxidation of these substrates to toxic participate in catalysis.76,77 The kinetics are unusual.
carboxylic acids.65 Both NAD+ and NADH are bound tightly and the
Yeast contains two cytosolic alcohol dehydrogen- overall rate of reduction of a substrate is limited by
ase isoenzymes.66 Alcohol dehydrogenase I, present the rate of dissociation of NAD+.78 Citrate is a natural
in large amounts in cells undergoing fermentation, uncompetitive inhibitor of aldose reductase.79

--- Page 778 ---

A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and Dehydrogenases 775
3. Dehydrogenation of Amino Acids and O a OH
OH
Amines
R C + H2O R C
H Covalent H
The dehydrogenation of an amine or the reverse hydrate –2[H]
b O
reaction, the reduction of a Schiff base (Table 15-1,
reaction type B), is another important pyridine nucle- R C
otide-dependent process. Glutamate dehydrogenase, OH
a large oligomeric protein whose subunits contain 450 (15-8)
or more residues, is the best known enzyme catalyzing
this reaction. An intermediate Schiff base of 2-oxo-
glutarate and NH is a presumed intermediate.80,81
3 to a carboxylic acid and the conversion of NAD+ to
Similar reactions are catalyzed by dehydrogenases for
NADH.
alanine,82,83 leucine,84 phenylalanine,85 and other amino
In green plants and in some bacteria an NADP+-
acids.83,86,87
dependent cytoplasmic glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase doesnotuse inorganic phosphate to
form an acyl phosphate intermediate but gives 3-phos-
4. Glyceraldehyde-3-Phosphate Dehydrogenase
phoglycerate with a free carboxylate as in Eq. 15-8.93,93a
and the Generation of ATP in Fermentation
Because it doesn’t couple ATP cleavage to the dehy-
Reactions
drogenation, it drives the [NADPH] / [NADP+] ratio
to a high value favorable to biosynthetic processes (see
The oxidation of an aldehyde to a carboxylic acid,
Chapter 17).
a highly exergonic process, often proceeds through a
thioester intermediate whose cleavage can then be
coupled to synthesis of ATP. This sequence is of central
H H
importance to the energy metabolism of cells (Chapters
a
10 and 17) and is shown in Fig. 15-6. R C O R C S E
The best known enzyme catalyzing the first step
of this reaction sequence is glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate OH
dehydrogenase which functions in the glycolytic NAD+
Dehydrogenase
sequence (steps a and bof Fig. 10-3). It is present in
b NADH
both prokaryotes and eukaryotes as a tetramer of
identical 36 - to 37-kDa subunits. Three-dimensional E SH S E
structures have been determined for enzyme from (An—SH group from R C
several species, including lobster,47,88E. coli,89 the CoA or some other O
compound may replace
thermophilic bacterium Bacillus stearothermophilus Thioester
E—SH in some instances)
(Fig. 2-13),90–90a and trypanosomes.91 Recall that alde- c P i
hydes are in equilibrium with their covalent hydrates
(Eq. 15-8, step a). Dehydrogenation of such a hydrate
O P
yields an acid (Eq. 15-8, step b) but such a mechanism
H R C
offers no possibility of conserving the energy available
R= C CH2OP
from the reaction. However, during catalysis by glycer- O
aldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase the SH group of OH Acyl phosphate
for glyceraldehyde
Cys 149, in the first step (step a, Fig. 15-6), adds to the Phospho- ADP
3-phosphate dehydrogenase transferase
substrate carbonyl group to form an adduct, a thio-
hemiacetal. This adduct is oxidized by NAD+ to a d ATP
thioester, an S-acyl enzyme (step b), which is then O
cleaved by the same enzyme through a displacement R C
on carbon by an oxygen atom of P
i
(phosphorolysis; O–
stepc). The sulfhydryl group of the enzyme is released
simultaneously and the product, the acyl phosphate
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate, is formed. The imidazole
Figure 15-6 Generation of ATP coupled to oxidation of an
group of His 176 may catalyze both steps a and b.89,92
aldehyde to a carboxylic acid. The most important known
A separate enzyme then transfers the phospho group
example of this sequence is the oxidation of glyceraldehyde
from the 1 position of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to ADP
3-phosphate to 3-phosphoglycerate (Fig. 10-3, steps a and b).
to form ATP and 3-phosphoglycerate (step d). The Other important sequences for “substrate-level” phosphory-
overall sequence of Fig. 15-6 is the synthesis of one lation are shown in Eq. 14-23 and in Fig. 15-16.
mole of ATP coupled to the oxidation of an aldehyde

--- Page 779 ---

776 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Animal tissues also contain aldehyde dehydrogen- CH3 O
ases of a nonspecific type which are thought to act to
–
remove toxic aldehydes from tissues.94,95 Like glycer-
OOC CH2 C CH2 C S CoA
aldehyde 3-phosphate, these enzymes form thioester OH
intermediates as in Fig. 15-6 but which are hydrolyzed
+
2 NADPH + 2H
rather than being converted to acyl phosphates. A
mutation (E487K) in the mitochondrial enzyme occurs 2 NADPH + CoASH
in about 50% of the Asian population. Although the
structural alteration is not at the active site, the enzyme CH3
activity is low. Individuals carrying the mutation are
–
healthy but have an aversion to alcohol, whose con-
OOC CH2 C CH2 CH2OH
sumption causes an elevated blood level of acetalde- OH (15-9)
hyde, facial flushing, dizziness, and other symptoms.
A similar effect is exerted by the drug disulfiram
(Antabuse), which has been used to discourage drink- A related oxidation reaction is catalyzed by
ing and whose metabolites are thought to inhibit alde- glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, the enzyme
hyde dehydrogenase.95 that originally attracted Warburg’s attention and led to
Alcohol dehydrogenases also oxidize aldehydes, the discovery of NADP+. The substrate, the hemiacetal
probably most often as the geminal diol forms, accord- ring form of glucose, is oxidized to a lactone which is
ing to Eq. 15-8. No ATP is formed. The same enzymes then hydrolyzed to 6-phosphogluconate (Eq. 15-10).104a
can catalyze the dismutation of aldehydes, with equal This oxidation of an aldehyde to a carboxylic acid is
numbers of aldehyde molecules going to carboxylic not linked directly to ATP synthesis as in Fig. 15-6.
acid and to the alcohol.96– 98 The ring-opening step ensures that the reaction goes
to completion. This reaction is a major supplier of
NADPH for reductive biosynthesis and the large Gibbs
5. Reduction of Carboxyl Groups energy decrease for the overall reaction ensures that
the ratio [NADPH] / [NADP+] is kept high within
The last two reaction steps in Fig. 15-6, steps c and cells. This is the only source of NADPH for mature
d, are in essence the reverse of the sequence used for erythrocytes and a deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate
synthesis of a thioester such as a fatty acyl coenzyme dehydrogenase is a common cause of drug- and food-
A. Thus, the chemistry by which ATP is generated
during glycolysis and that by which it is utilized in
biosynthesis is nearly the same. Furthermore, a stan- P O
dard biochemical method for reduction of carboxyl
CH2
groups to aldehyde groups is conversion, in an ATP-
O
HO
requiring process, to a thioester followed by reduction
of the thioester (Table 15-1, reaction type C). For example, HO H
the sequence of Fig. 15-6 is reversed during gluconeo- OH
OH
genesis (see Fig. 17-17). The carboxyl group of the
side chain of aspartate can be reduced in two steps to
Glucose 6-phosphate NADP+
form the alcohol homoserine (Figs. 11-3; 24-13). NADPH + H+
The aldehyde generated by reduction of a
thioester is not always released from the enzyme but
P O
may be converted on to the alcohol in a second reduc-
tion step.99 This is the case for 3-hydroxy-3-methyl- CH2
glutaryl-CoA reductase (HMG-CoA reductase), a O O
large 887-residue protein that synthesizes mevalonate O O– HO
HO
(Eq. 15-9).100– 102 This highly regulated enzyme controls C
OH
the rate of synthesis of cholesterol and is a major target
H C OH Lactone
of drugs designed to block cholesterol synthesis. The H2O
structure of a smaller 428-residue bacterial enzyme is HO C H
known.103,104 Aspartate 766 is a probable proton donor
H C OH
in both reduction steps and Glu 558 and His 865 may
act as a catalytic pair that protonates the sulfur of H C OH
coenzyme A.100
CH2OP
6-Phosphogluconate (15-10)

--- Page 780 ---

A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and Dehydrogenases 777
induced hemolytic anemia in human beings. About *H+
400 variant forms of this enzyme are known.105 Like
the sickle cell trait (Box 7-B) some mutant forms of
25
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase appear to confer
resistance to malaria. O
H HS
C
NH2
6. Reduction of Carbon–Carbon Double
HO
Bonds N NADPH
Desmosterol
Neither NADP+ nor NAD+ is a strong enough
*H
oxidant to carry out the dehydrogenation of an acyl-CoA H
(reaction type D of Table 15-1). However, NADPH or CH3
NADH can participate in the opposite reaction. Thus, H
NADPH transfers a hydride ion to the β-carbon of an CH3
unsaturated acyl group during the biosynthesis of Cholesterol (15-11)
fatty acids (Chapter 17) and during elongation of
shorter fatty acids (Chapter 21).106–107b A discovery
of medical importance is that isonicotinyl hydrazide type, hydrogen transfer has been shown to be from the
(INH), the most widely used antituberculosis drug, pro-S position in NADPH directly to C-25 of the sterol.
forms an adduct (of an INH anion or radical) with The proton introduced from the medium (designated
NAD+ of long-chain enoyl-acyl carrier protein by the asterisks in Eq. 15-11) enters trans to the H– ion
reductase(enoyl-ACP reductase).133a,b This enzyme from NADPH. The proton always adds to the more
utilizes NADH in reduction of a C = C double bond electron-rich terminus of the double bond, i.e., it follows
during synthesis of mycolic acids. The same enzyme the Markovnikov rule. This result suggests that proto-
is blocked by triclosan, an antibacterial compound nation of the double bond may precede H– transfer.108
used widely in household products such as antiseptic Additional pyridine nucleotide-dependent dehy-
soaps, toothpastes, cosmetics, fabrics, and toys.133c– e drogenases include glutathione reductase (Figs.
15-10, 15-12), dihydrofolatereductase (Fig. 15-19),
isocitrate dehydrogenase, sn-glycerol-3-phosphate
N
dehydrogenase (Chapter 21), L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase (Chapter 21), retinol dehydrogenase
(Chapter 23), and a bacterial quinone oxidoreduc-
tase.109 Some of these also contain a flavin coenzyme.
C H O
O
C
7. Transient Carbonyl Groups in Catalysis
NH2
Some enzymes contain bound NAD+ which oxi-
N
dizes a substrate alcohol to facilitate a reaction step
H
and is then regenerated. For example, the malolactic
Adduct of isonicotinyl hydrazide
anion with NAD+ enzyme found in some lactic acid bacteria and also in
Ascaris decarboxylates L-malate to lactate (Eq. 15-12).
This reaction is similar to those of isocitrate dehydro-
OH
genase,110 – 112 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase,113
O and the malic enzyme (Eq. 13-45)114 which utilize free
NAD+ to first dehydrogenate the substrate to a bound
oxoacid whose β carbonyl group facilitates decarboxy-
lation. Likewise, the bound NAD+ of the malolactic
Cl Cl Cl
Triclosan
COO– COO–
Less frequently NADPH is used to reduce an
–OOC CH2 C OH + H+ CO2 + H3C C OH
isolated double bond. An example is the hydrogenation
H H
ofdesmosterol by NADPH (Eq. 15-11), the final step
l-Malate l-Lactate
in one of the pathways of biosynthesis of cholesterol
(15-12)
(Fig. 22-7). In this and in other reactions of the same

--- Page 781 ---

778 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
enzyme apparently dehydrogenates the malate to a +
H3N H
bound oxaloacetate which is decarboxylated to pyru-
vate.115 The latter remains in the active site and is –OOC C S CH2 O Adenine
reduced by the bound NADH to lactate which is released
H H
from the enzyme. H 3' H
Another reason for introducing a carbonyl group S-Adenosyl-l-homocysteine
is to form a symmetric intermediate in a reaction that OH OH
inverts the configuration about a chiral center. An
H2O
example is UDP-galactose 4-epimerase, an enzyme
+
that converts UDP-galactose to UDP-glucose (Eq. 15-13; H3N H
Chapter 20) and is essential in the metabolism of galac-
C
HO CH2
O
Adenine
tose in our bodies. The enzyme contains bound NAD+ –OOC SH
H H
and forms a transient 4-oxo intermediate and bound l-Homocysteine H H
3'
NADH. Rotation of the intermediate allows nonstereo-
specific reduction by the NADH, leading to epimeriza- OH OH
tion.116–117a
Adenosine (15-14)
OH
O
OH
CH2 COO– H2O COO–
O
H N N
HO NH NH
OH Urocanate (15-15)
O O O Uridine
P P
–O O –O O mechanism and no obvious role for NAD+. See Frey
OH for a discussion.117
H
CH2
O
HO 8. ADP Ribosylation and Related Reactions
HO of NAD+and NADP+
OH
O O O Uridine The linkage of nicotinamide to ribose in NAD+
P P and NADP+ is easily broken by nucleophilic attack on
–O O –O O (15-13) C-1 of ribose. In Chapter 11 enzyme-catalyzed ADP
ribosylation, which can be shown as in Eq. 15-16, is
discussed briefly. The nucleophilic group –Y from an
The enzyme is a member of the short-chain dehy- ADP-ribosyltransferase carries the ADP-ribosyl group
drogenase group with a catalytic Tyr–Lys pair in the which can then be transferred by a second displace-
active site.118 Another way that formation of an oxo ment onto a suitable nucleophilic acceptor group.121,122
group can assist in epimerization of a sugar is through Hydrolysis (Eq. 15-16, step a) gives free ADP-ribose.123
enolization with nonstereospecific return of a proton Other known products of enzymatic action are indicated
to the intermediate enediol. A third possible mechanism in steps c–f. Poly-(ADP ribosylation) is discussed
of epimerization is through aldol cleavage followed in Chapter 27. The structure of cyclic ADP-ribose
by aldol condensation, with inversion of configuration. (cADPR)124 is shown in Chapter 11, Section E,2. The
In each case the initial creation of an oxo group by acceptor nucleophile is N-1 of the adenine ring which
dehydrogenation is essential. is made more nucleophilic by electron donation from
Bound NAD+ is also present in S-adenosylhomo- the amino group. A similar reaction with ADP ribose
cysteine hydrolase,119,120 which catalyzes the irrevers- (Eq. 15-16, step e) produces a dimeric ADP-ribose
ible reaction of Eq. 15-14. Transient oxidation at the 3 (ADPR) 125 while reaction with free nicotinic acid
2
position of the ribose ring facilitates the reaction. The (stepf) yields, in an overall base exchange, nicotinic
reader can doubtless deduce the function that has acid adenine dinucleotide (NAADP+).126,127 Some
been established for the bound NAD+ in this enzyme. of these compounds, e.g., cADPR, NAADP+, and
However, the role of NAD in the urocanase reaction (ADPR) , are involved in signaling with calcium
2
(Eq. 15-15) is puzzling. This reaction, which is the ions.124
second step in the catabolism of histidine, following
Eq. 14-44, appears simple. However, there is no obvious

--- Page 782 ---

A. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes and Dehydrogenases 779
O the cyanide adduct, whose absorption maximum
is at 327 nm, has been used to introduce deuterium
C NH2
into the para position of the pyridine nucleotides.
Adenine In the adduct, the hydrogen adjacent to the highly
polarized C – N bond is easily dissociated as a proton.
Ribose P P O CH2 N+
Thiolate anions and bisulfite also add. Dithionite ion,
O
S O 2–, can lose SO and acquire a proton to form the
2 4 2
Y-Enzyme
sulfoxylate ion HSO – which also adds to the 4 position
(ADP-ribosyl 2
HO OH transferase of the NAD+ ring.130 The resulting adduct is unstable
or cyclase) and loses SO to give NADH + H+. Addition can also
NAD + 2
occur at the two ortho positions. The adducts of HO–
to the 4 position of NAD+ are stable but those to the
Nicotinamide 2 position undergo ring opening (Eq. 15-18) in base-
catalyzed reactions which are followed by further
degradation.128,131
ADP-ribosyl-Y-Enzyme
Nicotinic acid
a
HO Base exchange O O
2
b f
ADP-ribose + C NH2 C NH2
NAADP
c ADP- (Nicotinic OH –
e ribose acid adenine
Mono-ADP ribosylation d dinucleotide) OH
(Chapter 11) Dimeric N N OH
ADP-ribose H
Poly-(ADP ribosylation) (ADPR) R R (15-18)
2
(Chapter 27)
Cyclic ADP-ribose
(cADPR, Chapter 11) (15-16)
Another base-catalyzed reaction is the addition of
enolate anions derived from ketones to the 4 position
of the pyridine nucleotides (Eq. 15-19). The adducts
9. The Varied Chemistry of the Pyridine undergo ring closure and in the presence of oxygen
Nucleotides are converted slowly to fluorescent materials. While
forming the basis for a useful analytical method for
Despite the apparent simplicity of their structures, determination of NAD+ (using 2-butanone), these
the chemistry of the nicotinamide ring in NAD+ and reactions also have created a troublesome enzyme
NADP+ is surprisingly complex.128,129 NAD+ is ex- inhibitor from traces of acetone present in commercial
tremely unstable in basic solutions, whereas NADH NADH.132
is just as unstable in slightly acidic media. These prop-
erties, together with the ability of NAD+ to undergo
CH3
condensation reactions with other compounds, have
sometimes caused serious errors in interpretation of
experiments and may be of significance to biological O O
function. C NH2 O
H
C
NH2
Addition to NAD+ and NADP+. Many nucleo-
–CH2 C CH3 O
philic reagents add reversibly at the para (or 4) position
N+ N
(Eq. 15-17) to form adducts having structures resem-
bling those of the reduced coenzymes. Formation of R R
CH3 CH3
This proton is
easily dissociated
in the CN– adduct
O O N N
Nucleophile, Y– Y H
C NH2 C NH2 C C
O O2 OH
N+ N N N+
R R Adduct R R
(15-17) (15-19)
Fluorescent

--- Page 783 ---

780 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
The reactions of Eq. 15-19 occur nonenzymatically the 6(R) adduct of Eq. 15-20, where Y is – OH. In an
only under the influence of strong base but dehydro- ATP-dependent reaction an enzyme from yeast recon-
genases often catalyze similar condensations relatively verts NADH-X to NADH.136
rapidly and reversibly. Pyruvate inhibits lactate dehy- Mercury (II) ions can add in place of H+ in the first
drogenase, 2-oxoglutarate inhibits glutamate dehydro- step of Eq. 15-20 and subsequent reactions similar to
genase, and ketones inhibit a short-chain alcohol those promoted by acid can occur.137
dehydrogenase in this manner.133,69a
Other reactions of pyridine nucleotides. Alka-
Modification of NADH in acid. Reduced pyri- line hexacyanoferrate (III) oxidizes NAD+ and NADP+
dine nucleotides are destroyed rapidly in dilute HCl to 2-,4-, and 6-pyridones. The 6-pyridone of N-methyl-
and more slowly at pH 7 in reactions catalyzed by buffer nicotinamide is a well-known excretion product of
acids.128,131,134 Apparently the reduced nicotinamide nicotinic acid in mammals. Reoxidation of NADH and
ring is first protonated at C-5, after which a nucleophile NADPH to NAD+ and NADP+ can be accomplished
Y– adds at the 6 position (Eq. 15-20). The nucleophile with hexacyanoferrate (III), quinones, and riboflavin
may be OH–, and the adduct may undergo further
reactions. For example, water may add to the other
double bond and the ring may open on either side of O
the nitrogen. The glycosidic linkage can be isomerized
from β to α or can be hydrolytically cleaved. The early
C NH2
steps in the modification reaction are partially revers-
ible, but the overall sequence is irreversible. One of
O N
the products, which has been characterized by crystal
structure determination, is shown in Eq. 15-20.128,135 It R
can arise if the group Y of Eq. 15-20 is the C-2' hydroxyl 6-Pyridone
of the ribose ring and if the configuration of the glyco-
sidic linkage is inverted (anomerized).
but not by H O or O . However, O does react at
2 2 2 2
neutral pH with uptake of a proton to form a peroxide
H H O H H O derivative of NADH.138 When heated in 0.1 N alkali at
H 100°C for 5 min, NAD+ is hydrolyzed to nicotinamide
C NH2 C NH2
H+ H and adenosine-diphosphate-ribose.
Treatment of NAD+ with nitrous acid deaminates
the adenine ring. The resulting deamino NAD+ as
N Y– N
+ well as synthetic analogs containing the following
groups in place of the carboxyamide have been used
H H O O O O S
H
H
C NH2 C CH3, C H, C O–, and C NH2
H
N widely in enzyme studies. In fact, almost every part
Y
of the coenzyme molecule has been varied systemati-
Adduct
cally and the effects on the chemical and enzymatic
properties have been investigated.139– 141 “Caged”
NAD+ and NADP+ have also been made.142 These
O O
H CONH2
compounds do not react as substrates until they are
N H released (“uncaged”) by photolytic action of a laser
AMP P H
O – H H beam (see Chapter 23).
O OH O H H H
An acid modification product from NADH
(15-20)
B. The Flavin Coenzymes
The foregoing reactions have attracted interest Flavin adenine diphosphate (FAD, flavin adenine
because glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, dinucleotide) and riboflavin 5'-monophosphate
in a side reaction, converts NADH to a substance (FMN, flavin mononucleotide), whose structures are
referred to as NADH-X which has been shown to be shown in Fig. 15-7, are perhaps the most versatile of all

--- Page 784 ---

781
Riboflavin 5’-phosphate or FMN AMP
O O– NH2
O P O O–
N
5' O P N
H2C
OH
O
C N
H H O N
C
HO OH
C
H OH OH
H2C 1' R
9 10 1 H
H3C N N O N N O Figure 15-7 The flavin
8 10a 2 + 2[H] coenzymes flavin adenine
Riboflavin
4a NH NH dinucleotide (FAD) and
H3C 7
6
N
5 4
3
H
N r
(F
ib
M
of
N
la
)
v
.
i
D
n
o
5
t
'-
t
p
ed
h o
li
s
n
p
e
h
s
a
e
te
n-
O O close the region that is
Oxidized form FAD or FMN Reduced form FADH2 or FMNH2 altered upon reduction.
32 the oxidation coenzymes. The name flavin adenine
dinucleotide is not entirely appropriate because the
D-ribityl group is not linked to the riboflavin in a
28
glycosidic linkage. Hemmerich suggested that FAD
be called flavin adenine diphosphate.143
24 The attention of biochemists was first attracted to
flavins as a result of their color and fluorescence. The
study of spectral properties of flavins (Fig. 15-8) has
20
been of importance in understanding these coenzymes.
The biochemical role of the flavin coenzymes was
16 first recognized through studies of the “old yellow
enzyme”144,145 which was shown by Theorell to contain
12 riboflavin 5'-phosphate. By 1938, FAD was recognized
as the coenzyme of a different yellow protein, D-amino
acid oxidase of kidney tissue. Like the pyridine nucle-
8
otides, the new flavin coenzymes were reduced by
A dithionite to nearly colorless dihydro forms (Figs. 15-7
4 B and 15-8) revealing the chemical basis for their function
C
as hydrogen carriers.
Flavins are also among the natural light receptors
0
18 22 26 30 34 38 42 46 and display an interesting and much studied photo-
Wave number, cm–1× 10-3 chemistry (Fig. 3-5).143 Flavins may function in some
photoresponses of plants, and they serve as light
500 400 350 300 250 220 emitters in bacterial bioluminescence (Chapter 23).146,147
Three facts account for the need of cells for both
Wavelength, nm
the flavin and pyridine nucleotide coenzymes: (1)
Flavins are usually stronger oxidizing agents than is
NAD+. This property fits them for a role in the electron
Figure 15-8 Absorption spectrum of neutral, uncharged
transport chains of mitochondria where a sequence
riboflavin (A), the riboflavin anion (B), and reduced to the
dihydro form (Fig. 15-7) by the action of light in the presence of increasingly more powerful oxidants is needed and
of EDTA (C). A solution of 1.1 x 10–4M riboflavin containing makes them ideal oxidants in a variety of other dehy-
0.01 M EDTA was placed 11.5 cm from a 40-W incandescent drogenations. (2) Flavins can be reduced either by
lamp for 30 min. one- or two-electron processes. This enables them to
participate in oxidation reactions involving free radicals
and in reactions with metal ions. (3) Reduced flavins
3-01
×
,tneiciffeoc
noitcnitxe
raloM
B. The Flavin Coenzymes

--- Page 785 ---

782 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
are “autooxidizable,” i.e., they can be reoxidized directly
2. Typical Dehydrogenation Reactions
and rapidly by O , a property shared with relatively
2 Catalyzed by Flavoproteins
few other organic substances. For example, NADH
and NADPH are not spontaneously reoxidized by
The functions of flavoprotein enzymes are numer-
oxygen. Autooxidizability allows flavins of some
ous and diversified.151– 153a A few of them are shown
enzymes to pass electrons directly to O and also pro-
2 in Table 15-2 and are classified there as follows: (A)
vides a basis for the functioning of flavins in hydroxy-
oxidation of hemiacetals to lactones, (B) oxidation
lation reactions.
of alcohols to aldehydes or ketones, (C) oxidation of
amines to imines, (D) oxidation of carbonyl compounds
or carboxylic acids to α,β-unsaturated compounds,
1. Flavoproteins and Their Reduction
(E) oxidation of NADH and NADPH in electron trans-
Potentials
port chains, and (F) oxidation of dithiols to disulfides
or the reverse reaction. Three-dimensional structures
Flavin coenzymes are usually bound tightly to
are known for enzymes of each of these types.
proteins and cycle between reduced and oxidized states
Reactions of types A–C could equally well be
while attached to the same protein molecule. In a free
catalyzed by pyridine nucleotide-requiring dehydro-
unbound coenzyme the redox potential is determined
genases. Recall that D-glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
by the structures of the oxidized and reduced forms of
genase uses NADP+ as the oxidant (Eq. 15-10). The
the couple. Both riboflavin and the pyridine nucleotides
first product is the lactone which is hydrolyzed to
contain aromatic ring systems that are stabilized by
6-phosphogluconic acid. The similar reaction of free
resonance. Part of this resonance stabilization is lost
glucose (Table 15-2, reaction type A) is catalyzed by
upon reduction. The value of E°’ depends in part upon
fungalglucose oxidase, a 580-residue FAD-containing
the varying amounts of resonance in the oxidized and
enzyme.154–155 A bacterial cholesterol oxidase has a
reduced forms. The structures of the coenzymes have
similar structure.156 The important plant enzyme
apparently evolved to provide values of E°’ appropriate
glycolate oxidase is a dimer containing riboflavin
for their biological functions.
5'-phosphate.157– 159 It catalyzes a reaction of type B,
The relative strengths of binding of oxidized
which plays an important role in photorespiration
and reduced flavin coenzymes to a protein also have
(Chapter 23). Amino acidoxidases (reaction type C)
strong effects upon the reduction potential of the
are well-known. The peroxisomal D-amino acid oxidase
coenzyme.148 If the oxidized form is bound weakly,
from kidney was the source from which Warburg first
but the reduced form is bound tightly, a bound flavin
isolated FAD and has been the subject of much investi-
will have a greater tendency to stay in the reduced
gation of mechanism and structure.153,160– 163 Many
form than it did when free. The reduction potential
E°’ will be less negative than it is for the free flavin-
snake venoms contain an active 140-kDa L-amino-acid
oxidase which contains FAD. Flavin-dependent amine
dihydroflavin couple. On the other hand, if the oxi-
oxidases, important in the human body, catalyze the
dized form of the flavin is bound more tightly by the
related reaction with primary, secondary, or tertiary
protein than is the reduced form, E°’ will be more
amines and in which a carboxyl group need not be
negative and the flavoenzyme will be a less powerful
present.164– 166a Reduced flavin produced by all of
oxidizing agent. In fact, the values of E°’ at pH 7 for
these oxidases is reoxidized with molecular oxygen
flavoproteins span a remarkably wide range from – 0.49
and hydrogen peroxide is the product. Nature has
to + 0.19 V. The state of protonation of the reduced
chosen to forego the use of an electron transport chain
flavin when bound to the enzyme will also have a
(Fig. 10-5), giving up the possible gain of ATP in favor
major effect on the oxidation–reduction potential.
of simplicity and a more direct reaction with oxygen.
For example, acyl-CoA dehydrogenases are thought to
In some cases there is specific value to the organism in
form an anionic species of reduced FAD (FADH–)
forming H O (see Chapter 18).
which is tightly bound to the protein.149 2 2
In contrast to the flavin oxidases, flavin dehydro-
Every flavoprotein accepts electrons from the
genases pass electrons to carriers within electron
substrate that it oxidizes and passes these electrons
transport chains and the flavin does not react with O .
on to another substrate, an oxidant. In the following 2
Examples include a bacterial trimethylaminedehy-
sections we will consider for several enzymes how the
drogenase (Fig. 15-9) which contains an iron–sulfur
electrons may get into the flavin from the oxidizable
cluster that serves as the immediate electron accep-
substrate and how they may flow out of the flavin into
tor167– 169 and yeast flavocytochrome b , a lactate
the final electron acceptor. 2
dehydrogenase that passes electrons to a built-in heme
group which can then pass the electrons to an external
acceptor, another heme in cytochrome c.170– 173 Like
glycolate oxidase, these enzymes bind their flavin
coenzyme at the ends of 8-stranded αβ barrels similar

--- Page 786 ---

B. The Flavin Coenzymes 783
BOX 15-B RIBOFLAVIN
CHOH Human beings require about 1.5 mg of riboflavin
H 2
per day. Because of its wide distribution in food, a
C
HO H deficiency, which affects skin and eyes, is rarely seen.
C Riboflavin is produced commercially in large quantities
H
OH
C by fungi such as Eremothecium asbyii which, apparently
HO because of some metabolic anomaly, produce the vita-
CH
2 min in such copious amounts that it crystallizes in the
H 3 C N N O culture medium.
When taken up by the body, riboflavin is converted
into its coenzyme forms (Chapter 25) and any excess is
NH
HC N quickly excreted in the urine. Urine also contains smaller
3
amounts of metabolites. The ribityl group may be cut
O by the action of intestinal bacteria acting on riboflavin
before it is absorbed. The resulting 10-hydroxyethyl
The bright orange-yellow color and brilliant green- flavin may sometimes be a major urinary product.c,d
ish fluorescence of riboflavin first attracted the attention The related 10-formylmethyl flavin is also excreted,c as
of chemists. Blyth isolated the vitamin from whey in are small amounts of 7α- and 8α- hydroxyriboflavins,
1879 and others later obtained the same fluorescent, apparently formed in the body by hydroxylation. These
yellow compound from eggs, muscle, and urine. All of may be degraded farther to the 7α- and 8α- carboxylic
these substances, referred to as flavins because of their acids of lumichrome (riboflavin from which the ribityl
yellow color, were eventually recognized as identical. side chain is totally missing).e A riboflavin glucoside
The structure of riboflavin was established in 1933 by R. has also been found in rat urine.f
Kuhn and associates, who had isolated 30 mg of the The choroid layer of the eye (behind the retina) in
pure material from 30 kg of dried albumin from 10,000 many animals contains a high concentration of free
eggs. The intense fluorescence assisted in the final stages riboflavin. Cats’ eyes also contain a large amount of
of purification. The vitamin was synthesized in 1935 by 7α-hydroxyriboflavin (nekoflavin), as do their livers.g
P. Karrer.a Nekoflavin is also present in human blood.h Hen egg
Riboflavin, a yellow solid, has a low solubility of white contains a 219-residue riboflavin-binding protein
~ 100 mg / l at 25°C. Three crystalline forms are known. whose functions are thought to be storage of the vitamin
One of these, the “readily soluble form,” is ten times and delivery to the developing embryo.i– k Most of the
more soluble than the others and can be used to prepare riboflavin in human blood is bound to proteins such
metastable solutions of higher concentration. One crys- as albumin and immunoglobulins. However, during
talline form is platelike and occurs naturally in the pregnancy a riboflavin-binding protein similar to that
tapetum (Box 13-C) of the nocturnal lemur. of the chicken appears, apparently to carry riboflavin to
Discovery of the role of riboflavin in biological the fetus.j
oxidation was an outgrowth of biochemists’ interest in Riboflavin is stable to heat but is extremely sensitive
respiration. In the 1920s Warburg provided evidence to light, a fact of some nutritional significance. Do not
that oxygen reacted with an iron-containing respiration leave bottled milk in the sunshine (see Fig. 15-8)! Many
catalyst and it was shown that the dye methylene blue products of photolysis are formed (Fig. 3-5). Among
could often substitute for oxygen as an oxidant (Box 18-A). them is lumichrome.
Oxidation of glucose 6-phosphate by methylene blue
within red blood cells required both a “ferment” (en- a Yagi, K. (1990) in Flavins and Flavoproteins (Curti, B., Ronchi, S.,
zyme) and a “coferment,” later identified as NADP+. and Zanetti, G., eds), pp. 3 –16, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin
b Kohli, R. M., and Massey, V. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 32763–
A yellow protein, isolated from yeast, was found to
32770
have the remarkable property of being decolorized by c Owen, E. C., West, D. W., and Coates, M. E. (1970) Br. J. Nutr.24,
the reducing system of glucose 6-phosphate plus the 259–267
protein and coferment from red blood cells. d Roughead, Z. K., and McCormick, D. B. (1991) European Journal
Warburg and Christian showed that the color of this of Clinical Nutrition45, 299–307
e Ohkawa, H., Ohishi, N., and Yagi, K. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258,
old yellow enzyme came from a flavin and proposed
5623–5628
that its cyclic reduction and reoxidation played a role
f Ohkawa, H., Ohishi, N., and Yagi, K. (1983) J. Nutr. Sci. Vitami-
in cellular oxidation. When NADP+ was isolated the nol.29, 515–522
proposal was extended to encompass a respiratory g Matsui, K., and Kasai, S. (1996) J. Biochem.119, 441–447
chain. The two hydrogen carriers NADP+ and flavin h Zempleni, J., Galloway, J. R., and McCormick, D. B. (1995) Int. J.
would work in sequence to link dehydrogenation of Vitamins Nutr. Res.66, 151–157
i Matsui, K., Sugimoto, K., and Kasai, S. (1982) J. Biochem.91,
glucose to the iron-containing catalyst that interacted
469–475
with oxygen. While we still do not know the physiolog-
j Miura, R., Tojo, H., Fujii, S., Yamano, T., Miyake, Y., (1984) J.
ical function of the old yellow enzyme,b the concept of Biochem.96, 197–206
respiratory chain was correct. k Monaco, H. L. (1997) EMBO J.16, 1475–1483

--- Page 787 ---

784 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Figure 15-9 Stereoscopic view of the
large domain (residues 1– 383) of tri-
methylamine dehydrogenase from a
methylotrophic bacterium. The helices
andβ strands of the (αβ) barrel are drawn
8
in heavy lines as are the FMN (center) and
the FeS iron–sulfur cluster at the lower
4 4
right edge. The α/β loop to which it is
bound is drawn with dashed lines. The
733-residue protein also contains two other
structural domains. From Lim et al.150
Courtesy of F. S. Mathews.
to that of triose phosphate isomerase (Fig. 2-28). Flav- potential (E°’, pH 7 = –0.32 V) is inappropriate. The
ocytochrome b has an additional domain which car- more powerfully oxidizing flavin system is needed.
2
ries the bound heme. Two additional domains (However, the reverse reaction, hydrogenation of a
of trimethylamine dehydrogenase have a topology C = C bond, is often carried out biologically with a
resembling that of the FAD- and NADH-binding reduced pyridine nucleotide.) Dehydrogenation
domains of glutathione reductase shown in Fig. 15-10. reactions of this type are important in the energy
A bacterial mandelate dehydrogenase is structurally metabolism of aerobic cells. For example, the first
and mechanistically closely related to the glycolate oxidative step in the β oxidation of fatty acids (Fig. 17-1)
oxidase family.173a is the α,β dehydrogenation of fatty acyl-CoA deriva-
Reaction type D of Table 15-2, the dehydrogenation tives. The pro-R hydrogen atoms are removed from
of an acyl-coenzyme A (CoA), could not be accomplished both the α- and β-carbon atoms to create the double
by a pyridine nucleotide system because the reduction bond (Table 15-2, type C).
TABLE 15-2
Some Dehydrogenation Reactions Catalyzed by Flavoproteinsa
–2[H] HO
AA. d-Glucose Gluconolactone 2 d-Gluconic acid
Glucose oxidase
(See Eq. 17-12 for structures in a closely related reaction.)
–2[H]
BB. HOOC CH2 OH HOOC CH O
Glycolate oxidase
H
–2[H] HO
C C . R C COOH R C COOH 2 R C COOH + NH
3
NH2 NH O
Amino acid oxidases
O O
–2[H]
DD. R CH2 CH2 C S CoA R CH CH C S CoA
Acyl-CoA dehydrogenases
–2[H]
EE. NADH (or NADPH) + H+ NAD+ (NADP+)
O O
C –2[H] C
N R N R
H GSH H
FE. HS SH S S
Dihydrolipoic acid amide
a These are shown as removal of two H atoms [H] and may occur by transfer of H–, H+ + e–, or 2H+ + 2e–. They represent reaction type 9C of the
table inside the back cover.

--- Page 788 ---

B. The Flavin Coenzymes 785
Figure 15-10 The three-
dimensional structure of
glutathione reductase. Bound
FAD is shown. NAD+ binds
to a separate domain below
the FAD. The two cysteine
residues forming the reduc-
ible disulfide loop are indicat-
ed by dots. From Thieme et
al.182
Animal mitochondria contain several different of flavoproteins that act on dithiols or disulfides.
acyl-CoA dehydrogenases with differing preferences The reaction catalyzed by the first of these is illustrated
for chain length or branching pattern.174–177 A related in Table 15-2 (reaction type F). The other two enzymes
reaction that occurs in the citric acid cycle is dehydro- usually promote the reverse type of reaction, the re-
genation of succinate to fumarate by succinate dehy- duction of a disulfide to two SH groups by NADPH
drogenase (Eq. 15-21).177a The dehydrogenation also (Eq. 15-22). Glutathione reductase splits its substrate
involvestrans removal of one of the two hydrogens, into two halves while reduction of the small 12-kDa
onepro-S hydrogen and one pro-R.178 The enzyme has protein thioredoxin (Box 15-C) simply opens a loop
a large 621-residue flavoprotein subunit and a smaller in its peptide chain. The reduction of lipoic acid opens
27-kDa iron–sulfur protein subunit.179– 181 the small disulfide-containing 5-membered ring in that
molecule. Each of these flavoproteins also contains
within its structure a reducible disulfide group that
–OOC HS
Succinate
–OOC H participates in catalysis.
C
HR dehydrogenase
–2[H]
HS HR COO– H COO– G S S G NADPH + H +
(15-21) Oxidized glutathione
Glutathione reductase
Neither the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases nor succinate
+
dehydrogenase react with O . Acyl-CoA dehydroge- 2 G SH NADP
2
nases pass the electrons removed from substrates to Glutathione
(See Box 11-B for structure) (15-22)
another flavoprotein, a soluble electron transferring
flavoprotein (p. 794), which carries the electrons to
an iron–sulfur protein embedded in the inner mito- Each 50-kDa chain of the dimeric glutathione
chondrial membrane where they enter the electron- reductase is organized into three structural domains
transport chain. Succinate dehydrogenase as well as (Fig. 15-10).191– 193 Two of the domains each contain
NADH dehydrogenase (Table 15-2, reaction E)183 are a nucleotide-binding motif resembling those of the
embedded in the same membrane and also pass their NAD+-dependent dehydrogenases. One of these
electrons to iron–sulfur clusters and eventually to domains binds NADPH and the other FAD. The latter
oxygen through the electron transport chain of the mito- domain also contains the reducible disulfide which is
chondria (Chapter 18). Fumarate reductase184 has formed from Cys 58 and Cys 63. It serves as an inter-
properties similar to those of succinate dehydrogenase mediate hydrogen carrier which can in turn reduce
but catalyzes the opposite reaction in “anaerobic respi- oxidized glutathione. A trypanothione reductase
ration” (Chapter 18),184 as do similar reductases of from trypanosomes and related flagellated protozoa
bacteria185 and of some eukaryotes.186 has a similar structure and acts on trypanothione,
Dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (lipoamide dehy- which replaces glutathione in these organisms.188,194-196
drogenase), glutathione reductase, and human Because it is unique to trypanosomes, this enzyme is
thioredoxin reductase187– 190 belong to a subclass a target for design of drugs against these organisms

--- Page 789 ---

786 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
BOX 15-C THIOREDOXIN AND GLUTAREDOXIN
The small proteins thioredoxin and glutaredoxin The resulting thiol pair of the reduced thioredoxin
are present in relatively high concentrations in bac- is the reductant used for ribonucleotide reductase
teria, plants, and animals. For example, thioredoxin (Chapter 16). The standard redox potential E°’ of
has a concentration of 15 µM in E. coli. Both proteins E. coli thioredoxin is – 0.27 V, appropriately low for
were discovered by their role as reducing agents in coupling to the NADPH / NADP+ system.
conversion of the ribonucleotides AMP, GMP, CMP, Reduced thioredoxin has a variety of functions.h
and UMP to the corresponding 2-deoxyribonucleo- It is the reductant for conversion of methionine sulf-
tides which are needed for synthesis of DNA:a,b oxide to methionine in bacteria, for reduction of
sulfate in yeast, and for additional specific enzymatic
reactions.b,h However, its major function may be to
AMP Thioredoxin-(SH) 2 NAD(P)+ reduce disulfide linkages in various proteins.i Several
Thioredoxin reductase photosynthetic enzymes are activated by reduction
of disulfide linkages via photosynthetically generated
2’-Deoxy-AMP Thioredoxin-S NAD(P)H + H+
2 reduced ferredoxin and thioredoxinj,k (Chapter 23).
Reduced thioredoxin may also play a similar role
The redox group in thioredoxin is a disulfide in nonphotosynthetic cells. It may reduce mixed
loop located on a protrusion at one end of the mole- disulfides such as those formed between glutathione
cule. In the 108-residue E. coli thioredoxin, as well and proteins (Box 11-B).l– n Thioredoxin may partici-
as in the 105-residue human thioredoxin,c it is formed pate in regulation of the level of nitric oxide (NO)
by cysteines 32 and 35 which are present in the in tissuesm and it is needed in the assembly of fila-
conserved sequence CGPC. The – SH groups of mentous bacteriophages.b,o For reasons that are
these two interacting cysteines have pK values of not clear, thioredoxin is also an essential subunit
a
~ 6.9 and 7.5, the former belonging predominantly for a virus-induced DNA polymerase formed in
to the more exposed Cys 32.d The buried Asp 26 E. coli following infection by bacteriophage T7 (see
carboxyl group, which may be a proton donor to Chapter 27).
Cys 35 during reduction of the disulfide form,e It was a surprise to discover that a mutant of
forms a salt bridge with the Lys 57 – NH +and E. coli lacking thioredoxin can still reduce ribonu-
3
has a high pK of ~ 7.4.e– g cleotides. In the mutant cells thioredoxin is replaced
a
by glutaredoxin, whose active site disulfide linkage
is reduced by glutathione rather than directly by
NADPH. Oxidized glutathione is, in turn, reduced
by NADPH and glutathione reductase. Thus, the
end result is the same with respect to ribonucleotide
reduction.
Glutaredoxin-S 2G—SH NAD(P)+
2
Glutathione reductase
Glutaredoxin-(SH) G—S—S—G NADPH + H+
2
However, the two proteins have significantly differ-
ent specificities and functions. The disulfide loop
in glutaredoxin, whose eukaryotic forms are often
calledthioltransferases,p has the sequence CPYC.
Although glutaredoxins are weaker reductants of
OxidizedE. coli thioredoxin. From Langsetmo et al.f mixed disulfides of proteins with glutathione than
are thioredoxins,q– s they are more specific.
Both thioredoxin and glutaredoxin are members
The pK assignments, which have been contro- of a larger group of thiol:disulfide oxidoreductases
a
versial, are discussed in Chapter 7. This disulfide which are found in all known organisms. In E. coli
loop is reduced by NADPH through the action of there are one thioredoxin, three different gluta-
the flavoprotein enzyme thioredoxin reductase. redoxins,h,t and the periplasmic protein disulfide

--- Page 790 ---

B. The Flavin Coenzymes 787
BOX 15-C (continued)
isomerases DsbA and DsbC, which were discussed gLadbury, J. E., Wynn, R., Hellinga, H. W., and Sturtevant, J. M.
in Chapter 10.u– w Similar enzymes are found in the (1993)Biochemistry32, 7526–7530
hGvakharia, B. O., Hanson, E., Koonin, E. K., and Mathews, C.
endoplasmic reticulum of eukaryotic cells.u,x Like
K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 15307–15310
thioredoxins, they contain disulfide loops which iThomas, J. A., Poland, B., and Honzatko, R. (1995) Arch.
contain the sequences CGHC and CGYC as well as Biochem. Biophys.319, 1–9
CPHC. Thioredoxin reductase itself also can keep jCapitani, G., Markovic-Housley, Z., DelVal, G., Morris, M.,
Jansonius, J. N., and Schürmann, P. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.302,
cytoplasmic bacterial proteins reduced.y Redox
135–154
potentials vary within this family of proteins:n,s,z,aa kBuchanan, B. B., Schürmann, P., Decottignies, P., and Lozano,
R. M. (1994) Arch. Biochem. Biophys.314, 257–260
E°’, pH 7 lWynn, R., Cocco, M. J., and Richrds, F. M. (1995) Biochemistry
34, 11807–11813
mNikitovic, D., and Holmgren, A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271,
Thioredoxins –.27 V 19180–19185
nPrinz, W. A., Åslund, F., Holmgren, A., and Beckwith, J. (1997)
Glutaredoxins –.20 to –.23 V
J. Biol. Chem.272, 15661– 15667
Protein disulfide isomerase –.18 V oRussel, M., and Model, P. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82,
29–33
DsbA –.09 to –.12 V pSrinivasan, U., Mieyal, P. A., and Mieyal, J. J. (1997)
Biochemistry36, 3199–3206
These differences are correlated with differing func- qKatti, S. K., Robbins, A. H., Yang, Y., and Wells, W. W. (1995)
Protein Sci.4, 1998–2005
tions. The intracellular reduced thioredoxins are
rGravina, S. A., and Mieyal, J. J. (1993) Biochemistry32,
thermodynamically the best reductants of disulfide
336–3376
linkages in proteins and they help keep intracellular sNikkola, M., Gleason, F. K., and Eklund, H. (1993) J. Biol.
proteins reduced. Glutaredoxin can be reduced Chem.268, 3845–3849
tÅslund, F., Nordstrand, K., Berndt, K. D., Nikkola, M.,
efficiently by reduced glutathione or by NADPH
Bergman, T., Ponstingl, H., Jörnvall, H., Otting, G., and
and glutathione reductase and can, in turn, reduce
Holmgren, A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 6736–6745
cysteine and the oxidized form of vitamin C, uFreedman, R. B., Hirst, T. R., and Tuite, M. F. (1994) Trends
dehydroascorbic acid (Box 18-D).bb,cc The peri- Biochem. Sci.19, 331–335
vRietsch, A., Belin, D., Martin, N., and Beckwith, J. (1996) Proc.
plasmic bacterial proteins DsbA and DsbC have the
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 13048–13053
highest redox potentials and an unusually low first wDarby, N. J., and Creighton, T. E. (1995) Biochemistry34,
pK for the dithiol pair in their thioredoxinlike 16770–16780
a
domains.aa The basis for these properties has been xKanaya, E., Anaguchi, H., and Kikuchi, M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
269, 4273–4278
hard to understand but is consistent with their role
yDerman, A. I., Prinz, W. A., Belin, D., and Beckwith, J. (1993)
in assisting formation of disulfide bridges in extra-
Science262, 1744–1747
cellular proteins and with the role of the related zChivers, P. T., Prehoda, K. E., and Raines, R. T. (1997)
protein disulfide isomerase in the ER.u,dd–ff These Biochemistry36, 4061–4066
aaJacobi, A., Huber-Wunderlich, M., Hennecke, J., and
disulfide exchanges are nucleophilic displacement
Glockshuber, R. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 21692–21699
reactions (Chapter 12). bbWells, W. W., Xu, D. P., Yang, Y., and Rocque, P. A. (1990)
J. Biol. Chem.265, 15361–15364
aHolmgren, A. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, 26–29 ccBischoff, R., Lepage, P., Jaquinod, M., Cauet, G., Acker-Klein,
bHolmgren, A. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 13963–13966 M., Clesse, D., Laporte, M., Bayol, A., Van Dorsselaer, A., and
cForman-Kay, J. D., Clore, G. M., Wingfield, P. T., and Roitsch, C. (1993) Biochemistry32, 725–734
ddHwang, C., Sinskey, A. J., and Lodish, H. F. (1992) Science257,
Gronenborn, A. M. (1991) Biochemistry30, 2685–2698
dDyson, H. J., Jeng, M.-F., Tennant, L. L., Slaby, I., Lindell, M., 1496–1502
eeRuoppolo, M., Freedman, R. B., Pucci, P., and Marino, G.
Cui, D.-S., Kuprin, S., and Holmgren, A. (1997) Biochemistry36,
(1996)Biochemistry35, 13636–13646
2622–2636
eJeng, M.-F., and Dyson, H. J. (1996) Biochemistry35, 1–6 ffCouprie, J., Vinci, F., Dugave, C., Quéméneur, E., and
fLangsetmo, K., Fuchs, J. A., and Woodward, C. (1991) Mourtiez, M. (2000) Biochemistry39, 6732–6742
Biochemistry30, 7603–7609
which cause such terrible diseases as African sleeping disulfide loop corresponding to that in glutathione
sickness and Chagas disease.195,197 reductase is present in this enzyme but there is also
Another flavoprotein constructed on the glutathione a second pair of cysteines nearby. All of these may
reductase pattern is the bacterial plasmid-encoded participate in binding and reduction of Hg2+.198–199a
mercuric reductase which reduces the highly toxic
Hg2+ to volatile elemental mercury, Hg0. A reducible

--- Page 791 ---

788 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
ribityl—P—P—adenosine
3. More Flavoproteins Peptide
(as in FAD)
chain δ1 ε2
Flavoproteins function in virtually
N N H2C N N O
every area of metabolism and we have O C
considered only a small fraction of the NH
HC CH2
total number. Here are a few more. H3C N
HN
Flavin-dependent reductases use hydrogen
O
atoms from NADH or NADPH to reduce
Covalently bound modified FAD
many specific substances or classes of com-
of succinate dehydrogenase
pounds. The FAD-containing ferredoxin:
NADP+ oxidoreductase catalyzes the reduc-
tion of free NADP+ by reduced ferredoxin generated in has been isolated from a bacterial electron-transferring
the chloroplasts of green leaves.200,201 Similar enzymes, flavoprotein.225 Commercial FAD may contain some
some of which utilize reduced flavodoxins, are found in riboflavin 5'-pyrophosphate which activates some
bacteria.202,203 The FMN-containing subunit of NADH: flavoproteins and inhibits others.226
ubiquinone oxidoreductase is an essential link in the Methanogenic bacteria contain a series of unique
mitochondrial electron transport chain for oxidation of coenzymes (Section F) among which is coenzyme
NADH in plants and animals183,204,205 and for related F , a 5-deazaflavin substituted by H at position 7
420
processes in bacteria. Glutamate synthase, a key and– OH at position 8 (8-hydroxy-7,8-didemethyl-5-
enzyme in the nitrogen metabolism of plants and deazariboflavin).227,228
microorganisms, uses electrons from NADPH to reduce
2-oxoglutarate to glutamate in a complex glutamine-
d
bo
ep
th
e n
F
d
M
e
N
nt
a
p
n
ro
d
c
F
e
A
ss
D
(s
a
e
n
e
d
F i
t
g
h
.
r
2
e
4
e
- 5
d
)
i
.
f f
T
er
h
e
e
n
e
t
n
ir
z
o
y
n
m
–
e
s u
co
lf
n
u
t
r
ains –O O CH3
H
O CO2 –
clusters.205a Flavin reductases use NADH or NADPH P N
O O N
to reduce free riboflavin, FMN, or FAD needed for H
various purposes206,206a including emission of light by H
CH2 O CO2 –
–OOC
C
luminous bacteria.207 They provide electrons to many HO H
enzymes that react with O such as the cytochromes C
P450208,209 and nitric oxide 2 synthase (Chapter 18). H OH
C
An example is adrenodoxin reductase (see chapter HO
banner, p. 764), which passes electrons from NADPH
CH2
to cytochrome P450 via the small redox protein adreno-
HO N N O
doxin. This system functions in steroid biosynthesis as is
indicated in Fig. 22-7.209a,b Other flavin-dependent reduc-
NH
tases have protective functions catalyzing the reduction
H
of ascorbic acid radicals,210,211 toxic quinones,212– 214
and peroxides.215– 218 O Coenzyme F 420 (oxidized form)
4. Modified Flavin Coenzymes This unique redox catalyst links the oxidation of
H or of formate to the reduction of NADP+229 and also
2
Mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase, which serves as the reductant in the final step of methane
catalyzes the reaction of Eq. 15-21, contains a flavin biosynthesis (see Section E).228 It resembles NAD+ in
prosthetic group that is covalently attached to a histi- having a redox potential of about –0.345 volts and
dine side chain. This modified FAD was isolated and the tendency to be only a two-electron donor. More
identified as 8α-(N ε2 -histidyl)-FAD.219 The same pros- recently free 8-hydroxy-7,8-didemethyl-5-deazaribo-
thetic group has also been found in several other dehy- flavin has been identified as an essential light-absorbing
drogenases.220 It was the first identified member of chromophore in DNA photolyase of Methanobacterium,
a series of modified FAD or riboflavin 5'-phosphate other bacteria, and eukaryotic algae.230 Roseoflavin
derivatives that are attached by covalent bonds to is not a coenzyme but an antibiotic from Streptomyces
the active sites of more than 20 different enzymes.219 davawensis.231 Many synthetic flavins have been used
These include 8α-(N ε2 -histidyl)-FMN,221 8α- in studies of mechanisms and for NMR232 and other
(N δ1-histidyl)-FAD,222 8α-(O-tyrosyl-FAD),223 and 6- forms of spectroscopy.
(S-cysteinyl)-riboflavin 5'-phosphate, which is found
in trimethylamine dehydrogenase (Fig. 15-9).224 An
8-hydroxy analog of FAD (– OH in place of the 8-CH )
3

--- Page 792 ---

B. The Flavin Coenzymes 789
CH2OH To avoid this problem, Brustlein and Bruice used a
5-deazaflavin to oxidize NADH nonenzymatically.237
(HOCH)3 When this reaction was carried out in 2H O, no 2H
2
entered the product at C-5, indicating that a hydrogen
CH2
H3C atom (circled in Eq. 15-24) had been transferred directly
N N N O from NADH to the C-5 position. Similar direct transfer
H3C
of hydrogen to C-5 of 5-deazariboflavin 5'-phosphate
NH is catalyzed by flavoproteins such as N-methylglutamate
H3C N synthase238 and acyl-CoA dehydrogenase.237– 239
O
Roseoflavin CH3
H H
N N O CONH2
5. Mechanisms of Flavin Dehydrogenase
Action
N
CH3 N
The chemistry of flavins is complex, a fact that is
H O R
reflected in the uncertainity that has accompanied efforts
2HO
to understand mechanisms. For flavoproteins at least 2
CH3
four mechanistic possibilities must be considered.153a,233 2H
(a) A reasonable hydride-transfer mechanism can be N N O CONH2
written for flavoprotein dehydrogenases (Eq. 15-23).
The hydride ion is donated at N-5 and a proton is
N
accepted at N-1. The oxidation of alcohols, amines, CH3 N
ketones, and reduced pyridine nucleotides can all be H H +
visualized in this way. Support for such a mechanism O R (15-24)
came from study of the nonenzymatic oxidation of
NADH by flavins, a reaction that occurs at moderate However, these experiments may not have established
speed in water at room temperature. A variety of a mechanism for natural flavoprotein catalysis because
flavins and dihydropyridine derivatives have been the properties of 5-deazaflavins resemble those of NAD+
studied, and the electronic effects observed for the more than of flavins.239 Their oxidation–reduction
reaction are compatible with the hydride ion mecha- potentials are low, they do not form stable free radicals,
nism.234– 236 and their reduced forms don’t react readily with O .
2
According to the mechanism of Eq. 15-23, a hydride Nevertheless, for an acyl-CoA dehydrogenase the rate
ion is transferred directly from a carbon atom in a sub- of reaction of the deazaflavin is almost as fast as that
strate to the flavin. However, a labeled hydrogen of natural FAD.238 For these enzymes a hydride ion
atom transferred to N-5 or N-1 would immediately transfer from the β CH (reaction type D of Table 15-1)
exchange with the medium, rapid exchange being is made easy by removal of the α-H of the acyl-CoA to
characteristic of hydrogens attached to nitrogen. form an enolate anion intermediate.
The three-dimensional structure of the medium
chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenases with bound substrates
R H+ and inhibitors is known.174,175,240 A conserved glutamate
side chain is positioned to pull the pro-R proton from
N N O
theα carbon to create the initial enolate anion.174,175,241
Thepro-Rβ C – H lies by N-5 of the flavin ring seem-
5 NH ingly ready to donate a hydride ion as in Eq. 15-23.
N
NMR spectroscopy has been carried out with 13C or
O 15N in each of the atoms of the redox active part of the
H–
FAD. The results show directly the effects of strong
hydrogen bonding to the protein at N-1, N-3, and N-5
and also suggest that the bound FADH is really FADH–
R 2
H with the negative charge localized on N-1 by strong
N N O hydrogen bonding.149 Many mutants have been made,242
substrate analogs have been tested,176,243 kinetic
isotope effects have been measured,242a and potentio-
NH
N metric titrations have been done.243 All of the results
are compatible with the enolate anion hydride-transfer
H O (15-23)

--- Page 793 ---

790 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
mechanism. Questions about the acidity of the α-H H
and the mechanism of its removal to form the enolate
anion242a are similar to those discussed in Chapter 13, R C OH R H+
Section B. H
N N O
A peculiarity of several acyl-CoA dehydrogenases a
is a bright green color with an absorption maximum at Flavin
coenzyme 4a
710 nm. This was found to result from tightly bound NH
coenzyme A persulfide (CoA – S – S –).244,245 N
H O
(b) A second possible mechanism of flavin reduc-
O
tion is suggested by the occurrence of addition reactions H C H
involving the isoalloxazine ring of flavins. Sulfite adds
Adduct R
to flavins by forming an N–S bond at the 5 position and
nitroethane, which is readily dissociated to the carban- O
i a o c n id H o 3 x C id – a C se H .2 – 46 – ,2 4 N 7 O T 2 h , i a s c f t a s c a t s s a u g su g b es s t t e ra d t e a f c o a r r D b - a a n m io in n o b H C + H+
mechanism according to which normal D-amino acid
R R
substrates form carbanions by dissociation of the αH
H
(Eq. 15-25). Ionization would be facilitated by binding N N O
of the substrate carboxylate to an adjacent arginine
side chain and the carbanion could react at N-5 of the
NH
flavin as in Eq. 15-25. Similar mechanisms have been N
suggested for other flavin enzymes.248,249 H
O (15-26)
+
R H R
4a adduct mechanism are the reduced
H
N N O N N O flavin and an aldehyde, the same as
would be obtained by the hydride ion
mechanism. However, in Eq. 15-26,
5 NH 4a NH
N + N both hydrogens in the original substrate
H (that on oxygen and that on carbon)
– O O have dissociated as protons, the electrons
R C COOH
R C COOH having moved as a pair during the
NH2
NH2
cleavage of the adduct. Hamilton argued
that an isolated hydride ion has a large
R diameter while a proton is small and
–
R C COO
H mobile; for this reason dehydrogenation
N N O
+ NH2 may often take place by proton transfer
mechanisms.
NH Experimental support for the mech-
N
anism of Eq. 15-26 has been obtained
H
O
usingD-chloroalanine as a substrate
Reduced flavin (15-25) forD-amino acid oxidase.252– 254 Chloro-
pyruvate is the expected product, but
under anaerobic conditions pyruvate
(c) The adducts with nitroethane and other com- was formed. Kinetic data obtained with α-2H and
pounds250 pointed to reaction at N-5, but Hamilton251 α-3H substrates suggested a common intermediate
suggested that a better position for addition of nucleo-
for formation of both pyruvate and chloro-pyruvate.
philes is carbon 4a, which together with N-5 forms a
This intermediate could be an anion formed by loss
cyclic Schiff base. He argued that other electrophilic
of H+ either from alanine or from a C-4a adduct. The
centers in the flavin molecule, such as carbons 2, 4,
anion could eliminate chloride ion as indicated by the
and 10a, would be unreactive because of their involve-
dashed arrows in the following structure. This would
ment in amide or amidine-type resonance but an amine,
lead to formation of pyruvate without reduction
alcohol, or other substrate could add to a flavin at
of the flavin. Alternatively, the electrons from the
position 4a (Eq. 15-26, step a). Cleavage of the newly
carbanion could flow into the flavin (green arrows),
formed C–O bond could then occur by movement of
reducing it as in Eq. 15-26. A similar mechanism
electrons from the alcohol part of the adduct into the
has been suggested for other flavoenzymes.249,255
flavin as indicated in step b. The products of this
Objections to the carbanion mechanism are the expected

--- Page 794 ---

B. The Flavin Coenzymes 791
R H+ tion sequence is opposite to that in Eq. 15-26. The
enzyme presumably functions as follows. NADPH
H3C N N O binds next to the bound FAD and reduces it by transfer
of the 4-pro-S hydrogen of the NADPH (Fig. 15-12,
4a NH stepa). The sulfur atom of Cys 63 is in van der Waals
H3C N contact with the bound FAD at or near carbon atom 4a.
H
In step b the nucleophilic center on atom C-4a of FADH
O 2
attacks a sulfur atom of the disulfide loop between
H2N+
cysteines 58 and 63 in the protein to create a C-4a
Cl H2C C COO– adduct of a thiolate ion with oxidized FAD and to
cleave the – S – S – linkage in the loop. In step c the thiol
This H removed as H+ H
in rate-limiting step group of cysteine 63 is eliminated, after which the thiol
of Cys 58 attacks the nearer sulfur atom of the oxidized
glutathione in a nucleophilic displacement (step d)
very high pK for loss of the α-H to form the car- to give one reduced glutathione (GSH) and a mixed
a
banion256 and the observed formation of only chloro- disulfide of glutathione and the enzyme (G-S-S-Cys 58).
alanine and no pyruvate in the reverse reaction of The thiolate anion of Cys 63, which is stabilized by
chloropyruvate, ammonia, and reduced flavoprotein. interaction with the adjacent flavin ring, then attacks
A long-known characteristic of D-amino acid oxi- this disulfide (step e) to regenerate the internal disulfide
dase is its tendency to form charge-transfer complexes and to free the second molecule of reduced glutathione.
with amines, complexes in which a nonbonding electron The imidazole group of the nearby His 467 of the second
has been transferred partially to the flavin. Complete subunit presumably participates in catalysis as may
electron transfer would yield a flavin radical and a some other side chains.191 The disulfide exchange
substrate radical which could be intermediates in a reactions are similar to those discussed in Chapter 12.
free radical mechanism, as discussed in the next A variation is observed for E. coli thioredoxin
section.256 reductase. The reducible disulfide and the NADPH
The three-dimensional structure of the complex binding site are both on the same side of the flavin
ofD-amino acid oxidase with the substrate analog rather than on opposite sides as in Fig. 15-12.190,259
benzoate has been determined. The carboxyl group Mercuric reductase also uses NADPH as the reductant
of the inhibitor is bound by an arginine side chain transferring the 4S hydrogen. The Hg2+ presumably
(Fig. 15-11) that probably also holds the amino acid binds to a sulfur atom of the reduced disulfide loop
substrate. There is no basic group nearby in the enzyme and there undergoes reduction. The observed geometry
that could serve to remove the α-H atom in Eq. 15-26 of the active site is correct for this mechanism.
but the position is appropriate for a direct transfer of
the hydrogen to the flavin as a hydride ion as in Eq.
15-23.161,162,257 In spite of all arguments to the contrary 6. Half-Reduced Flavins
the hydride ion mechanism could be correct! However,
an adduct mechanism is still possible. A possible mechanism of flavin dehydrogenation
Experimental evidence supports a 4a adduct consists of consecutive transfer of a hydrogen atom
mechanism for glutathione reductase and related and of an electron with intermediate radicals being
enzymes191,258,258a (Fig. 15-12). In this figure the reac- formed both on the flavin and on the substrate. Such
Figure 15-11 Stereoscopic view
of the benzoate ion in its complex
withD-amino acid oxidase. A
pair of hydrogen bonds binds the
carboxylate of the ligand to the
guanidinium group of R283.
Several hydrogen bonds to the
flavin ring of the FAD are also
indicated. Courtesy of Retsu
Miura.161

--- Page 795 ---

792 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
FAD
C58
NADPH
N N
S
1N
S a
O
N5
+ H N C63 H N H H C58
O N N +
O N + S N
H H S
– –O
N
O b
N H
H
N
O
O N
H
–
O
N
H S S N G S S G
O
N
N H c
H
N
O G
O H N S –S H N
N
– S
O S O
N
G
GSH d + H N H N
O
O N
H
–
O
C58
N
G
–S
N
S
S–
O
C58
N e
H+
N
H
N C63 S
O
O N GSH S
H Figure 15-12 Probable reaction mechanism for lipo-
– amide dehydrogenase and glutathione reductase. See
O C63 Pai and Schulz.191
a mechanism takes full advantage of one of the most ent equilibrium constants relating total concentrations
characteristic properties of flavins, their ability to of oxidized, reduced, and radical forms vary with
accept single electrons to form semiquinone radicals. pH.143,260– 262 The fraction of radicals present is greater
If the oxidized form Fl of a flavin is mixed with the at low pH and at high pH than at neutrality. For a
reduced form FlH , a single hydrogen atom is trans- 3-alkylated flavin the formation constant K has been
2 f
·
ferred from FlH to Fl to form two F1H radicals (Eq. estimated as 2.3 x 10–2 and for riboflavin260 as 1.5 x 10–2.
2
15-27). From these values and the pK values in Fig. 15-13, it
a
is possible to estimate the amount of radical present at
K
f · any pH.
Fl + FlH 2 FlH
2 (15-27) Neutral flavin radicals have a blue color (the
wavelength of the absorption maximum, λ , is ~ 560
max
The equilibrium represented by this equation is nm) but either protonation at N-1 or dissociation of a
independent of pH, but because all three forms of the proton from N-5 leads to red cation or anion radicals
flavin have different pK values (Fig. 15-13) the appar- withλ at ~ 477 nm. Both blue and red radicals are
a max

--- Page 796 ---

B. The Flavin Coenzymes 793
Protonation occurs here in oxidized R
R flavins at very low pH; pKa ~ 0
H3C N N O
N N O
Flavin
NH anion
NH pKa ~ 10.0
H3C N
–
radical
N O
+
O
H NH2 Amino
Unpaired electron C acid
Oxidized flavin, Fl (yellow) is distributed by R R radical
resonance into the
Protonation at low pH, benzene ring
R
pKa ~ 2.3 to form cation radical
R
Another alternative to a radical
redλ max ~ 490 nm pair is a hydrogen atom transfer
N N O N N O followed by a second electron
transfer.265
If an enzyme binds a flavin
NH NH
N N radical much more tightly than the
H H+ fully oxidized or reduced forms,
–
O O reduction of the flavoprotein will
Half-reduced “semiquinone” · FlH Dissociates with pKa take place in two one-electron steps.
blue radical λmax ~ 560 nm an ~ i 8 o .3 n – r a 8 d .6 ic t a o l r λ e m d ax In such proteins the values of E°’
~477 nm for the two steps may be widely
separated. The best known exam-
R
pKa ~ 6.6
R ples are the small, low-potential
H H O electron-carrying proteins known as
N N O N
N flavodoxins.266– 269a These proteins,
which carry electrons between
NH
NH pairs of other redox proteins, have
N
N a variety of functions in anaerobic
H
O 144° O and photosynthetic bacteria, cyano-
Fully reduced, dihydroflavin, FlH2 H bacteria, and green algae. Their
pKa values 6.2, < 0 functions are similar to those of the
Angle variable
ferredoxins, iron–sulfur proteins
that are considered in Chapter 16.
Figure 15-13 Properties of oxidized, half-reduced, and fully reduced flavins.
In some bacteria ferredoxin and
See Mülleret al.263,264
flavodoxin are interchangeable and
the synthesis of flavodoxin
is induced if the bacteria become
deficient in iron. Flavodoxins all
observed in enzymes, with some enzymes favoring contain riboflavin monophosphate, which functions by
one and some the other. Hemmerich suggested that cycling between the fully reduced anionic form and a
enzymes forming red radicals make a strong hydrogen blue semiquinone radical.270 The two reduction steps,
bond to the proton in the 5 position of the flavin. This from oxidized flavin to semiquinone and from semi-
increases the basicity of N-1 leading to its protonation quinone to dihydroflavin, are well separated. For exam-
and formation of the red cation radicals. ple, the values of E°’ (pH 7) for the flavodoxin from
It is possible that many flavoprotein oxygenases Megasphaera elsdenii are – 0.115 and – 0.373 V, while
and dehydrogenases react via free radicals. For exam- those of the Azotobacter vinlandii flavodoxin (azoto-
ple, instead of the mechanism of Eq. 15-26, an electron flavin) are + 0.050 and – 0.495 V. The latter is the lowest
could be transferred to the flavin, leaving a radical known for any flavoprotein.
pair (at right). The crystallographic structure and Flavodoxins are small proteins with an α/β struc-
modeling of the substrate complex support this ture resembling that of the nucleotide binding domain
possibility.265,265a In this pair the flavin radical would of dehydrogenases. According to 31P NMR data, the
be more basic than in the fully oxidized form and the phosphate group of the coenzyme bound to flavodoxin
aminoacid radical would be more acidic than in the is completely ionized,271 even though it is deeply
uncharged form. A proton transfer as indicated buried in the protein and is not bound to any positively
together with coupling of the radical pair would yield charged side chain but to the N terminus of an α helix
the same product as the mechanism of Eq. 15-26. and to four – OH groups of serine and threonine side

--- Page 797 ---

794 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
chains. The flavin ring is partially buried near the flavin for electron transfer to occur but not in direct
surface of the 138-residue protein. An aromatic side contact. This is the case for a bacterial trimethylamine
chain, from tryptophan or tyrosine, lies against the flavin dehydrogenase in which the FeS cluster is bound about
on the outside of the molecule. Flavodoxins can be 0.4 nm from the alloxazine ring of riboflavin 5'-phosphate
crystallized in all three forms: oxidized, semiquinone, as shown in Fig. 15-9.
and fully reduced. In the crystals the flavin semi- Some metalloflavoproteins contain heme groups.
quinone, like the oxidized flavin, is nearly planar. The previously mentioned flavocytochrome b of
2
TheDNA photolyase of E. coli, an enzyme that yeast is a 230-kDa tetramer, one domain of which
participates in the photochemical repair of damaged carries riboflavin phosphate and another heme. A
DNA (Chapter 23), contains a blue neutral FAD radical flavocytochrome from the photosynthetic sulfur bacte-
with a 580-nm absorption band and an appropriate riumChromatium (cytochrome c-552)279 is a complex
ESR signal.230,272 In contrast, the mitochondrial of a 21-kDa cytochrome c and a 46-kDa flavoprotein
electron-transferring flavoprotein (ETF), a 57-kDa containing 8α-(S-cysteinyl)-FAD. The 670-kDa sulfite
αβ dimer containing one molecule of FAD, functions reductase of E. coli has an α β subunit structure. The
8 4
as a single electron carrier cycling between oxidized eightα chains bind four molecules of FAD and four of
FAD and the red anionic semiquinone.273,274 The re- riboflavin phosphate, while the β chains bind three or
duced forms of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases transfer four molecules of siroheme (Fig. 16-6) and also con-
their electrons one at a time from their FAD to the FAD tain Fe S clusters.280,281 Many nitrate and some nitrite
4 4
of two molecules of electron-transferring flavoprotein. reductases are flavoproteins which also contain Mo or
Therefore, an intermediate enzyme-bound radical must
be present in the FAD of acyl-CoA dehydrogenase at R
one stage of its catalytic cycle. A related ETF from a
methylotrophic bacterium accepts single electrons from N N O
reduced trimethylamine dehydrogenase (Fig. 15-9).275
Another flavoprotein that makes use of both one- 5 4 N
and two-electron transfer reactions is ferredoxin- N
Proton has
NADP+ oxidoreductase (Eq. 15-28). Its bound FAD
O– dissociated
accepts electrons one at a time from each of the two
M+
2Fd + NADP+ + H+→ 2 Fd + + NADPH
red ox (15-28)
Fe prosthetic groups.282,283 A group of aldehyde
reduced ferredoxins (Fd ) in chloroplasts and then oxidases and xanthine dehydrogenases also contain
red
presumably transfers a hydride ion to the NADP+. molybdenum as well as iron (Chapter 16). In every case
The enzyme is organized into two structural domains,201 the metal ions are bound independently of the flavin.283a
one of which binds FAD and the other NADP+. Similar
single-electron transfers through flavoproteins also occur
in many other enzymes. Chorismate mutase, an impor- 8. Reactions of Reduced Flavins with Oxygen
tant enzyme in biosynthesis of aromatic rings (Chapter
25), contains bound FMN. Its function is unclear but Free dihydroriboflavin reacts nonenzymatically
involves formation of a neutral flavin radical.276,277 in seconds and reduced flavin oxygenases react even
faster with molecular oxygen to form hydrogen perox-
ide (Eq. 15-29).
7. Metal Complexes of Flavins and
Metalloflavoproteins FlH 2 + O 2 → Fl + H 2 O 2 (15-29)
The presence of metal ions in many flavoproteins The reaction is more complex than it appears. As soon
suggested a direct association of metal ions and flavins. as a small amount of oxidized flavin is formed, it
Although oxidized flavins do not readily bind most reacts with reduced flavin to generate flavin radicals
·
metal ions, they form red complexes with Ag+ and Cu+ FlH (Eq. 15-27). The latter react rapidly with O each
2
with a loss of a proton from N-3.278 Flavin semiquinone donating an electron to form superoxide anion radicals
·
radicals also form strong red complexes with many O – (Eq. 15-30a) which can then combine with flavin
2
metals.264 If the complexed metal ion can exist in more radicals (Eq. 15-30b).284
than one oxidation state, electron transfer between the
flavin and a substrate could take place through the
·
FlH + O
→·
O – + H+ + Fl (15-30a)
2 2
metal atom. However, chelation by flavins in naturehas
not been observed. Metalloflavoproteins probably func- · O 2 – + · FlH + H+→ Fl + H 2 O 2 (15-30b)
tion by having the metal centers close enough to the

--- Page 798 ---

C. Lipoic Acid and the Oxidative Decarboxylation of (cid:1)-Oxoacids 795
During the corresponding reactions of reduced
C. Lipoic Acid and the Oxidative
flavoproteins with O 2 , intermediates have been detected. Decarboxylation of (cid:1)-Oxoacids
For example, spectrophotometric studies of the FAD-
containing bacterial p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase
The isolation of lipoic acid in 1951 followed an
(Chapter 18) revealed the consecutive appearance of
earlier discovery that the ciliate protozoan Tetrahymena
three intermediate forms.285– 287 The first, whose absorp-
geleii required an unknown factor for growth. In inde-
tion maximum is at 380 – 390 nm, is thought to be an
pendent experiments acetic acid was observed to pro-
adduct at position 4a (Eq. 15-31). That such a 4a perox-
mote rapid growth of Lactobacillus casei, but it could be
ide really forms with the riboflavin phosphate of the
replaced by an unknown “acetate replacing factor.”
light-emitting bacterial luciferase (Chapter 23) was
Another lactic acid bacterium Streptococcus faecalis was
demonstrated using coenzyme enriched with 13C at
unable to oxidize pyruvate without addition of “pyru-
position 4a.147 A large shift to lower frequency (from
vate oxidation factor.” By 1949, all three unknown
104 to 83 ppm) accompanied formation of the transient
substances were recognized as identical.291,291a After
adduct. Comparison with reference compounds
working up the equivalent of 10 tons of water-soluble
showed that this change agreed with that predicted.
residue from liver, Lester Reed and his collaborators
Other structures for O adducts have also been
2 isolated 30 mg of a fat-soluble acidic material which
considered, as has the possibility of rearrangements
was named lipoic acid (or 6-thioctic acid).292– 294
among these structures.288 Nevertheless, the products
WhileTetrahymena must have lipoic acid in its diet,
observed from many different flavoprotein reactions
we humans can make our own, and it is not considered
can be explained on the basis of a 4a peroxide.289
a vitamin. Lipoic acid is present in tissues in extraor-
dinarily small amounts. Its major function is to partic-
R ipate in the oxidative decarboxylation of α-oxoacids
H but it also plays an essential role in glycine catabolism
N N O in the human body as well as in plants.295,296 The struc-
10a ture is simple, and the functional group is clearly the
4a NH cyclic disulfide which swings on the end of a long arm.
N Like biotin, which is also present in tissues in very small
H
O2 amounts, lipoic acid is bound in covalent amide linkage
O
to lysine side chains in active sites of enzymes:296a
R
Peptide
Lipoic acid in amide linkage Lysine side chain
N N O
(lipoamide) chain
4a NH O H NH
N
H C C
O O N
H O H H C O
(15-31) S S
~1.5 nm
Formation of H O by flavin oxidases can occur via
2 2
elimination of a peroxide anion HOO– from the adduct
of Eq. 15-31 with regeneration of the oxidized flavin.
1. Chemical Reactions of Lipoic Acid
In the active site of a hydroxylase, an OH group can be
transferred from the peroxide to a suitable substrate
The most striking chemical property of lipoic acid
(Eq. 18-42). Although radical mechanisms are likely to
is the presence of ring strain of ~ 17 – 25 kJ mol–1 in the
be involved, such hydroxylation reactions can also be
cyclic disulfide. Because of this, thiol groups and
viewed as transfer of OH+ to the substrate together
cyanide ions react readily with oxidized lipoic acid to
with protonation on the inner oxygen atom of the
give mixed disulfides (Eq. 15-32a) and isothiocyanates
original peroxide to give a 4a – OH adduct. The latter
(Eq. 15-32b), respectively.
is a covalent hydrate which can be converted to the
Another result of the ring strain is that the reduc-
oxidized flavin by elimination of H 2 O. This hydrate tion potential E°’ (pH 7, 25°C), is – 0.30 V, almost the
is believed to be the third spectral intermediate identi-
same as that of reduced NAD (– 0.32V). Thus, reoxida-
fied during the action of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxy-
tion of reduced lipoic acid amide by NAD+ is thermo-
lase.286,287,290
dynamically feasible. Yet another property attributed
to the ring strain in lipoic acid is the presence of an
absorption maximum at 333 nm.

--- Page 799 ---

796 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
COOH catalytic mechanism similar to those of glutathione
reductase (Figs. 15-10, 15-12).303– 305
RSH Electron microscopy of the core dihydrolipoyl
S S
transacylase from E. coli reveals a striking octahedral
a symmetry which has been confirmed by X-ray diffrac-
CN– + H+ COOH tion.306–307a The core from pyruvate dehydrogenase
b has a mass of ~ 2390 kDa and contains 24 identical
R S S SH 99.5-kDa E subunits. The 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase
2
from E. coli has a similar but slightly less symmetric
COOH
structure. Each core subunit is composed of three
domains. A lipoyl group is bound in amide linkage to
N C S SH (15-32) lysine 42 and protrudes from one end of the domain.
A second domain is necessary for binding to subunits
E and E , while the third major 250-residue domain
1 3
2. Oxidative Decarboxylation of Alpha- contains the catalytic acyltransferase center.308,309 This
Oxoacids center closely resembles that of chloramphenicol acetyl-
transferase (Chapter 12).310,311 The lipoyl301,309,312 and
The oxidative cleavage of an α-oxoacid is a major catalytic307 domains of the dihydrolipoyl succinyl-
step in the metabolism of carbohydrates and of amino transferase from 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase resem-
acids and is also a step in the citric acid cycle. In many ble those of pyruvate dehydrogenase and also of the
bacteria and in eukaryotes the process depends upon branched chain oxoacid dehydrogenase. The three
both thiamin diphosphate and lipoic acid. The oxoacid domains of the proteins are joined by long 25- to 30-
anion is cleaved to form CO and the remaining acyl residue segments rich in alanine, proline, and ionized
2
group is combined with coenzyme A (Eq. 15-33). hydrophilic side chains.309 This presumably provides
NAD+ serves as the oxidant. The reaction is catalyzed flexibility for the lipoyl groups which must move from
by a complex of enzymes whose molecular mass varies site to site. The presence of unexpectedly sharp lines
from ~ 4 to 10 x 106, depending on the species and in the proton NMR spectrum of the core protein may
exact substrate.297 Separate oxoacid dehydrogenase be a result of this flexibility.309
systems are known for pyruvate,298–300 2-oxoglut- To obtain the X-ray structure of the core protein
arate,301 and the 2-oxoacids with branched side chains it was necessary to delete the lipoyl- and E (E )- bind-
1 2
derived metabolically from leucine, isoleucine, and ing domains. The resulting 24-subunit structure is
shown in Fig 15-14A,B.306 It has been assumed for
many years that 12 of the dimeric decarboxylase units
O
(E ) are bound to the 12 edges of the transacetylase
1
R C COO– cube, while six (50.6 x 2 kDa) flavoprotein (E 3 ) dimers
bind on the six faces of the cube. The active centers of
NAD+
all three types of subunits are thought to come close
Thiamin CoASH together in the regions where the subunits touch, per-
diphosphate
mitting the sequence of catalytic reactions indicated in
Lipoamide
FAD CO NADH + H+ Fig. 15-15 to take place. Eukaryotic as well as some
2
bacterial pyruvate decarboxylases have a core of 60
O subunits in an icosahedral array with 532 symmetry.
This can be seen in the image reconstructions of the
R C S CoA (15-33)
enzyme from Saccharomyces cerevisiae shown in Fig.
15-14C and D. A surprising discovery is that in this
valine.302,302a In eukaryotes these enzymes are located yeast enzyme the E units are not on the outside of
3
in the mitochondria. The pyruvate and 2-oxoglut- the 5-fold symmetric faces but protrude into the inner
aratedehydrogenase complexes of E. coli and Azoto- cavity.299 Each of the 12 E subunits is assisted in
3
bacter vinelandii have been studied most. In both cases binding correctly to the E core by a molecule of the
2
there are three major protein components. The first (E ) 47-kDaE -binding protein (BP), also known as pro-
1 3
is a decarboxylase (also referred to as a dehydrogenase) tein X.313,314 Absence of this protein is associated with
for which the thiamin diphosphate is the dissociable congenital lactic acidosis.
cofactor. The second (E ) is a lipoic acid amide-containing The unique function of lipoic acid is in the oxida-
2
“core” enzyme which is a dihydrolipoyl transacylase. tion of the thiamin-bound active aldehyde (Fig. 15-15)
The third (E ) is the flavoprotein dihydrolipoyl in such a way that when the complex with thiamin
3
dehydrogenase, a member of the glutathione reduc- breaks up, the acyl group formed by the oxidative
tase family with a three-dimensional structure and decarboxylation of the oxoacid is attached to the

--- Page 800 ---

C. Lipoic Acid and the Oxidative Decarboxylation of (cid:1)-Oxoacids 797
A B
5 nm
Figure 15-14 (A) View of the com-
plex down a fourfold axis through
the face of the cube. (B) Stereoscopic
C
view of three subunits of the 24-subunit
cubic core of the E. coli pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex. The view
is down the threefold axis through
opposite vertices of the cube. Bound
lipoate and CoA molecules are visible
in each subunit. (A) and (B) from
Knappet al.307a (C) Image of the 60-
subunit core of yeast pyruvate dehydro-
10 nm
genase reconstructed from electron
micrographs of frozen-hydrated com-
1 2 3
plexes. The five-, three-, and twofold
symmetries can be seen. The view is
along the threefold axis. 1. Truncated
E ; 2. Truncated E plus binding D
2 2
proteins; 3. Truncated E + binding
2
protein + E . The reconstructions
3
show that the E and BP components
3
are inside the truncated E scaffold.
2
The morphologies of E and BP are
3
not correctly represented since they
are not bound with icosahedral sym-
metry. (D) Stereoscopic image of
complex shown in B,3 with the front
half cut away to show the interior.
The conical objects protruding in are
the E molecules. The arrow points
3
to a binding site for attachment of the 10 nm
binding protein to the core. Courtesy
of J. K. Stoops et al.299
dihydrolipoyl group at the S-8 position.315 The lipoic reoxidize the lipoyl group. The reduced flavin-disul-
acid, which is attached to the flexible lipoyl domains fide enzyme is then oxidized by NAD+ (Fig. 15-15) by
of the core enzyme on a 1.5-nm-long arm, apparently the reverse of the mechanism depicted in Fig. 15-12.
first contacts the thiamin diphosphate site on one of Although the direct reaction of a lipoyl group
the decarboxylase subunits. Bearing the acyl group, with the thiamin-bound enamine (active aldehyde)
it now swings to the catalytic site on the core enzyme is generally accepted, and is supported by recent
where CoA is bound. The acyl group is transferred studies,315a an alternative must be considered.315
to CoA producing a dihydrolipoyl group which then Hexacyanoferrate (III) can replace NAD+ as an oxidant
swings to the third subunit where the disulfide loop for pyruvate dehydrogenase and is also able to oxidize
and a bound FAD of dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase nonenzymatically thiamin-bound active acetaldehyde

--- Page 801 ---

798 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Thiamin
R diphosphate
O C
R
S
COO–
HO C
Oxoacid
decarboxylase N
Thiamin-bound
“active aldehyde”
CO
2 S S
H+
R
S
NADH + H+ H O C
+
N
Lipoamide
S
dehydrogenase
SH
NAD+
C O
O
C
CoA
C
–S
Figure 15-15 Sequence
of reactions catalyzed by
HS O α-oxoacid dehydrogenases.
S C R The substrate and product
are shown in boxes, and the
HS SH O path of the oxidized oxoacid
is traced by the heavy arrows.
Core active center The lipoic acid “head” is
dihydrolipoyl shown rotating about the
acyltransferase
point of attachment to a core
R C S CoA subunit. However, a whole
flexible domain of the core is
O also thought to move.
to 2-acetylthiamin, a compound in which the acetyl thiamin diphosphate.315b The lipoamide dehydrogenase
group has a high group transfer potential (Eq. 14-22). component of all three dehydrogenase complexes
Thus, the lipoyl group could first oxidize the active appears to be the same.
aldehyde to a thiamin-bound acyl derivative, and then
in the second step accept the acyl group by a nucleo-
philic displacement reaction. This mechanism fails 3. Other Functions of Lipoic Acid
to explain the unique role of lipoic acid in oxidative
decarboxylation. However, as we will see in the next In addition to its role in the oxidative decarboxyla-
section, oxidative decarboxylation does not always tion of 2-oxoacids, lipoic acid functions in the human
require lipoic acid and acetylthiamin is probably an body as part of the essential mitochondrial glycine-
intermediate whenever lipoamide is not utilized. cleavage system described in Section E. It may also
Within many tissues the enzymatic activities of the participate in bacterial glycine reductase (Eq. 15-61)
pyruvate and branched chain oxoacid dehydrogenases and other enzyme systems. Dihydrolipoamide dehydro-
complexes are controlled in part by a phosphorylation genase binds to G4-DNA structures of telomeres and
–dephosphorylation mechanism (see Eq. 17-9). Phos- may have a biological role in DNA-binding.315c Lipoic
phorylation of the decarboxylase subunit by an ATP- acid is being utilized as a nutritional supplement and
dependent kinase produces an inactive phosphoenzyme. appears to help in maintaining cellular levels of gluta-
A phosphatase reactivates the dehydrogenase to com- thione.316
plete the regulatory cycle (see Eq. 17-9 and associated
discussion). The regulation is apparently accomplished,
in part, by controlling the affinity of the protein for

--- Page 802 ---

C. Lipoic Acid and the Oxidative Decarboxylation of (cid:1)-Oxoacids 799
Pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase. Within
4. Additional Mechanisms of Oxidative
clostridia and other strict anaerobes this enzyme
Decarboxylation
catalyzesreversible decarboxylation of pyruvate
(Eq. 15-35). The oxidant used by clostridia is the low-
Pyruvate is a metabolite of central importance
potential iron–sulfur ferredoxin.320,320a Clostridial
and a variety of mechanisms exist for its cleavage.
ferredoxins contain two Fe–S clusters and are therefore
The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is adequate for
two-electron oxidants. Ferredoxin substitutes for NAD+
strict aerobes and is very important in aerobic bacteria
in Eq. 15-33 but the Gibbs energy decrease is much less
and in facultative anaerobes such as E. coli. Lactic acid
(– 16.9 vs – 34.9 kJ / mol. for oxidation by NAD+).
bacteria, which lack cytochromes and other heme
proteins, are able to carry out limited oxidation with
flavoproteins such as pyruvate oxidase.317 However, Pyruvate– + CoA Acetyl-CoA + CO
2
strict anaerobes have to avoid accumulation of reduced
pyridine nucleotides and use a nonoxidative cleavage Ferredoxin (ox) Ferredoxin (red)
of pyruvate by pyruvate formate-lyase. The pyruvate ∆G’ (pH 7) = –16.9 kJ mol–1
(15-35)
dehydrogenase complex of our bodies generates NADH
which can be oxidized in mitochondria to provide
The enzyme does not require lipoic acid. It seems
energy to our cells. However, NADH is a weak reduc-
likely that a thiamin-bound enamine is oxidized by an
tant. Some cells, such as those of nitrogen-fixing
iron–sulfide center in the oxidoreductase to 2-acetyl-
bacteria, require more powerful reductants such as
thiamin which then reacts with CoA. A free radical
reduced ferredoxin and utilize pyruvate: ferredoxin
intermediate has been detected318,321 and the proposed
oxidoreductase. Escherichia coli, a facultative anaerobe,
sequence for oxidation of the enamine intermediate is
is adaptable and makes use of all of these types of
that in Eq. 15-34 but with the Fe–S center as the elec-
pyruvate cleavage.318
tron acceptor. Like pyruvate oxidase, this enzyme
transfers the acetyl group from acetylthiamin to coen-
Pyruvate oxidase. The soluble flavoprotein
zyme A. Cleavage of the resulting acetyl-CoA is used
pyruvate oxidase, which was discussed briefly in
to generate ATP. An indolepyruvate: ferredoxin oxi-
Chapter 14 (Fig. 14-2, Eq. 14-22), acts together with a
doreductase has similar properties.322
membrane-bound electron transport system to convert
In methanogenic bacteria320 the low-potential
pyruvate to acetyl phosphate and CO .319 Thiamin
2 5-deazaflavin coenzyme F serves as the reductant
diphosphate is needed by this enzyme but lipoic acid 420
in a reversal of Eq. 15-35. A similar enzyme, 2-oxo-
is not. The flavin probably dehydrogenates the thiamin-
glutarate synthase, apparently functions in synthesis
bound intermediate to 2-acetylthiamin as shown in
of 2-oxoglutarate from succinyl-CoA and CO by
Eq. 15-34. The electron acceptor is the bound FAD 2
photosynthetic bacteria.323 Either reduced ferredoxin
and the reaction may occur in two steps as shown
or, in Azotobacter, reduced flavodoxin is generated in
with a thiamin diphosphate radical intermediate.319a
nitrogen-fixing bacteria (Chapter 24) by cleavage of
Reaction with inorganic phosphate generates the
pyruvate and is used in the N fixation process.
energy storage metabolite acetyl phosphate. 2
Oxidative decarboxylation
by hydrogen peroxide. The
H O S
CH2CH2O-P-P
H+ O S
CH2CH2O-P-P
nonenzymatic oxidative decarb-
C C oxylation of α-oxoacids by H 2 O 2
is well-known. The first step is
H3C N
CH3
e– H3C N
CH3 the formation of an adduct, an
organic peroxide, which breaks
Pyrimidine Pyrimidine up as indicated in Eq. 15-36. An
Enamine Thiamin diphosphate radical enzyme-catalyzed version of this
reaction is promoted by lactate
monooxygenase, a 360-kDa octa-
e–
meric flavoprotein obtained from
H2PO3 – O S
CH2CH2O-P-P
Mycobacterium smegmatis324 and a
C Thiamin diphosphate member of the glycolate oxidase
+
H3C N O family. Under anaerobic condi-
tions, the enzyme produces pyru-
H3C C
vate by a simple dehydrogenation.
–
Pyrimidine OPO3H However, the pyruvate dissociates
2-Acetyl-TDP Acetyl phosphate (15-34) slowly and in the presence of

--- Page 803 ---

800 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
oxygen it forms acetic acid, with one of the oxygen The reaction has sometimes been called the “phosphoro-
atoms of the carboxyl group coming from O .324,325 clastic reaction” because the product acetyl-CoA usually
2
Hydrogen peroxide is the usual product formed from reacts further with inorganic phosphate to form acetyl
oxygen by flavoprotein oxidases, and it seems likely phosphate (see Fig. 15-16). The latter can then transfer
that with lactate monooxygenase the hydrogen peroxide its phospho group to ADP to form ATP.
formed immediately oxidizes the pyruvate according
to Eq. 15-36. The α-oxoacids formed by amino acid
O
oxidasesin vitro are also oxidized by accumulating
hydrogen peroxide. However, if catalase (Chapter 16)
CH3 C CoA SH
is present it destroys the H O and allows the oxoacid
COO–
2 2
to accumulate. O O
H C
H2O2 OH CH3 C S CoA O–
O O
∆G' (pH 7) = –12.9 kJ mol–1 (15-37)
R C R C C
COO– O–
O
The mechanism of the cleavage of the pyruvate
HO
in Eq. 15-37 is not obvious. Thiamin diphosphate is
H+
not involved, and free CO is not formed. The first
2
identified intermediate is an acetyl-enzyme containing
a thioester linkage to a cysteine side chain. This is
cleaved by reaction with CoA-SH to give the final
O H2O + CO2
product. A clue came when it was found by Knappe
R C
and coworkers that the active enzyme, which is rapidly
O– (15-36)
inactivated by oxygen, contains a long-lived free
radical.326 Under anaerobic conditions cells convert
Pyruvate formate-lyase reaction. Anaerobic the inactive form E to the active form E by an enzy-
i a
cleavage of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and formate matic reaction with S-adenosylmethionine and reduced
(Eq. 15-37) is essential to the energy economy of many flavodoxin Fd(red) as shown in Eq. 15-38.327– 329 A
cells,including those of E. coli. No external oxidant is deactivase reverses the process.330
needed, and the reaction does not require lipoic acid.
A Oxidative decarboxylation of an α-oxoacid with thiamin diphosphate
2 Fd (ox) 2 Fd (red) Pi
or or +
NAD+ NADH ADP(GDP) ATP(GTP)
O O O
R C R C R C
COO– li T p h o i i a c m ac in id S CoA CoASH O–
CoASH CO
2
Optional ATP-generating system
1. with lipoic acid and NAD+ as oxidants ∆G’ (pH 7, for pyruvate) = –35.5 kJ/mol overall
2. with ferredoxin as oxidant ∆G’ (pH 7, for pyruvate) = –13.9 kJ/mol overall
B The pyruvate formate-lyase reaction
O O P i O ADP ATP
H3C C CH3 C CH3 C CH
3
COO–
COO– CoASH HCOO– S CoA
CoASH
O PO3 2–
Optional ATP-generating system
∆G’ (pH 7) = –13.5 kJ/mol overall
Figure 15-16 Two systems for oxidative decarboxylation of α-oxoacids and for “substrate-level” phosphorylation. The value
of∆G’ = +34.5 kJ mol–1 (Table 6-6) was used for the synthesis of ATP4– from ADP3– and HPO 2– in computing the values of ∆G’
4
given.

--- Page 804 ---

C. Lipoic Acid and the Oxidative Decarboxylation of (cid:1)-Oxoacids 801
5' CH2 (adenosyl) d-Alanine
H3C
+
S
HS HR H CH3
CH2 CH2 CH COO– C O C O
N C N C
NH3 +
H H
e– (From flavodoxin H)
2 Fe(II) in activating enzyme Activating Activating
enzyme enzyme
Methionine
Radical
CH
2
(adenosyl) O H(CH3)
Inactive pyruvate Ser 733
formate lyase (E) HO C O
i
N C
Radical form H 3 C (adenosyl) H
active enzyme (E) 5’-Deoxyadenosine H N N OH
a (15-38) O H
Tyr 735
The activating enzyme, which is allosterically
Val N H O
activated by pyruvate, is an iron–sulfur (Fe S ) protein
4 4
(Chapter 16).331,331a Formation of the observed radical (15-40)
may proceed via a 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical as has
been proposed for lysine 2,3-aminomutase (Eq. 16-42).332
enzyme329 as illustrated in Eq. 15-40. It has been sug-
The activation reaction also resembles the free radical- gested that the peptide exists in the β-bend conforma-
dependent reactions of vitamin B which are discussed
12 tion shown.
in Chapter 16. When subjected to O 2 of air at 25°C How does the enzyme work? The α-CH proton
pyruvate formate-lyase is destroyed with a half-life
of the glycyl radical of the original pro-R proton under-
of ~ 10 s. The peptide chain is cleaved and sequence
goes an unexpected exchange with the deuterium of
analysis and mass spectrometry of the resulting frag-
2H O. The exchange is catalyzed by the thiol group
ments show that the specific sequence Ser-Gly-Tyr at 2
of Cys 419, suggesting that it is close to Gly 734 in the
positions 733 – 755 is cut with formation of an oxalyl
three-dimensional structure.334 The mutants C419S
group on the N-terminal tyrosine of one fragment
and C418S are inactive but still allow formation of the
(Eq. 15-39). Various 13C-containing amino acids were
Gly 734 radical.334–335a The mechanism has been pro-
supplied to growing cells of E. coli and were incorpo-
posed in Eq. 15-41.
rated into the proteins of the bacteria. Pyruvate formate-
lyase containing 13C in carbon-2 of glycine gave an
EPR spectrum with hyperfine splitting arising from O
coupling of the unpaired electron of the radical with
the adjacent 13C nucleus.333,333a This experiment,
–OOC C CH3
together with the results described by Eq. 15-39, H H H H H H
suggested that the radical is derived from Gly 734. S S S S
C
C
G734 C419 C418 G734 C419 C418
Glycine
radical
O O
733 734 735
Ser C NH CH C NH Tyr O
O
O2 CoA S C CH3 HCOO– C
O C CH3
735 CoA S– H H –O
–OOC C NH Tyr (15-39) C S
G734 C419
The activating enzyme will also generate radicals
from short peptides such as Arg-Val-Ser-Gly-Tyr-Ala-
O–
Val, which corresponds to residues 731– 737 of the
C
O CH3
pyruvate formate-lyase active site. If Gly 734 is replaced C
H H
byL-alanine, no radical is formed, but radical is formed O
S
ifD-alanine is in this position. This suggests that the C
pro-S proton of Gly 734 is removed by the activating
G734 C419 (15-41)

--- Page 805 ---

802 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
5. Cleavage of (cid:1)-Oxoacids and Substrate-Level different oxidation levels corresponding to formic acid,
formaldehyde, and the methyl group and also facili-
Phosphorylation
tate their interconversion.336,337 Moreover, folic acid
Theα-oxoacid dehydrogenases yield CoA deriva- is just one of the derivatives of the pteridine ring
system that enjoy a widespread natural distribution.338
tives which may enter biosynthetic reactions. Alterna-
One of these derivatives functions in the hydroxylation
tively, the acyl-CoA compounds may be cleaved with
of aromatic amino acids and in nitric oxide synthase
generation of ATP. The pyruvate formate-lyase system
and yet another within several molybdenum-containing
also operates as part of an ATP-generating system for
enzymes. Pteridines also provide coloring to insect
anaerobic organisms, for example, in the “mixed acid
wings and eyes and to the skins of amphibians and
fermentation” of enterobacteria such as E. coli (Chapter
fish. They appear to act as protective filters in insect
17). These two reactions, which are compared in Fig.
eyes and may function as light receptors. An example is
15-16, constitute an important pair of processes both
a folic acid derivative found in some forms of the DNA
of which accomplish substrate-level phosphorylation.
photorepair enzyme DNA photolyase (Chapter 23).
They should be compared with the previously consid-
ered examples of substrate level phosphorylation
depicted in Eq. 14-23 and Fig. 15-16.
1. Structure of Pterins
Because of the prevalence of its derivatives, 2-amino-
D. Tetrahydrofolic Acid and Other Pterin
4-hydroxypteridine has been given the trivial name
Coenzymes
pterin. Its structure resembles closely that of guanine,
the 5-membered ring of the latter having been expanded
In most organisms reduced forms of the vitamin
to a 6-membered ring. In fact, pterins are derived
folic acid serve as carriers for one-carbongroups at three
BOX 15-D FOLIC ACID (PTEROYLGLUTAMIC ACID)
O that has led to the description of the history of folic
O 5 10 H N C COOH acid as “the most complicated chapter in the story of
4 N CH2 N C H the vitamin B complex.”a Metabolic functions for
HN 9 H
folic acid were suggested by the observations that
2
7
CH2
the requirement for Streptococcus faecalis could be
H2N N
1
N
8
CH2 replaced by thymine plus serine plus a purine base.
Folic acid is required for the biosynthesis of all of
COOH
these substances. A function in the interconversion
para-Aminobenzoic l-Glutamic of serine and glycine was suggested by the observa-
acid acid
tion that certain mutants of E. coli required either
serine or glycine for growth. Isotopic labeling experi-
In 1931, Lucy Wills, working in India, observed
ments established that in the rat as well as in the
that patients with tropical macrocytic anemia, a
yeastTorulopsis serine and glycine could be inter-
disease in which the erythrocytes are enlarged but
converted. It was also shown that the amount of
reduced in numbers, were cured by extracts of yeast
interconversion decreased in the folate-deficient rat.
or liver. The disease could be mimicked in monkeys
Deficiency of folic acid is a common nutritional
fed the local diet, and a similar anemia could be
problem of worldwide importance.b A recommended
induced in chicks. By 1938 it had also been shown
daily intake is 0.2 mg, but because of the association
that a factor present in yeast, alfalfa, and other
between low folic acid intake and neural tube defects
materials was required for the growth of chicks.
in infants, women of child-bearing age should have
Isolation of the new vitamin came rapidly after it
0.4 mg / day.c– e
was recognized that it was also an essential nutrient
forLactobacillus casei andStreptococcus faecalis R.a,b a Wagner, A. F., and Folkers, E. (1964) Vitamins and Coenzymes,
Spinach was a rich source of the new compound, Wiley (Interscience), New York
and it was named folic acid (from the same root as b Jukes, T. H. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 112–113
c Cziezel, A. E., and Dudás, I. (1992) N. Engl. J. Med.327, 1832–
the word foliage).
1835
The microbiological activity attributed to folic d Jukes, T. H. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 254–256
acid in extracts of natural materials was largely that e Rosenquist, T. H., Ratashak, S. A., and Selhub, J. (1996) Proc.
of di- and triglutamyl derivatives, one of the facts Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 15227–15232

--- Page 806 ---

D. Tetrahydrofolic Acid and Other Pterin Coenzymes 803
biosynthetically from guanine. The two-ring system of Mo-containing enzymes discussed in Chapter 16,348,349
pterin is also related structurally and biosynthetically andmethanopterin is utilized by methanogenic
to that of riboflavin (Box 15-B). bacteria.350– 353
4 N 5 2. Folate Coenzymes
4a
3N 6
The coenzymes responsible for carrying single-
2 N 8a N 7 carbon units in most organisms are derivatives of
1 8 5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolic acid (abbreviated H PteGlu,
O O 4
Pteridine H folate or THF). However, in methanogenic bacteria
4
N the tetrahydro derivative of the structurally unique
N
HN HN methanopterin (Fig. 15-17) is the corresponding single-
carbon carrier.353 Naturally occurring tetrahydrofolates
N contain a chiral center of the S configuration.354,355 They
H2N N N H2N N
H
exhibit negative optical rotation at 589 nm. The folate
Pterin: 2-amino-4-hydroxypteridine Guanine
coenzymes are present in extremely low concentrations
and the reduced ring is readily oxidized by air.
Interest in pteridines began with Frederick G. In addition to the single L-glutamate unit present
Hopkins, who in 1891 started his investigation of the in tetrahydrofolic acid, the coenzymes occur to the
yellow and white pigments of butterflies. Almost 50 greatest extent as conjugates called folyl polyglutamates
years and a million butterflies later, the structures of in which one to eight or more additional molecules
the two pigments, xanthopterin and leucopterin ofL-glutamic acid have been combined via amide
(Fig. 15-17), were established.339 These pigments are linkages.356–357a The first two of the extra glutamates
produced in such quantities as to suggest that their are always joined through the γ (side chain) carboxyl
synthesis may be a means of deposition of nitrogenous groups but in E. coli the rest are joined through their
wastes in dry form. α carboxyls.358 The distribution of the polyglutamates
Among the simple pterins isolated from the eyes varies from one organism to the next. Some bacteria
ofDrosophila340 is sepiapterin (Fig. 15-17), in which contain exclusively the triglutamate derivatives, while
the pyrazine ring has been reduced in the 7,8 position in others almost exclusively the tetraglutamate or
and a short side chain is present at position 6. Reduc- octaglutamate derivatives predominate.359 The serum
tion of the carbonyl group of sepiapterin with NaBH
4
followed by air oxidation produces biopterin, the
most widely distributed of the pterin compounds.
CCOOOO––
First isolated from human urine, biopterin (Fig. 15-17)
is present in liver and other tissues where it functions
in a reduced form as a hydroxylation coenzyme ––
OOOOCC
(see Chapter 18).338 It is also present in nitric oxide
synthase (Chapter 18).341,342 Other functions in oxida- Additionalγ-linked glutamates HH
can be added to form tetrahydrofolyl- NNHH
tive reactions, in regulation of electron transport, and triglutamic acid (THF-triglutamic
in photosynthesis have been proposed.343 Neopterin, acid or H 4 PteGlu 3 ) as shown OO
here or higher polyglutamates
found in honeybee larvae, resembles biopterin but has
aD-erythro configuration in the side chain. The red eye
pigments of Drosophila, called drosopterins, are com- HH
plex dimeric pterins containing fused 7-membered
rings (Fig. 15-17).344,345 CCOOOO
––
HHNN
In the pineal gland, as well as in
C O
the retina of the eye, light-sensitive
A proton adds here The“active site”
pterins may be photochemically with pKa = 4.82
H
cleaved to generate such products
O 10 N
as6-formylpterin, a compound HNN C
that could serve as a metabolic 5 H NN H O COO– H
regulator.346 Another pterin acts as pKa = 10.5 HN
a chemical attractant for aggregation S configuration
CH2
of the ameboid cells of Dictyostelium
H2N N N
lacteum347(Box 11-C). Molybdopterin H
(Fig. 15-17) is a component of several
Tetrahydrofolic acid (THF) or tetrahydropteroylglutamic acid (HPteGlu)
4

--- Page 807 ---

804 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
O O Blue-green algae contain glycosides
with glucose, galactose, xylose, etc.,
H H
attached possibly here
N O N O
HN HN
O
HO H
H2N N N H2N N N
H
O
HN
N
CH3
Xanthopterin (yellow) Leucopterin (white) OH
H
H2N N N
O S – Mo l-erythro-Biopterin
H H S–
N
HN
O O
7 H O
H2N N N
H
O H N C
CH3
H HN
Molybdopterin OH
? S – Mo 8 7 H
S– H2N N N
H
Sepiapterin
?
OH
–O N 7
O HO
P
O O O N NH2
H O
C
COO– O N N
H3C
HO HO
H O
NH
–OOC
HO H HN
N H
H
HH
H OH H
HO H2N N N H
H
Drosopterin and isodrosopterin
O S
CH3
O HN N OH H
HN
N CH
OH
HN CH3 H2N N N S
Urothione
H2N N N CH3
A urinary product thought to
Methanopterin be derived from molybdopterin
Figure 15-17 Structures of several biologically important pterins.
of many species contains only derivatives of folic acid
3. Dihydrofolate Reductase
itself but pteroylpentaglutamate is the major folate
derivative present in rodent livers.360,361 A large fraction
Folic acid and its polyglutamyl derivatives can be
of these pentaglutamates consists of the 5-methyl-
reduced to the THF coenzymes in two stages: the first
THF derivative, while at the heptaglutamate level
step is a slow reduction with NADPH to 7,8-dihydro-
most consists of the free THF derivative. Folyl poly-
folate (step a, Fig. 15-18). The same enzyme that cata-
glutamate in its oxidized form is a component of
lyzes this reaction rapidly reduces the dihydrofolates
some DNA photolyases (Chapter 23).362

--- Page 808 ---

D. Tetrahydrofolic Acid and Other Pterin Coenzymes 805
to tetrahydrofolates (step b, Fig. 15-18). Again, NADPH of dihydrofolate reductase had been studied.367
is the reducing agent and the enzyme has been given However, methotrexate and trimethoprim remain
the name dihydrofolate reductase. An unusual fact outstanding. Methotrexate has been in clinical use for
is that bacteriophage T4 not only carries a gene for its nearly 50 years and is very effective against leukemia
own dihydrofolate reductase but also the enzyme is a and some other cancers.371 Before 1960 persons with
structural unit in the phage baseplate.363 acute leukemia lived no more than 3 – 6 months. How-
ever, with antifolate treatment some have lived for 5
Inhibitors. Aside from its role in providing reduced years or more and complete cures of the relatively rare
folate coenzymes for cells, this enzyme has attracted a choriocarcinoma have been achieved. New methods
great deal of attention because it appears to be a site of of chemotherapy use the antifolates in combination
action of the important anticancer drugs methotrexate with other drugs.
(amethopterin) and aminopterin.293,364,365 These com- Folate coenzymes are required in the biosynthesis
pounds inhibit dihydrofolate reductase in concentra- of both purines and thymine. Consequently, rapidly
tions as low as 10–8 to 10–9M. Methotrexate is also growing cancer cells have a high requirement for
widely used as an immunosuppresant drug and in activity of this enzyme. However, since all cells require
the treatment of parasitic infections. the enzyme the antifolates are toxic and cannot be used
for prolonged therapy. An even more
serious problem is the development of
Methotrexate contains —CH3 here
resistance to the drug by cancer cells,
O H COO– often through “amplification” of the
NH2
HN C C dihydrofolate reductase gene365,372– 374
N N COO– as discussed in Chapter 27. Cells may
N H also become resistant to methotrexate
and other antifolates as a result of
mutations that prevent efficient uptake
H2N N N
of the drug,375 cause increased action
Aminopterin (4-amino-4-deoxyfolic acid)
of effux pumps in the cell,376 reduce
the affinity of dihydrofolate reductase
Another dihydrofolate inhibitor trimethoprim is for the drug,377 or interfere with conversion of the
an important antibacterial drug, usually given together drug to polyglutamate derivatives which are better
with a sulfonamide. Although it is not as close a inhibitors than free methotrexate.378,379 Cell surface
structural analog of folic acid as is methotrexate, it is folate receptors, present in large numbers in some
tumor cells, can be utilized to bring suitably designed
antifolate drugs or even unrelated cytotoxic com-
OCH3 pounds into tumor cells.379a Some tumor cells are
NH2
more active than normal cells in generating folyl poly-
glutamates, contributing to the effectiveness of meth-
N
CH2 O-CH2CH2-OCH3
otrexate.379 Resistance of E. coli cells to trimethoprin
may result from acquisition by the bacteria of a new
H2N N Trimethoprim OCH3 form of dihydrofolate reductase carried by a plasmid.380
Cl Structure and mechanism. Dihydrofolate reduc-
NH2 tase from E. coli is a small 159-residue protein with a
central parallel stranded sheet,381– 383 while that from
N higher animals is 20% larger. The three-dimensional
structures of the enzymes from Lactobacillus,384 chicken,
mouse, and human are closely similar. The NADP
H2N N CH2CH3
binds at the C-terminal ends of β strands as in other
Pyrimethamine
dehydrogenases. In Fig. 15-19 the reduced nicotinamide
end of NADP+ is seen next to a molecule of bound
a potent inhibitor which binds far more tightly to the dihydrofolate.381 The side chain carboxylate of Asp 27
enzyme from bacteria than to that from humans.366– 368 makes a pair of hydrogen bonds to the pterin ring as
The inhibitors pyrimethamine andcycloguanil are shown on the right-hand side of Eq. 15-42. As can be
effective antimalarial drugs.369,370 seen from Fig. 15-19, the nicotinamide ring of NADP+
An enormous number of synthetic compounds have is correctly positioned to have donated a hydride ion to
been prepared in the hope of finding still more effec- C-6 to form THF with the 6S configuration. Notice that
tive inhibitors. By 1984, over 1700 different inhibitors in Eq. 15-42 the NH hydrogen atom at the 3' position

--- Page 809 ---

806 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
R O H COO–
O HN
C
C
N N COO–
HN H
NADPH or polyglutamates
R
a
H2N N N DHF NADPH O HN
Folate b H H
N
HN
*
H2N N N
H
Serine O
Glycine or H C
c c’ H
(nonenzymatic)
CO 2
Gly
R
2-Oxopantoate
O CH3 HN
+ NADPH NADP
N
HN
2-Oxovalerate
DHF H2N N N
H
Purines Histidine Thymine (thymidylate)
NADP+
Hydroxymethylcytosine
Formimino-Gly Formimino-Glu d (hydroxymethyldeoxy CMP)
NADPH
NH 3 OH–
h
ADP ATP
+ P
i
5-Formimino-THF 5,10-Methenyl-THF 5-Formyl-THF (leucovorin)
HO
2
e
O
H C
O–
g
ATP
ADP
+ P
i
Figure 15-18 Tetrahydrofolic acid and its one-carbon derivatives.
e
R=
Tetrahydrofolate
Methionine
Methane
Homocysteine
R
O H2C N
H
N
HN i
6
H2N N N j
H
5,10-Methylene-THF 5-Methyl-THF
k
HN + R O
O CH HN R O HC N O HC HN R
N N m N5
HN HN HN
l
H2N N N H2N N N H2N N N
H H H
O
HO
2 g’ HC 10
O N R n
H Purines
Formate N5
o
HN
NADP+ Formylmethionine
NADPH
H2N N N f
H
p
10-Formyl-THF CO
2
CO

--- Page 810 ---

D. Tetrahydrofolic Acid and Other Pterin Coenzymes 807
H of the pterin makes a hydrogen bond to
H O Asp 27. However, X-ray studies have shown
O – that the pteridine ring of methotrexate is
H H
Asp 27 O turned 180° so that its 4-NH group forms
H N 2
N 5 R hydrogen bonds to backbone carbonyls of
3 6
O Ala 97 and Leu 4 at the edge of the central
H pleated sheet while a protonated N-1
N N N8
interacts with the side chain carboxylate
1 H
H H H of Asp 27.
O
Tautomerized dihydropterin ring Because of its significance in cancer
pKa=6.5 O H therapy and its small size, dihydrofolate
Asp 27 O H reductase is one of the most studied of all
H N
enzymes. Numerous NMR studies385– 387
N R
O and investigations of catalytic mechanism
H and of other properties388 have been
N N N
conducted. Many mutant forms have been
H
created.389–391 For example, substitution
H
of Asp 27 (Asp 26 in L. casei) of the E. coli
Tetrahydrofolate (15-42)
A Closed
B Open
Figure 15-19 Drawings of the active site of E. coli dihydrofolate reductase showing the bound ligands NADP+ and tetrahydro-
folate. Several key amino acid side chains are shown in the stereoscopic views on the right. The complete ribbon structures
are on the left. (A) Closed form. (B) Open form into which substrates can enter and products can escape. From Sawaya and
Kraut.381 Courtesy of Joseph Kraut. Molscript drawings (Kraulis, 1991).

--- Page 811 ---

808 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
enzyme by Asn reduced the specific cata- TABLE 15-3
lytic activity to 1/300 that of native enzyme Single-Carbon Compounds in Order of Oxidation State of
indicating that this residue is important for Carbon
catalysis.390 The value of k for reduction
cat
of dihydrofolate is highest at low pH and O O
varies around a pK
a
of ~ 6.5.392– 394 One CH4 H3C Y H C H C CO2
interpretation is that this pK a belongs to the H H
Asp 27 carboxyl group and another is that it Methane Methyl groups Formaldehyde Formic acid H2CO3
belongs to an N-5 protonated species of the bound to O, N, S
coenzyme. As we have seen (Chapter 6) it is
O
often impossible to assign a pK to a single
a CH2OH C
group because there may be a mixture of
H
interacting tautomeric species. Despite the
Hydroxymethyl Formyl group
enormous amount of study, we still don’t
group
know quite how the proton gets to N-5 in
this reaction. Only one possibility is illus-
trated in Eq. 15-42. Asp 27 is protonated, CH2 C
the pterin ring is enolized, and a buried H
water molecule serves to relay a proton to Methylene group Methenyl group
N-5. The X-ray crystallographic studies
on the E. coli enzyme show that after the
NH
binding of substrates a conformational
C
change closes a lid over the active site (Fig.
H
15-19). This excludes water from N-5 but it
Formimino group
may permit intermittent access, allowing
transfer of a proton from a water molecule
bound to O-4 as shown in Eq. 15-42.381 C O
During the reduction of folate to dihydro- Carbon monoxide
folate a different mechanism of proton dona-
tion must be followed to allow protonation at C-7.
another single-carbon unit by loss of CO under the
2
influence of the THF and the PLP-requiring glycine
cleavage system which is discussed in the next para-
4. Single-Carbon Compounds and Groups in
graph. Free formaldehyde in a low concentration can
Metabolism
also combine with THF to form methylene-THF (Fig.
15-18, step c’ and Eq. 15-43).399
Some single-carbon compounds and groups impor-
tant in metabolism are shown in Table 15-3 in order
(from left to right) of increasing oxidation state of the
carbon atom. Groups at three different oxidation
HO H10
H2CO CH2 N
levels, corresponding to formic acid,formaldehyde,
and the methyl group, are carried by tetrahydrofolic THF 5N
acid coenzymes. While the most completely reduced
H
compound, methane, cannot exist in a combined form, H2C N
its biosynthesis depends upon reduced methanopterin, –
HO +
as does that of carbon monoxide. Figure 15-18 sum- N
marizes the metabolic interrelationships of the com-
pounds and groups in this table.
+
H
Serine as a C1 donor. For many organisms, from H H
C N
E. coli to higher animals, serine is a major precursor of
C-1 units.395– 397 The β-carbon of serine is removed as N
formaldehyde through direct transfer to tetrahydro-
folate with formation of methylene-THF and glycine
(Eq. 14-30, Fig. 15-18, step c). This is a stereospecific (15-43)
transfer in which the pro-S hydrogen on C-3 of serine
enters the pro-S position also in methylene-THF.398
The glycine decarboxylase–synthetase system.
The glycine formed in this reaction can, in turn, yield
Glycine is cleaved reversibly within mitochondria of

--- Page 812 ---

D. Tetrahydrofolic Acid and Other Pterin Coenzymes 809
plants and animals and also by bacteria to CO , NH tetrahydrofolate with release of ammonia. The
2 3,
and a methylene group which is carried by tetrahydro- dihydrolipoate is then reoxidized by NAD+ and dihy-
folic acid296,400– 403 (Fig. 15-20). Four proteins are required. drolipamide dehydrogenase (Fig. 15-20). Glycine can
The P-protein consists of two identical 100-kDa subunits, be oxidized completely in liver mitochondria with the
each containing a molecule of PLP. This protein is a methylene group of methylene-THF being converted
glycine decarboxylase which, however, replaces the to CO through reaction steps d,e, and f of Fig. 15-18.
2
lost CO by an electrophilic sulfur of lipoate rather than The glycine cleavage system is reversible and is used
2
by a proton. Serine hydroxymethyltransferase can also by some organisms to synthesize glycine.
catalyze this step of the sequence.404 The lipoate is Whether it arises from the hydroxymethyl group
bound to a second protein, the H-protein. A third of serine or from glycine, the single-carbon unit of
protein, the T-protein, carries bound tetrahydrofolate methylene-THF (which is at the formaldehyde level of
which displaces the aminomethyl group from the oxidation) can either be oxidized further to 5,10-meth-
dihydrolipoate and converts it to N5,N10-methylene enyl-THF and 10-formyl-THF (steps d and e, Fig. 15-18)
Glycine
PLP bound
to P-protein
CO
2
CH2OP
P-protein
HN H H+
N C S S
O H H
Schiff base
NADH + H+
Lipoamide
dehydrogenase
C O
H
O
NAD+ N
C
5
C N H
H
THF bound
O
HS to T-protein
H-protein
S CH2
HS SH NH3 +
H
H2N N N
N
H N
N5, N10-Methylene H
THF O H2C N10
H
NH3 +
NH
3
Figure 15-20 The reversible glycine cleavage system of mitochondria. Compare with Fig. 15-15.

--- Page 813 ---

810 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
or it can be reduced to methyl-THF (step i). The reac- of the tumor the patient is periodically given what
tions of folate metabolism occurs in both cytoplasm and would normally be a lethal dose of methotrexate, then,
mitochondria at rates that are affected by the length of about 36 h later, the patient is rescued by injection of
the polyglutamate chain. The many complexities of 5-formyl-THF. The mechanism of rescue is thought
these pathways are not fully understood.395,397 to depend upon the compound’s rapid conversion to
10-formyl-THF within cells. Tumor cells are not rescued,
Starting with formate or carbon dioxide. Most perhaps because they have a higher capacity than
organisms can, to some extent, also utilize formate as normal cells for synthesis of polyglutamates of metho-
a source of single-carbon units. Human beings have trexate.379 This observation also suggests that the major
a very limited ability to metabolize formate and the anti-cancer effect of methotrexate may not be on dihy-
accumulation of formic acid in the body following drofolate reductase but on enzymes of formyl group
ingestion of methanol is often fatal. However, many transfer that are inhibited by polyglutamate derivatives
bacteria are able to subsist on formate as a sole carbon of methotrexate.
source. Archaea may generate the formate by reduction
of CO . Utilization of formate begins with formation Catabolism of histidine and purines. Another
2
of 10-formyl-THF (Fig. 15-18, step g, lower left corner). source of single-carbon units in metabolism is the
10-Formyl-THF can be reduced to methylene-THF and degradation of histidine which occurs both in bacteria
the single-carbon unit can be transferred to glycine to and in animals via formiminoglutamate. The latter
form serine. In some bacteria three separate enzymes transfers the – CH = NH group to THF forming 5-form-
are required to convert formate to methylene-THF: imino-THF, which is in turn converted (step h, Fig. 15-18)
10-formyl-THF synthetase (Fig. 15-18, step g, presumably to 5,10-methenyl-THF and ammonia. In bacteria that
via formyl phosphate),405 methenyl-THF cyclohydrolase ferment purines, formiminoglycine is an intermediate.
(stepe, reverse), and methylene-THF dehydrogenase Again, the formimino group is transferred to THF and
(stepd, reverse). NADH is used by the acetogens but deaminated, the eventual product being 10-formyl-THF.
inE. coli and in most higher organisms NADPH is the In these organisms, the enzyme 10-formyl-THF synthase
reductant. In some bacteria and in some tumor cells, also has a very high activity.415 It probably operates
two of the three enzymes are present as a bifunctional in reverse as a mechanism for synthesis of ATP in
enzyme.406–407a In most eukaryotes all three of the this type of fermentation. In other organisms excess
enzymatic activities needed for converting formate to 10-formyl-THF may be oxidized to CO via an NADP+-
2
methylene-THF are present in a single large (200-kDa) dependent dehydrogenase (step f, Fig. 15-16), providing
dimeric trifunctional protein called formyl-THF a mechanism for detoxifying formic acid. In some
synthetase.407,408 organisms excess 10-formyl-THF may simply be hydro-
N10-Formyl-THF serves as a biological formylating lyzed with release of formate (step q).415a
agent needed for two steps in the synthesis of pu-
rines409–410b (Chapter 25) and, in bacteria and in mito-
chondria and chloroplasts, for synthesis of formyl- Thymidylate synthase. Methylene-THF serves
methionyl-tRNA411 which initiates synthesis of all as the direct precursor of the 5-methyl group of thy-
polypeptide chains in bacteria and in these organelles mine as well as of the hydroxymethyl groups of
(Chapter 29). hydroxymethylcytosine416 and of 2-oxopantoate, an
intermediate in the formation of pantothenate and coen-
N5-Formyl-THF (leucovorin). TheN5-formyl zyme A.417 The latter is a simple hydroxymethyl trans-
derivative of THF (5-formyl-THF) is a growth factor for fer reaction (Eq. 15-44) that is related to an aldol
Leuconostoc citrovorum. Following this discovery in 1949 condensation and which may proceed through an
it was called the “citrovorum factor” or leucovorin. imine of the kind shown in Eq. 15-43.
Its significance in metabolism is not clear. Perhaps it
serves as a storage form of folate in cells that have a
dormant stage, e.g., of seeds or spores.412 It may also O O
have a regulatory function.413 In some ants and in –OOC CH3 –OOC CH2OH
certain beetles, it is stored and hydrolyzed to formic
acid. The carabid beetle Galerita lecontei ejects a defen-
H3C H H3C CH3
sive spray that contains 80% formic acid.414 H2C 10
N
5-Formyl-THF can arise by transfer of a formyl
5N
group from formylglutamate and there is an enzyme
that converts 5-formyl-THF to 5,10-methenyl-THF
with concurrent cleavage of ATP.412 5-Formyl-THF is
sometimes used in a remarkable way to treat certain N5,10-Methylene-THF (15-44)
highly malignant cancers. Following surgical removal

--- Page 814 ---

D. Tetrahydrofolic Acid and Other Pterin Coenzymes 811
During thymine formation the coenzyme is oxi- (dUMP). As a consequence the 6 position becomes a
dized to dihydrofolate, which must be reduced by nucleophilic center which can combine with methylene-
dihydrofolate reductase to complete the catalytic cycle. THF as shown in step b of Fig. 15-21. After tautomer-
A possible mechanistic sequence for thymidylate ization (step c) this adduct eliminates THF (step d) to
synthase, an enzyme of known three-dimensional give a 5-methylene derivative of the dUMP. The latter
structure,354,418–421a is given in Fig. 15-21. In the first step immediately oxidizes the THF by a hydride ion transfer
(a) a thiolate anion, from the side chain of Cys 198 of to form thymidylate and dihydrofolate.422,422a
the 316-residue Lactobacillus enzyme, adds to the 5 In protozoa thymidylate synthase and dihydro-
position of the substrate 2'-deoxyuridine monophosphate folate reductase exist as a single bifunctional protein.
E160
C
H –O O
O H
H
H A H R
H O H199
HO
N O
N229 C
H
CH2 N+ NH
H
O a HN
HN
O N – S–Enz O N S–Enz Methylene-THF
P O O
b
dUMP
OH
A H R
A–H H R
O B HO H–B
H CH2 N+ NH
HN CH2 N NH c HN H
S–Enz
O N H O N S–Enz
d
A
H R
A–H H
O O
CH2 HN NH e CH3
HN HN
H folate
2
O N S–Enz O N S–Enz
f
O
CH3
HN
A:, A–H, B:; catalytic basic or acidic groups
O N –S–Enz
Thymidylate (dTMP)
Figure 15-21 Probable mechanism of action of thymidylate synthase. After Huang and Santi422 and Hyatt et al.354

--- Page 815 ---

812 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Consequently, in methotrexate-resistant strains of protozoal parasitic diseases for which few suitable
Leishmania (and also in cancer cells) both enzyme drugs are known.
activities are increased equally by gene amplification.423 Cells of E. coli, when infected with T-even bacterio-
This presents a serious problem in the treatment of phage, convert dCMP to 5-hydroxymethyl-dCMP423a
BOX 15-E THYMIDYLATE SYNTHASE, A TARGET ENZYME IN CANCER CHEMOTHERAPYa
O more potent drug than 5-fluoro-
uracil. It binds into the active
F
site of thymidylate synthase
HN
and reacts in the initial steps of
catalysis. However, the 5-H of
O N 2'-deoxyuridine, the normal
H
substrate, must be removed as
5-Fluorouracil
H+ (step c of Fig. 15-21) in order
for the reaction to continue. The
5-F atom cannot be removed in
5-Fluorouridine 5’-phosphate Triphosphate RNA this way and a stable adduct is
formed.d,e A crystal structure
Reduction (via diphosphate)
containing both the bound
5-F-2’-deoxyuridine dUMP Methylene-THF 5-fluorodeoxyuridine and
THF methylene-THF supports this
5-Fluoro-2’- NADP +
conclusion.e
deoxyuridine – – Antifolates
5’-phosphate NADPH Thymidylate synthase
requires methylene tetrahydro-
Thymidylate Dihydrofolate
synthetase dTMP Dihydrofolate folate as a reductant and the
reductase
reduction of dihydrofolate is also
an important part of the process.
In protozoa dihydrofolate reduc-
If an animal or bacterial cells are deprived of tase and thymidylate synthase occur as a single-
thymine they can no longer make DNA. However, chain bifunctional enzyme.f As has been pointed
synthesis of proteins and of RNA continues for out in the main text, such folic acid analogs as
some time. This can be demonstrated experimen- methotrexate are among the most useful anticancer
tally with thymine-requiring mutants. However, drugs. By inhibiting dihydrofolate reductase they
sooner or later such cells lose their vitality and die. deprive thymidylate synthase of an essential
The cause of this thymineless deathb is not entirely substrate.
clear. Perhaps thymine is needed to repair damage Because 5-fluorouracil acts on normal cells as
to DNA and if it is not available transcription well as cancer cells, its usefulness is limited. Know-
eventually becomes faulty. Chromosome breakage ledge of the chemistry and three-dimensional
is also observed.c Whatever the cause of death, the structure of thymidylate synthase complexes is
phenomenon provides the basis for some of the being used in an attempt to discover more specific
most effective chemotherapeutic attacks on cancer. and effective drugs that attack this enzyme.g,h
Rapidly metabolizing cancer cells are especially
vulnerable to thymineless death. Consequently, a Friedkin, M. (1973) Adv. Enzymol.38, 235–292
b Sahasrabudhe, P. V., and Gmeiner, W. H. (1997) Biochemistry36,
thymidylate synthase is an important target enzyme
5981–5991
for inhibition. One powerful inhibitor is the mono- c Ayusawa, D., Shimizu, K., Koyama, H., Takeishi, K., and Seno,
phosphate of 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine. The T. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 12448–12454
inhibition was originally discovered when 5-fluoro- d Huang, X. F., and Arvan, P. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 20417–
20423
uracil was recognized as a useful cancer chemo-
e Hyatt, D. C., Maley, F., and Montfort, W. R. (1997) Biochemistry
therapeutic agent. 36, 4585–4594
Fluorouracil has many effects in cells, including f Ivanetich, K. M., and Santi, D. V. (1990) FASEB J.4, 1591–1597
incorporation into RNA,b but the inhibition of g Shoichet, B. K., Stroud, R. M., Santi, D. V., Kuntz, I. D., and
Perry, K. M. (1993) Science259, 1445–1449
thymidylate synthase by the reduction product may
h Weichsel, A., Montfort, W. R., Ciesla, J., and Maley, F. (1995)
be the most useful effect in chemotherapy. In fact, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 3493–3497
5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine is a much less toxic and

--- Page 816 ---

E. Specialized Coenzymes of Methanogenic Bacteria 813
and suitably infected cells of Bacillus + +
H H
subtilis form 5-hydroxymethyl-
10 H
dUMP.424,425 These products can be O H2C N R O H2C N R
formed by attack of OH– on quinonoid 5 +
intermediates of the type postulated for HN N CH2 HN N CH2
thymidylate synthetase (formed in step
d of Fig. 15-21).416 A related reaction
is the posttranscriptional conversion
H2N N N H2N N N
H H
of a single uracil residue in tRNA mole- Methylene-THF
Internal redox
cules of some bacteria to a thymine ring
reaction
(aribothymidylic acid residue). In this
case, FADH is used as a reducing agent O CH3 O CH3
2
to convert the initial adduct of Fig. 15-21 +
N N
to the ribothymidylic acid and THF.426 HN CH2NHR HN CH2NHR
FAD
Synthesis of methyl groups. The
reduction of methylene-THF to 5-methyl- HN N N NADPH NADP+ H2N N N
H H
THF within all living organisms from 5-Methyl-quinonoid-THF Methyl-THF (15-45)
bacteria to higher plants and animals
provides the methyl groups needed in
biosynthesis.426a These are required for
formation of methionine and, from it,
S-adenosylmethionine. The latter is used to modify the acetogenic bacteria.432 This corrinoid coenzyme-
proteins, nucleic acids, and other biochemicals through dependent process is also considered in Chapter 16.
methylation of specific groups. In the methanogens,
reduction of a corresponding methylene derivative of
methanopterin gives rise to methane (Section F). E. Specialized Coenzymes of Methanogenic
Mammalian methylene-THF reductase is a FAD- Bacteria
containing flavoprotein that utilizes NADPH for the
reduction to 5-methyl-THF.427,428 Matthews429 suggested Methane-producing bacteria433,434 obtain energy
that the mechanism of this reaction involves an internal by reducing CO with molecular hydrogen:
2
oxidation–reduction reaction that generates a 5-methyl-
quinonoid dihydro-THF (Eq. 15-45). Methylene-THF CO + 4H → CH + 2H O
2 2 4 2
reductase of acetogenic bacteria is also a flavoprotein ∆G ° = – 131 kJ / mol (15-46)
but it contains Fe–S centers as well. The 237-kDa α β
4 4
oligomer contains two molecules of FAD and four to Some species are also able to utilize formate or formal-
six of both Fe and S2– ions.430,431 dehyde as reducing agents.435 These compounds are
The methyl group of methyl-THF is incorporated oxidized to CO , the reducing equivalents formed being
2
into methionine by the vitamin B -dependent methio- used to reduce CO to methane. Carbon monoxide can
12 2
nine synthase which is discussed in Chapter 16. Mat- also be converted to CO .
2
thews suggested that methionine synthase may also
make use of the 5-methyl-quinonoid-THF of Eq. 15-45. CO + H O→ CO + H
2 2 2
An initial reduction step would precede transfer of the ∆G ° = – 20 kJ / mol (15-47)
methyl group. Methyl-THF is a precursor to acetate in
HS CH2 O H COO– H O
CH2 SO3 – HS (CH2)6 C C CH2 N C
N C O PO3 2– H
Coenzyme M R
H H CH3 O
7-Mercaptoheptanoylthreonine phosphate Formylmethanofuran
COO– O COO– O
CH2 NH2
H
CH CH N
–OOC CH N CH N O CH2
H H O
COO– O COO–
Methanofuran

--- Page 817 ---

814 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
By using the combined reactions of Eqs. R
CO
2
15-46 and 15-47 the bacteria can subsist
on CO alone (Eq. 15-48):
NH3 + a
4CO + 2 H O→ 3CO + CH O
∆G ° = – 2 211 kJ / mo 2 l of 4 Meth M an F o R furan R
methane formed (15-48) O
H
N C
Some species reduce methanol to methane O O –
via Eqs. 15-49 or 15-50. Carbamate
H
2
H2X
CH OH + H → CH + H O
3 ∆G ° = – 1 2 13 kJ / m 4 ol 2 (15-49) b
X + H2O
4CH 3 OH→ 3CH 4 + CO 2 + 2 H 2 O R
∆G ° = – 107 kJ / mol of
methane formed (15-50) H H
N C
O
To accomplish these reactions a O
Formyl-MFR
O H5
surprising variety of specialized cofac- N
HN R'
tors are needed.351,352,434 The first of
c
these,coenzyme M, 2-mercaptoethane
MFR
sulfonate, was discovered in 1974.436 It H2N N N
H
is the simplest known coenzyme. Later, 5-Formyl-HMPT
4 H4-Methanopterin
the previously described 5-deazaflavin d H4MPT
F 420 (Section B), a nickel tetrapyrrole H 2 O
F (Chapter 16), methanopterin (Fig. 5,10-Methenyl-HMPT
430 4
15-17),437 the “carbon dioxide reduction F H
420 2
factor” called methanofuran,352,438 and e
7-mercaptoheptanoylthreonine
H F
phosphate439,440 were also identified. 2 420
A sketch of the metabolic pathways 5,10-Methylene-H 4 MPT
followed in methane formation is given F H
420 2
in Fig. 15-22.352,435 In the first step (a) f
the amino group of methanofuran is H F
2 420
thought to add to CO to form a carbam-
2 5-CH-MPT
ate which is reduced to formylmethano- 3
furan by H and an intermediate carrier CoM-SH
2
g
H X in step b. The formyl group is then
2
transferred to tetrahydromethanopterin
(H MPT) (step c)440a and is cyclized and
4 H3C S
reduced in two stages in steps d,e, and f. SO3 –
The reductant is the deazaflavin F and Methyl-CoM
420
the reactions parallel those for conver- H 2 H-S-HTP
sion of formyl-THF to methyl-THF X h
i
(Fig. 15-18).431,440b,441 The methyl group F [Ni]
430
of methyl-H 4 MPT is then transferred to H 2 X CoM-S-S-HTP See Fig. 16-27
the sulfur atom of the thiolate anion of
CH
coenzyme M, from which it is reduced 4
off as CH . This is a complex process
4
requiring the nickel-containing F , Figure 15-22 Tentative scheme for reduction of carbon dioxide to
430
FAD, and 7-mercaptoheptanoylthreo- methane by methanogens. After Rouvière et al.352 and Thauer et al.435
nine phosphate (HS-HTP).
The HS-HTP may be the 2-electron
donor for the reduction. The mixed-disulfide CO to formylmethanofuran. A complex of proteins
2
CoM-S-S-HTP appears to be an intermediate and also that is unstable in oxygen is also needed. The principal
an allosteric effector for the first step, the reduction of component of the methyl reductase binds two molecules

--- Page 818 ---

F. Quinones, Hydroquinones, and Tocopherols 815
of the nickel-containing F . It also binds two moles of have also been studied intensively. The 450-residue
430
CoM-SH noncovalently. The binding process requires soluble enzyme from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus is par-
ATP as well as the presence of other proteins, notably tially homologous to the methanol dehydrogenase.446a,446b
those of the hydrogenase system. PQQ and the other quinone prosthetic groups
Coenzyme M, previously found only in methano- described here all function in reactions that would be
genic archaeobacteria, has recently been discovered in possible for pyridine nucleotide or flavin coenzymes.
both gram-negative and gram-positive alkene-oxidizing All of them, like the flavins, can exist in oxidized, half-
eubacteria. It seems to function in cleavage of epoxy reduced semiquinone and fully reduced dihydro
rings and as a carrier of hydroxyalkyl groups.441a See forms. The questions to be asked are the same as we
also Chapter 17. asked for flavins. How do the substrates react? How
is the reduced cofactor reoxidized? In nonenzymatic
reactions alcohols, amines, and enolate anions all add
F. Quinones, Hydroquinones, and Tocopherols at C-5 of PQQ to give adducts such as that shown for
methanol in Eq. 15-51, step a.444,449,449a Although many
additional reactions are possible, this addition is a
1. Pyrroloquinoline Quinone (PQQ) reasonable first step in the mechanism shown in Eq.
15-51. An enzymatic base could remove a proton as is
Bacteria that oxidize methane or methanol indicated in step b to give PQQH . The pathway for
2
(methylotrophs) employ a periplasmic methanol dehy- reoxidation (step c) might involve a cytochrome b,
drogenase that contains as a bound coenzyme, the cytochrome c, or bound ubiquinone.445,446
pyrroloquinoline quinone designated PQQ or meth-
oxatin (Eq. 15-51).442– 444 This fluorescent ortho-quinone
CHOH
3
COOH
H
1 4 a H–
COOH N 2 5
O O
9 3 O HO O H
8
PQQ C
4 B H H
7 5
HOOC N O c
6
O Reoxidation b
HCO
PQQ (oxidized) COOH 2
H
COOH N
OH
HOOC N OH
HO (15-51)
OH
PQQH2 (reduced)
Although the soluble PQQ-dependent glucose dehydro-
genase forms, with methylhydrazine, an adduct similar
is released when the protein is denatured. Some other to that depicted in Eq. 15-51,449b the structure of a
bacterial alcohol dehydrogenases445,445a and glucose glucose complex of the PPQH - and Ca2+-containing
2
dehydrogenases446-446d contain the same cofactor. enzyme at a resolution of 0.2 nm suggests a direct
PQQ-containing methanol dehydrogenase from hydride ion transfer. The only base close to glucose
Methylophilusis a dimer of a 640-residue protein con- C1 is His 144. The C1-H proton lies directly above the
sisting of two disulfide-linked peptide chains with PQQH C5 atom. Oubrie et al.446a propose a deproto-
2
one noncovalently bound PQQ.447 The large subunit nation of the C1-OH by His 144 and H– transfer to
contains a β propellor (Fig. 15-23), which is similar to C5 of PQQ followed by tautomerization (Eq. 15-52).
that in the protein G shown in Fig. 11-7. The PQQ Theoretical calculations by Zheng and Bruice449c favor
i
binding site lies above the propellor and is formed by a simpler mechanism with hydride transfer to the
a series of loops. The coenzyme interacts with several oxygen atom of the C4 carbonyl (green arrows). In
polar protein side chains and with a bound calcium either case, the Ca2+ would assist by polarizing the C5
ion.448 Bacterial PQQ-dependent glucose dehydrogenases carbonyl group.

--- Page 819 ---

816 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
A
B
Figure 15-23 (A) Stereoscopic view of the H subunit
of methanol dehydrogenase. Eight four-stranded anti-
parallelβ sheets, labeled W1–W8, form the base of the
subunit. Several helices and two additional β-sheet
structures (labeled βx and βy) form a cap over the base.
The PQQ is located in a funnel within the cap approxi-
mately on an eight-fold axis of pseudosymmetry.
Courtesy of Xia et al.447 (B) Schematic view of the
active site. W467 is parallel to the plane of PQQ. All
hydrogen-bond interactions between PQQ and its
surrounding atoms, except for the three water mole-
cules, are indicated. Courtesy of White et al.448
OH
2. Copper Amine Oxidases
O
HO
His 144 At first it appeared that PQQ had a broad distribu-
HO O H
tion in enzymes, including eukaryotic amine oxidases.
OH
However, it was discovered, after considerable effort,
H
that there are additional quinone cofactors that func-
5 4 H– tion in oxidation of amines. These are derivatives of
O tyrosyl groups of specific enzyme proteins. Together
with enzymes containing bound PQQ they are often
O
calledquinoproteins.450– 454
Ca2+ 4
5
O
Topaquinone (TPQ). Both bacteria and eukary-
H
–O otes contain amine oxidases that utilize bound copper
Ca2+ H+ ions and O 2 as electron acceptors and form an aldehyde,
NH , and H O . The presence of an organic cofactor
3 2 2
OH was suggested by the absorption spectra which was
variously attributed to pyridoxal phosphate or PQQ.
HO
(15-52) However, isolation from the active site of bovine serum

--- Page 820 ---

F. Quinones, Hydroquinones, and Tocopherols 817
amine oxidase established the structure of the reduced O
form of the cofactor as a trihydroxyphenylalanyl H
group covalently linked in the peptide chain.455,456 N
CH
Its oxidized form is called topaquinone:
H2C
H
O O
N
H H NH
N C N C
CH CH
CH2 CH2
O
O 1 HO HC
6 N O
2 H
5 O
3
O O Tryptophan tryptophylquinone (TTQ)
4
OH O
Topaquinone (TPQ)
Three-dimensional structures. The TPQ-con-
taining amine oxidase from E. coli is a dimer of 727-
The same cofactor is present in an amine oxidase from residue subunits with one molecule of TPQ at position
E. coli457– 460 and in other bacterial461– 463 fungal,463a 402 in each subunit.457,458 Methylamine dehydrogenase
plant,464 and mammalian464a amine oxidases. is also a large dimeric protein of two large 46.7-kDa
subunits and two small 15.5-kDa subunits. Each large
subunit contains a TTQ cofactor group.468,471,471a
O Reduced TTQ is reoxidized by the 12.5-kDa blue copper
H protein amicyanin. Crystal structures have been
N C
determined for complexes of methylamine dehydroge-
CH
nase with amicyanin471 and of these two proteins with
CH2 a third protein, a small bacterial cytochrome c.472,472a
O C H
N
Mechanisms. Studies of model reactions473– 476
and of electronic, Raman,466,477,478 ESR,479,480 and NMR
HN
spectra and kinetics481 have contributed to an under-
O
standing of these enzymes.459,461,464,482,483 For these
O copper amine oxidases the experimental evidence
Lysine tyrosylquinone (LTQ) suggests an aminotransferase mechanism.450,453,474,474a-d
The structure of the E.coli oxidase shows that a single
copper ion is bound by three histidine imidazoles and
Lysine tyrosylquinone (LTQ). Another copper is located adjacent to the TPQ (Eq. 15-53). Asp 383 is a
amine oxidase, lysyl oxidase, which oxidizes side conserved residue that may be the catalytic base in Eq.
chains of lysine in collagen and elastin (Eq. 8-8) con- 15-53.474b A similar mechanism can be invoked for LTQ
tains a cofactor that has been identified as having a and TTQ.
lysyl group of a different segment of the protein in How is the reduced cofactor reoxidized? Presum-
place of the – OH in the 2 position of topaquinone.465 ably the copper ion adjacent to the TPQ functions in
Lysyl oxidase plays an essential role in the crosslinking this process, passing electrons one at a time to the
of collagen and elastin. next carrier in a chain. There is no copper in the TTQ-
containing subunits. Electrons apparently must jump
Tryptophan tryptophanylquinone (TTQ). This about 1.6 nm to the copper ion of amicyanin, then
recently discovered quinone cofactor is similar to the another 2.5 nm to the iron ion of the cytochrome c.472
lysyl tyrosylquinone but is formed from two trypto- Reoxidation of the aminoquinol formed in Eq. 15-53,
phanyl side chains.466 It has been found in methyl- stepd, yields a Schiff base whose hydrolysis will release
amine dehydrogenase from methylotrophic gram- ammonia and regenerate the TTQ. Intermediate states
negative bacteria467– 469 and also in a bacterial aromatic with Cu+ and a TTQ semiquinone radical have been
amine dehydrogenase.470 observed.483a

--- Page 821 ---

818 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
A closely related series of
O R-CH 2 NH 3 + O plastoquinones occur in chloro-
plasts (Chapter 23). In these com-
H B
Cu 2+ O H H a Cu 2+ O HH p of o u u n b d iq s u t i h n e o t n w e o a r m e e r t e h p o l x a y ce l d g r b o y ups
O H NN + CC methyl groups (Fig. 15-24). The
O– TPQ O– HH RR most abundant of these com-
HH
NH 2e– pounds, plastoquinone A, con-
3
b tains nine prenyl units.493,494
d
Addition of the hydroxyl
HO
2 group of the reduced ubiqui-
– – none or plastoquinone to the
O O
adjacent double bond leads to
H c H
a chroman-6-ol structure. The
Cu 2+ O Cu2+ O H 2 O RR compounds derived from ubiqui-
+
H NNHH 22 R H NN CC none in this way are called
O– O C O– H HH ubichromanols (Fig. 15-24).
Aminoquinol H (15-53) The corresponding ubichromenol
(Fig. 15-24) has been isolated
from human kidney. Plasto-
chromanols are derived from plastoquinone. That
3. Ubiquinones, Plastoquinones, Tocopherols, from plastoquinone A, first isolated from tobacco, is
and Vitamin K also known as solanochromene.
A closely related and important family of chro-
In 1955, R. A. Morton and associates in Liverpool manols are the tocopherols or vitamins E (Fig. 15-24,
announced the isolation of a quinone which they Box 15-G). Tocopherols are plant products found
named ubiquinone for its ubiquitous occurrence.484,485 primarily in plant oils and are essential to proper
It was characterized as a derivative of benzoquinone nutrition of humans and other animals. α-Tocopherol
attached to an unsaturated polyprenyl (isoprenoid) is the most abundant form of the vitamin E family;
side chain (Fig. 15-24). In fact, there is a family of smaller amounts of the β,δ, and γ forms occur, as do
ubiquinones: that from bacteria typically contains six a series of tocotrienols which contain unsaturated
prenyl units in its side chain, while most ubiquinones isoprenoid units.495 The configuration of α-tocopherol
from mammalian mitochondria contain ten. Ubiqui- is 2R,4'R,8'R as indicated in Fig. 15-24. When α-toco-
none was also isolated by F. L. Crane and associates pherol is oxidized, e.g., with ferric chloride, the ring can
using isooctane extraction of mitochondria. These be opened by hydrolysis to give tocopherolquinones
workers proposed that the new quinone, which they (Fig. 15-24), which can in turn be reduced to tocopherol-
calledcoenzyme Q, might participate in electron hydroquinones. Large amounts of the tocopherol-
transport. As is described in Chapter 18, this function quinones have been found in chloroplasts.
has been fully established. Both the name ubiquinone Another important family of quinones, related in
and the abbreviation Q are in general use. A subscript structure to those already discussed, are the vitamins
indicates the number of prenyl units, e.g., Q . K (Fig. 15-24, Box 15-F). These occur naturally as two
10
Ubiquinones can be reversibly reduced to the hydro- families. The vitamins K (phylloquinones) have
1
quinone forms (Fig. 15-24), providing a basis for their only one double bond in the side chain and that is in
function in electron transport within mitochondria and the prenyl unit closest to the ring. This suggests again
chloroplasts.486– 490 the possibility of chromanol formation. In the vitamin
While vitamin E (Box 15-G) and vitamin K (Box K (menaquinone) series, a double bond is present
2
15-F) are dietary essentials for humans, ubiquinone is in each of the prenyl units. A synthetic compound
apparently not. Animals are able to make ubiquinones menadione completely lacks the polyprenyl side chain
in quantities adequate to meet the need for this essen- and bears a hydrogen in the corresponding position on
tial component of mitochondria. However, an extra the ring. Nevertheless, menadione serves as a synthetic
dietary supplement may sometimes be of value.491 A vitamin K, apparently because it can be converted in
reduced level of ubiquinone has been reported in gum the body to forms containing polyprenyl side chains.
tissues of patients with periodontal disease.492
Ubiquinones are being tested as possible protectants
against heart damage caused by lack of adequate
oxygen or by drugs.491

--- Page 822 ---

F. Quinones, Hydroquinones, and Tocopherols 819
These two methoxyl these membranes. Within some my-
groups are replaced
by CH3 groups in cobacteria vitamin K apparently
plastoquinones
participates in electron transport
OCH3 OCH3
chains in the same way (see Chapter
H3CO O H3CO OH 18). Some bacteria contain both
+ 2[H] menaquinones and ubiquinones.
The vitamin E derivative
O H HO H (cid:1)-tocopherolquinone (Fig. 15-24)
n n
CH3 CH3 CH3 CH3 can also serve as an electron carrier,
Ubiquinones (coenzyme Q) Reduced ubiquinone being reversibly reduced to the hydro-
n = 6–10 quinone form α-tocopherolquinol.
Such a function has been proposed
OCH3
for the anaerobic rumen bacterium
CH3 CH3
H3CO O Butyrovibrio fibrisolvens.497
H
When a single hydrogen atom is
n–1 removed from a hydroquinone or from
HO a chromanol such as a tocopherol, a
A double bond is present
CH3 here in ubichromenol free radical is formed (Eq. 15-54).
Ubichromanol Phenols substituted in the 2, 4, and
6 positions give especially stable
Tocotrienols contain
CH3 double bonds here radicals.
H3C 8 O
CH3 CH3
H β-Tocopherol contains H in position 7
1 H γ-Tocopherol contains H in position 5
7 2 δ-Tocopherol contains H in positions 5 and 7
OH O
3
1' 3
HO 6 4
5
6 2
CH3 –[H]
α-Tocopherol (vitamin E)
CH3 4
H3C O OH(R) OH (R)
(15-54)
O H
Both the presence of methyl substitu-
3
CH3 HO CH3 CH3 ents in the tocopherols and their
Tocopherolquinone of chloroplasts chromanol structures increase the
ability of these compounds to form
relatively stable radicals.498,499 This
ability is doubtless probably impor-
O
tant also in the function of ubiquino-
nesand plastoquinones. Ubiquinone
n = 4,5. In the phylloquinone
O H b (v o i n ta d m is in p K re 1 s ) e s n e t r i i e n s t o h n e l i y n o n n er e m d o o s u t b u le nit radicals (semiquinones) are probably
intermediates in mitochondrial elec-
n of the isoprenoid side chain.
CH3 CH3 tron transport (Chapter 18) and radi-
Vitamins K cals amounting to as much as 40% of
the total ubiquinone in the NADH-
Figure 15-24 Structures of the isoprenoid quinones and vitamin E. ubiquinone reductase of heart mito-
chondria have been detected by EPR
measurements.500,501
The equilibria governing semi-
4. Quinones as Electron Carriers quinone formation from quinones are similar to those
for the flavin semiquinones which were discussed in
Ubiquinones function as electron transport agents Section B,6. Two consecutive one-electron redox steps
within the inner mitochondrial membranes496 and also can be defined. Their redox potentials will vary with
within the reaction centers of the photosynthetic mem- pH because of a pK for the semiquinone in the pH 4.5
a
branes of bacteria (Eq. 23-32).484,488,494 The plasto- – 6.5 region. For ubiquinone this pK is about 4.9 in
a
quinones also function in electron transport within water and 6.45 in methanol. A pK of over 13 in the
a

--- Page 823 ---

820 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
hydroquinone form502 will have little effect on redox Dihydrovitamin K
potentials near pH 7. The potential for the one-elec-
tron reaction Q + e–→ Q– is evaluated most readily.
O2
For this reaction E°’ (pH 7) is –0.074,–0.13,–0.17, and
–0.23 for 2,3-dimethylbenzoquinone, plastoquinone, O
ubiquinone, and phylloquinone, respectively.
CH3
Why does this entire family of compounds have 4
3
the long polyprenyl side chains? A simple answer is O O H COOH
2
that they serve to anchor the compounds in the lipid 1 H HS C
R
portion of the cell membranes where they function.
In the case of ubiquinones both the oxidized and the O
reduced forms may move freely through the lipid H
phase shuttling electrons between carriers. Peroxide Glu side chain
in protein
5. Vitamin K and (cid:2)-Carboxyglutamate
Formation
Epoxide H2O
In higher animals the only known function of O H COOH
vitamin K is in the synthesis of γ-carboxyglutamate C –C
(Gla)-containing proteins, several of which are needed
O
in blood clotting (Box 15-F, Chapter 12). Following the
(15-56)
discovery of γ-carboxyglutamate, it was shown that liver
microsomes were able to incorporate 14C-containing
bicarbonate or CO into the Gla of prothrombin and H O and a carbanion which would be stabilized by the
2 2
could also generate Gla in certain simple peptides such adjacent carboxyl group508– 511 (Eq. 15-56).
as Phe-Leu-Glu-Val. Three enzymes are required. Dowd and coworkers raised doubts that a hydroxide
All are probably bound to the microsomal mem- ion released in the active site in this manner is a strong
branes.503– 507a An NADPH-dependent reductase reduces enough base to generate the anion shown in Eq. 15-
vitamin K quinone to its hydroquinone form. Conver- 52.512,513 They hypothesized a “base strength amplifica-
sion of Glu residues to Gla residues requires this reduced tion” mechanism that begins with a peroxide formed at
vitamin K as well as O and CO . During the carboxy- C-4 followed by ring closure to form a dioxetane and
2 2
lation reaction the reduced vitamin K is converted into rearrangement to the following hypothetical strong
vitamin K 2,3-epoxide (Eq. 15-55).508 The mechanism is base.507,512,514
uncertain but a peroxide intermediate such as that
O
shown in Eq. 15-56 is probably involved. This could
be used to generate a hydroxide ion adjacent to the
CH3
pro-S -H of the glutamate side chain of the substrate.
This hydrogen could be abstracted by the OH– to form O
Phytyl
O O
–
H H HO O
α N N
CO
N 2 N
H HS H HR Hypothetical strong base
HR β O –OOC O
γ
The proposal was supported by model
O HO
COO– 2 2 COO– experiments and also by observation
Glu Gla of some incorporation of both atoms
of18O into vitamin K epoxide. How-
2
OH O
ever, theoretical calculations support
the simpler mechanism of Eq. 15-56.
CH3 CH3
5
4
3
The fact that L-threo-γ-fluoro-
O glutamate residues, in which the
6 2
1 fluorine atom is in the position corre-
Phytyl Phytyl
sponding to the pro-S hydrogen, are
OH O not carboxylated but that an erythro-
Dihydro Vitamin K- γ-fluoroglutamate is carboxylated
vitamin K 2R,3S-epoxide (15-55)

--- Page 824 ---

F. Quinones, Hydroquinones, and Tocopherols 821
BOX 15-F THE VITAMIN K FAMILY
The existence of an “antihemorrhagic factor” and Z contain γ-carboxyglutamate. The functions of
required in the diet of chicks to ensure rapid clotting proteins M and Z are unknown but protein C is a serine
of blood was reported in 1929 by Henrik Dam at the protease involved in regulation of blood coagulation
University of Copenhagen.a,b The fat-soluble material, and protein S is a cofactor that assists the action of
later designated vitamin K, causes a prompt (2 – 6 h) protein C. Other proteins that require vitamin K for
decrease in the clotting time when administered to synthesis include the 49-residue bone Gla protein (or
deficient animals and birds. The clotting time for a osteocalcin) and the 79-residue matrix Glaprotein
vitamin K-deficient chick may be greater than 240 s, found in bone and cartilage.i,j These proteins contain
but 6 h after injection of 2 µg of vitamin K it falls to three and five residues of Gla, respectively. Their
3
50–100 s.c Pure vitamin K (Fig. 15-24), a 1,4-naphtho- possible functions in mineralization are considered
quinone, was isolated from alfalfa in 1939. Within a in Chapter 8. At least two additional small human
short time two series, the phylloquinones (vitamin K ) proline-rich Gla proteins of unknown function are
1
and the menaquinones (vitamin K ), were recognized. synthesized in many tissues.k Gamma-carboxy-
2
The most prominant phylloquinone contains the phytyl glutamate also occurs in an invertebrate peptide from
group, which is also present in the chlorophylls. For fish-hunting cone snails. This “sleeper peptide,” which
a human being a dietary intake of about 30 µg per day induces sleep in mice after intracerebral injection, has
is recommended.d Additional vitamin K is normally the sequence GEE*E*LQE*NQE*LIRE*KSN. Here E*
supplied by intestinal bacteria. designates the 5 residues of Gla.l
The most obvious effect of a deficiency in vitamin An interesting facet of vitamin K nutrition and
K in animals is delayed blood clotting, which has been metabolism was revealed by the observation that cattle
traced to a decrease in the activity of prothrombin and fed on spoiled sweet clover develop a fatal hemorrhagic
of clotting factors VII, IX, and X (Chapter 12, Fig. 12-17). disease. The causative agent is dicoumarol, a com-
Prothrombin formed by the liver in the absence of vitamin pound arising from coumarin, a natural constituent of
K lacks the ability to chelate calcium ions essential for clover. Dicourmarol and the closely related synthetic
the binding of prothrombin to phospholipids and to warfarin are both potent vitamin K antagonists.
its activation to thrombin. The structural differences Warfarin is used both as a rat poison and in the treat-
between this abnormal protein and the normal pro- ment of thromboembolic disease. As rodenticides
thrombin have been pinpointed at the N terminus of hydroxycourmarin derivatives are usually safe because
the ~ 560 residue glycoprotein.e,f Tryptic peptides from a single accidental ingestion by a child or pet does little
the N termini differed in electrophoretic mobility. As harm, whereas regular ingestion by rodents is fatal.
detailed in Chapter 12, ten residues within the first 33,
which were identified as glutamate residues by the
sequence analysis on normal prothrombin, are actually OH OH
(cid:2)-carboxyglutamate (Gla). The same amino acid is
present near the N termini of clotting factors VII, IX,
CH2
and X.
H COO– O O O O
Dicoumarol
H3 +N C
H2C H
C COO– a Wasserman, R. H. (1972) Ann. Rev. Biochem.41, 179–202
b Tim Kim, X. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 118–119
COO– c Olson, R. E. (1964) Science45, 926–928
γ-Carboxyglutamate (Gla) d Shils, M. E., Olson, J. A., and Shike, M., eds. (1994) Modern
Nutrition in Health and Disease, 8th ed., Vol. 1, Lea & Febiger,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (pp. 353–355)
The fact that γ-carboxyglutamate had not been e Friedman, P. A. (1984) N. Engl. J. Med.310, 1458–1460
f Stenflo, J. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.251, 355–363
identified previously as a protein substituent is ex- g Wood, G. M., and Suttie, J. W. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 3234–3239
plained by its easy decarboxylation to glutamic acid h Wu, S.-M., Mutucumarana, V. P., Geromanos, S., and Stafford,
during treatment with strong acid. The function of D. W. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 11718–11722
vitamin K is to assist in the incorporation of the addi- i Price, P. A., and Williamson, M. K. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260,
14971–14975
tional carboxyl group into the glutamate residues of
j Price, P. A., Rice, J. S., and Williamson, M. K. (1994) Protein Sci.
preformed prothrombin and other blood-clotting
3, 822–830
factorsg,h with a resulting increase in calcium ion k Kulman, J. D., Harris, J. E., Haldeman, B. A., Davie, E. W.
affinity. (1997)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA 94, 9058–9062
Four other plasma proteins designated C, S, M, l Prorok, M., Warder, S. E., Blandl, T., and Castellino, F. J. (1996)
Biochemistry35, 16528–16534

--- Page 825 ---

822 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
suggested the indicated stereospecificity.515,516 This
6. Tocopherols (Vitamin E) as Antioxidants
was confirmed by observation of a kinetic isotope
effect when 2H is present in the pro-S position.517
The major function of the tocopherols is thought to
Addition of the carbanion to CO would generate the
2 be the protection of phospholipids of cell membranes
Gla residue. The two glutamates in the following
against oxidative attack by free radicals and organic
sequence, in which X may be various amino acids,
peroxides. Peroxidation of lipids, which is described
are carboxylated if the protein also carries a suitable
in Chapter 21, can lead to rapid development of ran-
N-terminal signal sequence: EXXXEXC. If a suitable
cidity in fats and oils. However, the presence of a small
glutamyl peptide is not available for carboxylation the
amount of tocopherol inhibits this decomposition,
postulated peroxide intermediate (Eq. 15-55) is still
presumably by trapping the intermediate radicals in
converted slowly to the 2,3-epoxide of vitamin K.
the form of the more stable tocopherol radicals (Eq.
A third enzyme is required to reduce the epoxide
15-54) which may dimerize or react with other radicals
to vitamin K (Eq. 15-57). The biological reductant is
to terminate the chain. Even though only one mole-
uncertain but dithiols such as dithiothreitol serve in
cule of tocopherol is present for a thousand molecules
the laboratory.518 See also Eq. 18-47. Protonation of an
of phospholipid, it is enough to protect membranes.523
intermediate enolate anion would give 3-hydroxy-2,
That vitamin E does function in this way is supported
3-dihydrovitamin K, an observed side reaction product.
by the observation that much of the tocopherol require-
ment of some species can be replaced by N,N’-diphenyl-
p-phenylenediamine, a synthetic antioxidant (see Table
Vitamin K epoxide + 2[H] → H O + Vitamin K
2 18-5 for the structure of a related substance). Three
(15-57)
generations of rats have been raised on a tocopherol-
free diet containing this synthetic antioxidant. How-
This reaction is of interest because of its specific inhibi-
ever, not all of the deficiency symptoms are prevented.
tion by such coumarin derivatives as Warfarin: The antioxidant role of α-tocopherol in membranes
is generally accepted.524– 526 It is thought to be critical
O O to defense against oxidative injury and to help the
body combat the development of tumors and to slow
aging. Gamma-tocopherol may be more reactive than
CH Warfarin α-tocopherol in removing radicals created by NO and
other nitrogen oxides.526 Its actions are strongly linked
HO CH2 to those of ascorbic acid (Box 18-D) and selenium. Ascor-
bate may reduce tocopherol semiquinone radicals, while
C O
selenium acts to enhance breakdown of peroxides as
CH3 described in the next section.
This synthetic compound, as well as natural cou-
G. Selenium-Containing Enzymes
marin anticoagulants (Box 15-F), inhibits both the
vitamin K reductase and the epoxide reductase.518,519
In 1957, Schwartz and associates showed that the
The matter is of considerable practical importance
toxic element selenium was also a nutritional factor
because of the spread of warfarin-resistant rats in
essential for prevention of the death of liver cells in
Europe and the United States. One resistance muta-
rats.527 Liver necrosis would be prevented by as little
tion has altered the vitamin K epoxide reductase so
as 0.1 ppm of selenium in the diet. Similar amounts of
that it is much less susceptible to inhibition by war-
selenium were shown to prevent a muscular dystrophy
farin.519,520
called“white muscle disease” in cattle and sheep
While glutamate residues in peptides of appropriate
grazing on selenium-deficient soil. Sodium selenite
sequence are carboxylated by the vitamin K-depen-
and other inorganic selenium compounds were more
dent system, aspartate peptides scarcely react.503
effective than organic compounds in which Se had
Beta-carboxyaspartate is present in protein C of the
replaced sulfur. Keshan disease, an often fatal
blood anticoagulant system (Fig. 12-17)521 and in
heart condition that is prevalent among childen in
various other proteins containing EGF homology
Se-deficient regions of China, can be prevented by
domains (Table 7-3),522 but the mechanism of its
supplementation of the diet with NaSeO .528 Even
formation is unknown. 3
the little crustacean “water flea”Daphnia needs 0.1
part per billion of Se in its water.529
Selenium has long been known to enhance the
antioxidant activity of vitamin E. Recent work suggests
that vitamin E acts as a radical scavenger, preventing

--- Page 826 ---

G. Selenium-Containing Enzymes 823
BOX 15-G VITAMIN E: THE TOCOPHEROLS
Vitamin E was recognized in 1926 as a factor action of vitamin E quinone.f Plant oils are usually
preventing sterility in rats that had been fed rancid the richest sources of tocopherols, while animal
lipids.a– e The curative factor, present in high con- products contain lower quantities.
centration in wheat germ and lettuce seed oils, is To some extent the vitamin E requirement may
a family of vitamin E compounds, the tocopherols be lessened by the presence in the diet of synthetic
(Fig. 15-24). The first of these was isolated by Evans antioxidants and by selenium. Much evidence
and associates in 1936. Vitamin E deficiency in the supports a relationship between the nutritional
rabbit or rat is accompanied by muscular degenera- need for selenium and that for vitamin E. Lack of
tion (nutritional muscular dystrophy; see also either causes muscular dystrophy in many animals
Box 15-A) and a variety of other symptoms that as well as severe edema (exudative diathesis) in
vary from one species to another. Animals deficient chicks. Since vitamin E-deficient rats have a low
in vitamin E display obvious physical deterioration selenide (Se2–) content, it has been suggested that
followed by sudden death. Muscles of deficient rats vitamin E protects reduced selenium from oxida-
show abnormally high rates of oxygen uptake, and tion.j Vitamin C (ascorbic acid), in turn, protects
abnormalities appear in the membranes of the en- vitamin E.
doplasmic reticulum as viewed with the electron
microscope. It is thought that deterioration of lyso- a Sebrell, W. H., Jr., and Harris, R. S., eds. (1972) The Vitamins,
somal membranes may be the immediate cause of Vol. 5, Academic Press, New York
b DeLuca, H. F., and Suttie, J. W., eds. (1970) The Fat-Soluble
death.
Vitamins, Univ. of Wisconsin Press, Madison, Wisconsin
The tocopherol requirement of humans is not c Machlin, L. J., ed. (1980) Vitamin E, Dekker, New York
known with certainty, but about 5 mg (7.5 IU) / day d Mino, M., Nakamura, H., Diplock, A. T., and Kayden, H. J.,
plus an additional 0.6 mg for each gram of polyun- eds. (1993) Vitamin E: Its Usefulness in Health and in Curing
Diseases, Japan Scientific Socities Press, Tokyo
saturated fatty acid consumed may be adequate.
e Packer, L., and Fuchs, J., eds. (1993) Vitamin E in Health and
It is estimated that the average daily intake is about Disease, Dekker, New York
14 mg, but the increasing use of highly refined foods f Dowd, P., and Zhend, Z. B. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
may lead to dangerously low consumption. Recent 92, 8171–8175
g Stampfer, M. J., Hennekens, C. H., Manson, J. E., Colditz, G. A.,
interestd– f has been aroused by studies that show
Rosner, B., and Willett, W. C. (1993) N. Engl. J. Med.328, 1444–
that much larger amounts of vitamin E (e.g., 100 – 1449
400 mg/day) substantially reduce the risk of coro- h Rimm, E. B., Stampfer, M. J., Ascherio, A., Giovannucci, E.,
nary disease and stroke in both womeng and menh Colditz, G. A., and Willett, W. C. (1993) N. Engl. J. Med.328,
1450–1456
and also decrease oxidative modification of brain
i Poulin, J. E., Cover, C., Gustafson, M. R., and Kay, M. M. B.
proteins.i The decrease in heart attacks and stroke (1996)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 5600–5603
may be in part an indirect effect of the anticlotting j Diplock, A. T., and Lucy, J. A. (1973) FEBS Lett.29, 205–210
excessive peroxidation of membrane lipids, while 2 GH–SH HO or R-OOH
2 2
selenium, in the enzyme glutathione peroxidase, Glutathione
acts to destroy the small amounts of peroxides that Glutathione peroxidase
do form. This was the first established function of
G—S—S—G 2HO or HO + ROH
2 2
selenium in human beings, but there are others. If we Oxidized glutathione (15-58)
include proteins from animals and bacteria, at least ten
selenoproteins are known (Table 15-4).530– 534 Seven of
these are enzymes and most catalyze redox processes. form with a preference for organic peroxides derived
The active sites most often contain selenocysteine, from phospholipids.327,538– 540 A related selenoprotein
whose selenol side chain is more acidic (pK ~ 5.2) than has been found in a human poxvirus.540a Selenocys-
a
that of cysteine and exists as –CH –Se– at neutral pH.530 teine is present at a position (residues 41 – 47) near the
2
Glutathione peroxidases catalyze the reductive N terminus of an α helix, in the ~ 180-residue polypep-
decomposition of H O or of organic peroxides by tides. A possible reaction mechanism involves attack
2 2
glutathione (G – SH) according to Eq. 15-58. At least by the selenol on the peroxide to give a selenic acid
three isoenzyme forms have been identified in mam- intermediate which is reduced by glutathione in two
mals: a cellular form,531,535– 537 a plasma form, and a nucleophilic displacement steps (Eq. 15-59).

--- Page 827 ---

824 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
– selenium in rat plasma and is also present in the human
E CH2 Se OH
body. Selenoprotein P contains ten selenocysteine
(or HO)
O 2 2 residues.550– 552a Some of these may be replaced by
H+ R
serine in a fraction of the molecules.553 A smaller
9.6-kDa skeletal muscle protein, selenoprotein W,
H OR (or H2O)
contains a single selenocysteine.554– 556 Another seleno-
+
H protein has been found in sperm cells, both in the tail
E CH2 Se OH and in a keratin-rich capsule that surrounds the mito-
chondria in the sperm midpiece.557 Lack of this protein
G S – may be the cause of the abnormal immotile spermatozoa
Reduced glutathione observed in Se-deficient rats and of reproductive diffi-
culties among farm animals in Se-deficient regions.558
HO Several selenoproteins have been found in certain
2
E CH2 Se S G bacteria and archaea. A hydrogenase from Methano-
coccus vannielii contains selenocysteine.559,560 This
– enzyme transfers electrons from H to the C-5 si face of
G S 2
the 8-hydroxy-5-deazaflavin cofactor F (Section B,4).
420
G S S G The same bacterium synthesizes two formate
(15-59)
dehydrogenases (see Fig 15-23), one of which con-
tains Se. Two Se-containing formate dehydrogenases
Three types of iodothyronine deiodinase remove are made by E. coli. One of them, which is coupled to
iodine atoms from thyroxine to form the active thyroid a hydrogenase in the formate hydrogen-lyase system
hormone triiodothyronine and also to inactivate the (see Eq. 15-37), is a 715-residue protein containing
hormone by removing additional iodine531,541– 546 (see selenocysteine at position 140.561– 563 The second has
also Chapter 25). In this case the – CH – Se– may attach selenocysteine at position 196 and functions with a
2
the iodine atom, removing it as I+ to form – CH – Se – I. nitrate reductase in anaerobic nitrate respiration.561
2
The process could be assisted by the phenolic – OH Glycine reductase is a complex enzyme530,564– 566
group if it were first tautomerized (Eq. 15-60). that catalyzes the reductive cleavage of glycine to
acetyl phosphate and ammonia (Eq. 15-61) with the
I I
H O NH 4 +
O C C HO
CH2 O O
H3C EB d
2
C
+
H N H H Glycine NH2 +
I I
a C
H
2
O H3C EB
I I
COO– c
SH b
C C CH2 O O
H + EA
Se–
CH2
N
+
H EA
SH
O
C
C
Se CH2 C
H N H H g H3C EB OH
I I
H+ + 2e– e
S–
–
Triiodothyronine
E CH2 Se
S–
EC
S f
E CH2 Se I (15-60) EA EA O
Se
O
Se CH2 C
S
A recently discovered human selenoprotein is a
H3C C
thioredoxin reductase which is present in the T cells S EC EC
P
i
of the immune system as well as in placenta and other
h
tissues.189,547– 549 The 55-kDa protein has one seleno- –S E
C
cysteine as the penultimate C-terminal residue. Another O i
mammalian selenoprotein, of uncertain function, is the H3C C Acetate
57-kDaselenoprotein P. It contains over 60% of the OPO3 2– ADP ATP (15-61)

--- Page 828 ---

G. Selenium-Containing Enzymes 825
subsequent synthesis of ATP (Eq. 14-43). Electrons for A selenium-containing xanthinedehydrogenase
reduction of the disulfide that is formed are provided is present in purine-fermenting clostridia. Like other
by NADH. A single selenocysteine residue is present xanthine dehydrogenases (Chapter 16), it converts
in the small 12-kDa subunits. The enzyme contains a xanthine to uric acid and contains nonheme iron,
dehydroalanine residue (Chapter 14) in subunit B and molybdenum, FAD, and an Fe–S center. The selenium
a thiol group in subunit C.566 An acetyl-enzyme deriv- is probably present as Se2– bound to Mo as is S2– in xan-
ative of subunit C, perhaps of its – SH group, has been thine oxidase (Fig. 16-32).567a A related reaction is cata-
identified.546 The mechanism of action is uncertain lyzed by the Fe–S protein nicotinic acid hydroxylase
but the steps in Eq. 15-61 have been suggested.567 (Eq. 15-62) found in some clostridia.568 Splitting of the
The subunits are designated E , E, and E . Step e is Mo(V) EPR signal when 77Se is present in the enzyme
A B C
particularly hard to understand because formation of shows that the selenium is present as a ligand of molyb-
a thioester in this manner is not expected to occur denum. Another member of the family is a purine
spontaneously and must be linked in some way to hydroxylase that converts purine 2-hydroxypurine,
other steps. or hypoxanthine to xanthine.567a
TABLE 15-4
Selenium-Containing Proteins
Mass Subunit Other
Enzyme Source
(kDa) composition cofactors
Glutathione peroxidases None
Cellular Mammals 21 x 4
Plasma Humans
Phospholipid Pig, rat
18
hydroperoxide
Iodothyronine deiodinases Vertebrates
Thioredoxin reductase Humans 55 × 2
Selenoprotein P Mammals 57 None
Selenoprotein W Rat 19.6
Formate dehydrogenase Bacteria - E. coli 600 α 2 β 4 γ 2-4 Hemeb
Archaea Mo; molybdopterin
Hydrogenase Bacteria α 2 β 4 γ 2 FAD; NiFeSe
Archaea
Glycine reductase Some clostridia ABC
Selenoprotein A 12
Selenoprotein B 200
Carbonyl protein C 250 Fe?
Nicotinic acid hydroxylase Clostridia 300 FAD, FeS, Mo
Purine hydroxylase Clostridia FAD, FeS, Mo
Thiolase (contains
selenomethionine) Clostridium kluyverii 39× 4 None
Carbon monoxide Oligotropha 137 × 2 α 2 β 2 γ 2 FAD; Mo;
molybdopterin
dehydrogenase carboxidovorans

--- Page 829 ---

826 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
BOX 15-H GLUTATHIONE PEROXIDASE AND ABNORMALITIES OF RED BLOOD CELLS
The processes by which hemoglobin is kept in thought to result from increased resistance to malaria
the Fe(II) state and functioning normally within intact parasites.
erythrocytes is vital to our health. Numerous hereditary Other erythrocyte defects that lead to drug sensi-
defects leading to a tendency toward anemia have tivity include a deficiency of glutathione (resulting
helped to unravel the biochemistry indicated in the from a decrease in its synthesis) and a deficiency of
accompanying scheme.a glutathione reductase (reaction b). The effects of drugs
have been traced to the production of
H O (reaction c) in red blood cells;
2 2
Autoxidizable O catalase, which converts H O into
2 2 2
drugs, AH 2 H 2 O and O 2 , is thought to function
d in a similar way. Both enzymes are
probably necessary for optimal health.
A
An excess of H O can damage
2 2
erythrocytes in two ways. It can
cause excessive oxidation of func-
G 6 P NADP+ 2 GSH HO
2 2 tioning hemoglobin to the Fe(III)-
a b c containing methemoglobin. (Methe-
moglobin is also formed spontane-
6-Phosphogluconate NADPH G S S G 2 HO ously during the course of the oxygen-
2
carrying function of hemoglobin. It
e is estimated that normally as much
NAD+ Hemoglobin(Fe2+) as 3% of the hemoglobin may be
O 2 oxidized to methemoglobin daily.)
f Nonenzymatic
O– The methemoglobin formed is reduced
2
NADH Methemoglobin(Fe3+) HO, HO back to hemoglobin through the
2 2
action of NADH-methemoglobin
g reductase (reaction f). A smaller
fraction of the methemoglobin is
Unsaturated fatty acids reduced by a similar enzyme requir-
in phospholipids ing NADPH (as indicated by the
colored arrow). A hereditary lack of
OOH the NADH-methemoglobin reductase
is also known.
A second destructive function
Fatty acid of H 2 O 2 is attack on double bonds of
hydroperoxides unsaturated fatty acids of the phos-
pholipids in cell membranes. The
resulting fatty acid hydroperoxides
About 90% of the glucose utilized by erythrocytes can react further with C–C chain cleavage and disrup-
is converted by glycolysis to lactate, but about 10% is tion of the membrane. This is thought to be the principal
oxidized (via glucose 6-phosphate) to 6-phosphoglu- cause of the hemolytic anemia induced by drugs in
conate. The oxidation (reaction a) is catalyzed by glu- susceptible individuals. The selenium-containing gluta-
cose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (Eq.15-10) using thione peroxidase is thought to decompose these fatty
NADP+. This is the principal reaction providing the acid hydroperoxides. Vitamin E (Box 15-G), acting as
red cell with NADPH for reduction of glutathione (Box an antioxidant within membranes, is also needed for
11-B) according to reaction b. Despite the important good health of erythrocytes.c,d
function of glucose-6-P dehydrogenase, ~ 400 million
persons, principally in tropical and Mediterranean a Chanarin, I. (1970) in Biochemical Disorders in Human Disease,
areas, have a hereditary deficiency of this enzyme. 3rd ed. (Thompson, R. H. S., and Wooton, I. D. P., eds), pp. 163 –
The genetic variations are numerous, with about 400 173, Academic Press, New York
b Luzzatto, L., and Mehta, A. (1995) in The Metabolic and Molecular
different ones having been identified. Although most
Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 1 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet,
individuals with this dificiency have no symptoms, the
A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 3367 – 3398, McGraw-
lack of the enzyme is truly detrimental and sometimes Hill, New York
leads to excessive destruction of red cells and anemia c Constantinescu, A., Han, D., and Packer, L. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.
during some sicknesses and in response to administra- 268, 10906 – 10913
tion of various drugs.b The survival of the defective d Liebler, D. C., and Burr, J. A. (1992) Biochemistry31, 8278 – 8284
genes, like that for sickle cell hemoglobin (Box 7-B) is

--- Page 830 ---

G. Selenium-Containing Enzymes 827
COOH NADP+ NADPH COOH How is selenium incorporated into selenocysteine-
containing proteins? This element does enter amino
acids to a limited extent via the standard synthetic
N H2O H+ O N pathways for cysteine and methionine. However, the
placement of selenocysteine into specific positions in
H
(15-62) selenoproteins occurs by the use of a minor serine-
specific tRNA that acts as a suppressor of chain termi-
nation during protein synthesis.532,533,578 (This topic is
Athiolase (Eq. 13-35) from Clostridium kluyveri dealt with further in Chapter 29.) The genes for these
is one of only two known selenoproteins that contain and presumably for other selenocysteine-containing
selenomethionine.569 However, the selenomethionine proteins have the “stop” codon TGA at the selenocys-
is incorporated randomly in place of methionine. This teine positions. However, when present in a suitable
occurs in all proteins of all organisms to some extent “context” the minor tRNA, carrying selenocysteine in
and the toxicity of selenium may result in part from place of serine, is utilized to place selenocysteine into
excessive incorporation of selenomethionine into the growing peptide chain. In bacteria, and presum-
various proteins. ably also in eukaryotes, the selenocysteinyl-tRNA is
Selenium is found to a minor extent wherever formed from the corresponding seryl-tRNA by a PLP-
sulfur exists in nature. This includes the sulfur-con- catalyzedβ-replacement reaction. The selenium donor
taining modified bases of tRNA molecules. In addition is not Se2– but selenophosphate Se – PO 2– in which the
3
to a small amount of nonspecific incorporation of Se Se– P bond is quite weak.579– 581 After addition to the
into all S-containing bases there are, at least in bacteria, aminoacrylate intermediate in the PLP enzyme the
specific Se-containing tRNAs. In E. coli one of these is Se– P bond may be hydrolytically cleaved to HPO 2–
4
specific for lysine and one for glutamate. One of the and selenocysteyl-tRNA.
modified bases has been identified as 5-methyl-amino-
methyl-2-selenouridine.570 It is present at the first
position of the anticodon, the “wobble” position.571
Selenium has its own metabolism. Through the
use of 75Se as a tracer, normal rat liver has been shown
to contain Se2–, SeO 2–, and selenium in a higher oxida-
3
tion state.572 Glutathione may be involved in reduction
of selenite to selenide.573 The nonenzymatic reduction
of selenite by glutathione yields a selenotrisulfide
derivative (Eq. 15-63). The latter is spontaneously
decomposed to oxidized glutathione and elemental
selenium or by the action of glutathione reductase to
glutathione and selenium. Selenocysteine can be
converted to alanine + elemental selenium (Eq. 14-34).
Some bacteria are able to oxidize elemental Se back to
selenite.574 Selenium undergoes biological methylation
readily in bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals (Chapter
16).575,576 This may in some way be related to the
reported effect of selenium in protecting animals
against the toxicity of mercury. Excess selenium may
appear in the urine as trimethylselenonium ions.577
4 GSH SeO2–
3
2 H+ pH 7
3 HO G S S G
2
G S Se S G
(Selenotrisulfide)
Spontaneous
Se0 Glutathione reductase
G S S G G S Se H
G Se SH (15-63)

--- Page 831 ---

828 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
References
1. Cornish-Bowden, A., ed. (1997) New Beer in an 29. Kallwass, H. K. W., Hogan, J. K., Macfarlane, 54. Dunn, M. F., Dietrich, H., MacGibbon, A. K.
Old Bottle (Eduard Buchner and the Growth of E. L. A., Martichonok, V., Parris, W., Kay, C. H., Koerber, S. C., and Zeppezauer, M. (1982)
Biochemical Knowledge), Valencia, Universitat M., Gold, M., and Jones, J. B. (1992) J. Am. Biochemistry21, 354–363
de València Chem. Soc.114, 10704 –10710 55. Jagodzinski, P. W., and Peticolas, W. L. (1981)
1a. Kalckar, H. M. (1969) Biological Phosphoryla- 30. Klinman, J. P. (1972) J. Biol. Chem.247, 7977– J. Am. Chem. Soc.103, 234–236
tions, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New 7987 56. MacGibbon, A. K. H., Koerber, S. C., Pease,
Jersey (pp. 86–97) 31. Ostovic, D., Roberts, R. M. G., and Kreevoy, K., and Dunn, M. F. (1987) Biochemistry26,
2. Rossmann, M. G., Adams, M. J., Buehner, M., M. M. (1983) J. Am. Chem. Soc.105, 7629–7631 3058–3067
Ford, G. C., Hackert, M. L., Lentz, P. J., Jr., 32. Coleman, C. A., Rose, J. G., and Murray, C. J. 57. Hennecke, M., and Plapp, B. V. (1983) Biochemis-
McPherson, A., Jr., Schevitz, R. W., and (1992)J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 9755–9762 try22, 3721–3728
Smiley, I. E. (1971) Cold Spring Harbor 33. Kong, Y. S., and Warshel, A. (1995) J. Am. 58. Plapp, B. V. (1995) Methods Enzymol.249, 91–
Symposia on Quant. Biol.36, 179–191 Chem. Soc.117, 6234–6242 119
3. Abad-Zapatero, C., Griffith, J. P., Sussman, J. 34. Lee, I.-S. H., Jeoung, E. H., and Kreevoy, M. 59. Makinen, M. W., Maret, W., and Yim, M. B.
L., and Rossmann, M. G. (1987) J. Mol. Biol. M. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 2722–2728 (1983)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.80, 2584–
198, 445–467 35. Rucker, J., Cha, Y., Jonsson, T., Grant, K. L., 2588
4. Rossmann, M. (1974) New Scientist61, 266–268 and Klinman, J. P. (1992) Biochemistry31, 60. Ryde, U. (1995) Protein Sci.4, 1124–1132
5. Eventoff, W., Rossmann, M. G., Taylor, S. S., 11489–11499 61. Ehrig, T., Muhoberac, B. B., Brems, D., and
Torff, H.-J., Meyer, H., Keil, W., and Kiltz, 36. Huskey, W. P., and Schowen, R. L. (1983) J. Bosron, W. F. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 11721–
H.-H. (1977) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.74, Am. Chem. Soc.105, 5704 –5706 11726
2677–2681 36a. Kohen, A., Cannio, R., Bartolucci, S., and 62. Hurley, T. D., Bosron, W. F., Stone, C. L., and
6. Hogrefe, H. H., Griffith, J. P., Rossmann, M. Klinman, J. P. (1999) Nature (London)399, 496– Amzel, L. M. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.239, 415–429
G., and Goldberg, E. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 499 63. Charlier, H. A., Jr., and Plapp, B. V. (2000)
13155–13162 36b. Chin, J. K., and Klinman, J. P. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 11569–11575
7. Iwata, S., and Ohta, T. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.230, Biochemistry39, 1278–1284 64. Xie, P., Parsons, S. H., Speckhard, D. C.,
21–27 36c. Northrop, D. B. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, Bosron, W. F., and Hurley, T. D. (1997) J. Biol.
8. Ostendorp, R., Auerbach, G., and Jaenicke, R. 3521–3524 Chem.272, 18558–18563
(1996)Protein Sci.5, 862–873 36d. Karsten, W. E., Hwang, C.-C., and Cook, P. F. 65. Cho, H., Ramaswamy, S., and Plapp, B. V.
9. Birktoft, J. J., Rhodes, G., and Banaszak, L. J. (1999)Biochemistry38, 4398–4402 (1997)Biochemistry36, 382–389
(1989)Biochemistry28, 6065 –6081 37. Grau, U. M., Trommer, W. E., and Rossmann, 66. Ganzhorn, A. J., Green, D. W., Hershey, A. D.,
10. Gleason, W. B., Fu, Z., Birktoft, J., and Banaszak, M. G. (1981) J. Mol. Biol.151, 289–307 Gould, R. M., and Plapp, B. V. (1987) J. Biol.
L. (1994) Biochemistry33, 2078–2088 38. Li, H., Hallows, W. H., Punzi, J. S., Pank- Chem.262, 3754–3761
11. Goward, C. R., and Nicholls, D. J. (1994) iewicz, K. W., Watanabe, K. A., and Goldstein, 67. Hake, S., Kelley, P. M., Taylor, W. C., and
Protein Sci.3, 1883–1888 B. M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 11734–11744 Freeling, M. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 5050–
12. Hall, M. D., Levitt, D. G., and Banaszak, L. J. 39. Gawlita, E., Paneth, P., and Anderson, V. E. 5054
(1992)J. Mol. Biol.226, 867–882 (1995)Biochemistry34, 6050 –6058 67a. Korkhin, Y., Kalb-Gilboa, A. J., Peretz, M.,
13. Kelly, C. A., Nishiyama, M., Ohnishi, Y., 40. Clarke, A. R., Wilks, H. M., Barstow, D. A., Bogin, O., Burstein, Y., and Frolow, F. (1998) J.
Beppu, T., and Birktoft, J. J. (1993) Biochemistry Atkinson, T., Chia, W. N., and Holbrook, J. J. Mol. Biol.278, 967–981
32, 3913–3922 (1988)Biochemistry27, 1617–1622 68. Jörnvall, H., Persson, B., Krook, M., Atrian, S.,
14. Bellamacina, C. R. (1996) FASEB J.10, 1257 – 41. Clarke, A. R., Atkinson, T., and Holbrook, J. J. Gonzàlez-Duarte, R., Jeffery, J., and Ghosh, D.
1269 (1989)Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 101–105 (1995)Biochemistry34, 6003–6013
15. Pullman, M. E., and Colowick, S. P. (1954) J. 42. Clarke, A. R., Atkinson, T., and Holbrook, J. J. 69. Ribas de Pouplana, L., and Fothergill-Gilmore,
Biol. Chem.206, 129–141 (1989)Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 145–148 L. A. (1994) Biochemistry33, 7047–7055
16. Fisher, H. F., Conn, E. E., Vennesland, B., and 43. Goldberg, J. D., Yoshida, T., and Brick, P. 69a. Benach, J., Atrian, S., Gonzàlez-Duarte, R.,
Westheimer, F. H. (1953) J. Biol. Chem.202, (1994)J. Mol. Biol.236, 1123–1140 and Ladenstein, R. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.289,
687–697 44. Cortes, A., Emery, D. C., Halsall, D. J., 335–355
17. Westheiner, F. H. (1987) in Pyridine Nucleotide Jackson, R. M., Clarke, A. R., and Holbrook, J. 70. Hawes, J. W., Crabb, D. W., Chan, R. M.,
Coenzymes: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical J. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 892–901 Rougraff, P. M., and Harris, R. A. (1995)
Aspects, Vol. A (Dolphin, D., Avramovic, O., 45. Clarke, A. R., Wigley, D. B., Chia, W. N., Biochemistry34, 4231–4237
and Poulson, R., eds), pp. 253–322, Wiley Barstow, D. A., Atkinson, T., and Holbrook, J. 71. Pawlowski, J. E., and Penning, T. M. (1994) J.
(Interscience), New York J. (1986) Nature (London)324, 699–702 Biol. Chem.269, 13502–13510
18. You, K.-s, Arnold, L. J., Jr., Allison, W. S., and 46. Deng, H., Burgner, J., and Callender, R. (1992) 72. Wilson, D. K., Nakano, T., Petrash, J. M., and
Kaplan, N. O. (1978) Trends Biochem. Sci.3, J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 7997–8003 Quiocho, F. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 14323–
265–268 47. Grau, W. M., Trommer, W. E., and Rossmann, 14330
19. Nakajima, N., Nakamura, K., Esaki, N., M. G. (1981) J. Mol. Biol.151, 289–307 73. Hoog, S. S., Pawlowski, J. E., Alzari, P. M.,
Tanaka, H., and Soda, K. (1989) J. Biochem. 48. Pettersson, G. (1987) CRC Critical Review of Penning, T. M., and Lewis, M. (1994) Proc.
106, 515–517 Biochemistry21, 349–389 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 2517–2521
20. Esaki, N., Shimoi, H., Nakajima, N., Ohshima, 49. Maret, W., and Makinen, M. W. (1991) J. Biol. 74. Wilson, D. K., Bohren, K. M., Gabbay, K. H.,
T., Tanaka, H., and Soda, K. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.266, 20636– 20644 and Quiocho, F. A. (1992) Science257, 81–84
Chem.264, 9750–9752 50. Eklund, H., and Brändén, C.-I. (1987) in 75. Rondeau, J.-M., Tête-Favier, F., Podjarny, A.,
21. Anderson, V. E., and LaReau, R. D. (1988) J. Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzyme: Chemical, Reymann, J.-M., Barth, P., Biellmann, J.-F., and
Am. Chem. Soc.110, 3695–3697 Biochemical and Medical Aspects, Vol. 2, Moras, D. (1992) Nature (London)355, 469–471
22. Almarsson, Ö., and Bruice, T. C. (1993) J. Am. Part A (Dolphin, D., Poulson, R., and Avram- 76. Tarle, I., Borhani, D. W., Wilson, D. K.,
Chem. Soc.115, 2125–2138 ovic, O., eds), pp. 51–98, Wiley, New York Quiocho, F. A., and Petrash, J. M. (1993) J. Biol.
23. Oppenheimer, N. J. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 51. Adolph, H. W., Kiefer, M., and Cedergren- Chem.268, 25687–25693
12209–12212 Zeppezauer, E. (1997) Biochemistry36, 8743– 77. Grimshaw, C. E., Bohren, K. M., Lai, C.-J., and
24. Benner, S. A., Nambiar, K. P., and Chambers, 8754 Gabbay, K. H. (1995) Biochemistry34, 14374–
G. K. (1985) J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 5513–5517 51a. Colby, T. D., Bahnson, B. J., Chin, J. K., 14384
25. Young, L., and Post, C. B. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Klinman, J. P., and Goldstein, B. M. (1998) 78. Grimshaw, C. E. (1992) Biochemistry31,
Soc.115, 1964–1970 Biochemistry37, 9295–9304 10139–10145
26. Almarsson, Ö, Karaman, R., and Bruice, T. C. 51b. Plapp, B. V., Eklund, H., and Brändén, C.-I. 79. Harrison, D. H., Bohren, K. M., Ringe, D.,
(1992)J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 8702–8704 (1978)J. Mol. Biol.122, 23–32 Petsko, G. A., and Gabbay, K. H. (1994)
27. LaReau, R. D., and Anderson, V. E. (1992) 52. Shearer, G. L., Kim, K., Lee, K. M., Wang, C. Biochemistry33, 2011–2020
Biochemistry31, 4174–4180 K., and Plapp, B. V. (1993) Biochemistry32, 80. Maniscalco, S. J., Saha, S. K., Vicedomine, P.,
28. Ohno, A., Tsutsumi, A., Kawai, Y., Yamazaki, 11186–11194 and Fisher, H. F. (1996) Biochemistry35, 89–94
N., Mikata, Y., and Okamura, M. (1994) J. Am. 53. Ramaswamy, S., Eklund, H., and Plapp, B. V. 81. Saha, S. K., Maniscalco, S. J., and Fisher, H. F.
Chem. Soc.116, 8133–8137 (1994)Biochemistry33, 5230–5237 (1996)Biochemistry35, 16483–16488
82. Smith, M. T., and Emerich, D. W. (1993) J. Biol.
Chem.268, 10746–10753

--- Page 832 ---

829
References
83. Delforge, D., Devreese, B., Dieu, M., Delaive, 110. Bolduc, J. M., Dyer, D. H., Scott, W. G., Singer, 133d.Roujeinikova, A., and 14 other authors. (1999)
E., Van Beeumen, J., and Remacle, J. (1997) J. P., Sweet, R. M., Koshland, D. E., Jr., and J. Mol. Biol.294, 527 – 535
Biol. Chem.272, 2276–2284 Stoddard, B. L. (1995) Science268, 1312–1318 133e.Parikh, S. L., Xiao, G., and Tonge, P. J. (2000)
84. Sekimoto, T., Fukui, T., and Tanizawa, K. 111. Lee, M. E., Dyer, D. H., Klein, O. D., Bolduc, J. Biochemistry39, 7645 – 7650
(1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 7262–7266 M., Stoddard, B. L., and Koshland, D. E., Jr. 134. Johnson, R. W., Marschner, T. M., and
85. Brunhuber, N. M. W., Banerjee, A., Jacobs, W. (1995)Biochemistry34, 378–384 Oppenheimer, N. J. (1988) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
R., Jr., and Blanchard, J. S. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 112. Schütz, M., and Radler, F. (1973) Arch. 110, 2257–2263
269, 16203–16211 Mikrobiol.91, 183 135. Oppenheimer, N. J. (1973) Biochem. Biophys.
86. Britton, K. L., Baker, P. J., Engel, P. C., Rice, D. 113. Hwang, C.-C., and Cook, P. F. (1998) Biochem- Res. Commun.50, 683–690
W., and Stillman, T. J. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.234, istry37, 15698–15702 136. Acheson, S. A., Kirkman, H. N., and Wolfend-
938–945 114. Karsten, W. E., Gavva, S. R., Park, S.-H., and en, R. (1988) Biochemistry27, 7371–7375
87. Scapin, G., Blanchard, J. S., and Sacchettini, J. Cook, P. F. (1995) Biochemistry34, 3253–3260 137. Marshall, J. L., Booth, J. E., and Williams, J. W.
C. (1995) Biochemistry34, 3502–3512 115. Caspritz, G., and Radler, F. (1983) J. Biol. Chem. (1984)J. Biol. Chem.259, 3033–3036
88. Moras, D., Olsen, K. W., Sabesan, M. N., 258, 4907–4910 138. Bernofsky, C., and Wanda, S.-Y. C. (1982) J.
Buehner, M., Ford, G. C., and Rossmann, M. 116. Thoden, J. B., Frey, P. A., and Holden, H. M. Biol. Chem.257, 6809–6817
G. (1975) J. Biol. Chem.250, 9137–9162 (1996)Biochemistry35, 5137–5144 139. Woenckhaus, C. H. (1974) in Topics in Current
89. Duée, E., Olivier-Deyris, L., Fanchon, E., 117. Frey, P. A. (1987) in Pyridine Nucleotide Chemistry (Fortschritte der chemischen Forschung,
Corbier, C., Branlant, G., and Dideberg, O. Coenzymes: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical Vol. 52 (Boschke, F. L., ed), pp. 209–233,
(1996)J. Mol. Biol.257, 814–838 Aspects, Vol. B (Dolphin, D., Avramovic, O., Springer-Verlag, Berlin
90. Skarzynski, T., Moody, P. C. E., and Wonacott, and Poulson, R., eds), pp. 461–512, Wiley 140. Anderson, B. M. (1982) in The Pyridine
A. J. (1987) J. Mol. Biol.193, 171–187 (Interscience), New York Nucleotide Coenzymes (Everse, J., Anderson, B.,
90a. Roitel, O., Sergienko, E., and Branlant, G. 117a.Thoden, J. B., Wohlers, T. M., Fridovich-Keil, and You, K.-S., eds), Academic Press, New
(1999)Biochemistry38, 16084–16091 J. L., and Holden, H. M. (2000) Biochemistry York
91. Kim, H., and Hol, W. G. J. (1998) J. Mol. Biol. 39, 5691–5701 141. Woenckhaus, C., and Jeck, R. (1987) in
278, 5–11 118. Thoden, J. B., Hegeman, A. D., Wesenberg, G., Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes: Chemical,
92. Soukri, A., Mougin, A., Corbier, C., Wonacott, Chapeau, M. C., Frey, P. A., and Holden, H. Biochemical and Medical Aspects, Vol. A
A., Branlant, C., and Branlant, G. (1989) M. (1997) Biochemistry36, 6294–6304 (Dolphin, D., Avramovic, O., and Poulson, R.,
Biochemistry28, 2568–2592 119. Palmer, J. L., and Abeles, R. H. (1979) J. Biol. eds), pp. 449–568, Wiley (Interscience), New
93. Habenicht, A., Hellman, U., and Cerff, R. Chem.254, 1217–1226 York
(1994)J. Mol. Biol.237, 165–171 120. Yuan, C.-S., Ault-Riché, D. B., and Borchardt, 142. Cohen, B. E., Stoddard, B. L., and Koshland,
93a. Marchal, S., Rahuel-Clermont, S., and R. T. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 28009–28016 D. E., Jr. (1997) Biochemistry36, 9035 –9044
Branlant, G. (2000) Biochemistry39, 3327–3335 121. Koch-Nolte, F., Petersen, D., Balasubramani- 143. Hemmerich, P. (1976) in Progress in the
94. Sheikh, S., Ni, L., Hurley, T. D., and Weiner, an, S., Haag, F., Kahlke, D., Willer, T., Chemistry of Organic Natural Products, Vol. 33
H. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 18817–18822 Kastelein, R., Bazan, F., and Thiele, H.-G. (Herz, W., Grisebach, H., and Kirby, G. W.,
95. Steinmetz, C. G., Xie, P., Weiner, H., and (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 7686–7693 eds), pp. 451–527, Springer-Verlag, New York
Hurley, T. D. (1997) Structure5, 701 –711 122. Takada, T., Iida, K., and Moss, J. (1995) J. Biol. 144. Fox, K. M., and Karplus, P. A. (1999) J. Biol.
96. Henehan, G. T. M., and Oppenheimer, N. J. Chem.270, 541– 544 Chem.274, 9357– 9362
(1993)Biochemistry32, 735–738 123. Rising, K. A., and Schramm, V. L. (1997) J. Am. 145. Niino, Y. S., Chakraborty, S., Brown, B. J., and
97. Henehan, G. T. M., Chang, S. H., and Oppen- Chem. Soc.119, 27–37 Massey, V. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 1983–1991
heimer, N. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12294– 124. Muller-Steffner, H. M., Augustin, A., and 146. Meighen, E. A. (1993) FASEB J.7, 1016–1022
12301 Schuber, F. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 23967– 147. Fisher, A. J., Raushel, F. M., Baldwin, T. O., and
98. Shearer, G. L., Kim, K., Lee, K. M., Wang, C. 23972 Rayment, I. (1995) Biochemistry34, 6581–6586
K., and Plapp, B. V. (1993) Biochemistry32, 125. De Flora, A., Guida, L., Franco, L., Zocchi, E., 148. Van den Berghe-Snorek, S., and Stankovich,
11186–11194 Bruzzone, S., Benatti, U., Damonte, G., and M. T. (1984) J. Am. Chem. Soc.106, 3685–3687
99. Feingold, D. S., and Franzen, J. S. (1981) Lee, H. C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 12945– 149. Miura, R., Nishina, Y., Sato, K., Fujii, S.,
Trends Biochem. Sci.6, 103–105 12951 Kuroda, K., and Shiga, K. (1993) J. Biochem.
100. Frimpong, K., and Rodwell, V. W. (1994) J. 126. Aarhus, R., Graeff, R. M., Dickey, D. M., 113, 106–113
Biol. Chem.269, 11478–11483 Walseth, T. F., and Lee, H. C. (1995) J. Biol. 150. Lim, L. W., Shamala, N., Mathews, F. S.,
101. Omkumar, R. V., and Rodwell, V. W. (1994) J. Chem.270, 30327–30333 Steenkamp, D. J., Hamlin, R., and Xuong, N.
Biol. Chem.269, 16862–16866 127. Chini, E. N., Beers, K. W., and Dousa, T. P. (1986)J. Biol. Chem.261, 15140–15146
102. Friesen, J. A., and Rodwell, V. W. (1997) (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 3216–3223 151. Massey, V. (1995) FASEB J.9, 473–475
Biochemistry36, 1157–1162 128. Oppenheimer, N. J. (1987) in Pyridine 152. Müller, F. (1991) Chemistry and Biochemistry of
103. Lawrence, C. M., Rodwell, V. W., and Nucleotide Coenzymes: Chemical, Biochemical Flavoenzymes, Vol. I, CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Stauffacher, C. V. (1995) Science268, 1758–1762 and Medical Aspects, Vol. A (Dolphin, D., Florida
104. Friesen, J. A., Lawrence, C. M., Stauffacher, C. Avramovic, O., and Poulson, R., eds), pp. 153. Curti, B., Ronchi, S., and Zanetti, G., eds.
V., and Rodwell, V. W. (1996) Biochemistry35, 323–365, Wiley (Interscience), New York (1990)Flavins and Flavoproteins, Walter de
11945–11950 129. Everse, J., Anderson, B., and You, K.-S., eds. Gruyter, Berlin
104a.Cosgrove, M. S., Naylor, C., Paludan, S., (1982)The Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes, 153a.Fraaije, M. W., and Mattevi, A. (2000) Trends
Adams, M. J., and Levy, H. R. (1998) Biochem- Academic Press, New York Biochem. Sci.25, 126–132
istry37, 2759–2767 130. Blankenhorn, G., and Moore, E. G. (1980) J. 154. Kohen, A., Jonsson, T., and Klinman, J. P.
105. Luzzatto, L., and Mehta, A. (1995) in The Am. Chem. Soc.102, 1092–1098 (1997)Biochemistry36, 2603 –2611
Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited 131. Bernofsky, C. (1987) in Pyridine Nucleotide 154a.Su, Q., and Klinman, J. P. (1999) Biochemistry
Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 1 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, Coenzymes: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical 38, 8572–8581
A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 3367– Aspects, Vol. B (Dolphin, D., Avramovic, O., 155. Bourdillon, C., Demaille, C., Moiroux, J., and
3398, McGraw-Hill, New York and Poulson, R., eds), pp. 105–172, Wiley Savéant, J.-M. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 2–10
106. Wakil, S. J. (1989) Biochemistry28, 4523–4530 (Interscience), New York 156. Li, J., Vrielink, A., Brick, P., and Blow, D. M.
107. Smith, S. (1994) FASEB J.8, 1248–1259 132. Chaykin, S. (1967) Ann. Rev. Biochem.36,(I), (1993)Biochemistry32, 11507–11515
107a.Barycki, J. J., O’Brien, L. K., Bratt, J. M., 149–170 157. Lindqvist, Y., and Brändén, C.-I. (1985) Proc.
Zhang, R., Sanishvili, R., Strauss, A. W., and 133. Everse, J., and Kaplan, N. O. (1973) Adv. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 6855–6859
Banaszak, L. J. (1999) Biochemistry38, 5786– Enzymol.37, 61–133 158. Lindqvist, Y., and Brändén, C.-I. (1989) J. Biol.
5798 133a.Rozwarski, D. A., Grant, G. A., Barton, D. H. Chem.264, 3624–3628
107b.Fillgrove, K. L., and Anderson, V. E. (2000) R., Jacobs, W. R. J., and Sacchettini, J. C. (1998) 159. Stenberg, K., and Lindqvist, Y. (1997) Protein
Biochemistry39, 7001–7011 Science279, 98–102 Sci.6, 1009–1015
108. Watkinson, I. A., Wilton, D. L., Rahimtula, A. 133b.Parikh, S., Moynihan, D. P., Xiao, G., and 160. Yagi, K., and Ozawa, T. (1989) Biochim.
D., and Akhtar, M. M. (1971) Eur. J. Biochem. Tonge, P. J. (1999) Biochemistry38, 13623– Biophys. Acta.1000, 203–206
23, 1–6 13634 160a.Curti, B., Ronchi, S., and Simonetta, M. P.
109. Thorn, J. M., Barton, J. D., Dixon, N. E., Ollis, 133c.McMurry, L. M., Oethinger, M., and Levy, S. (1990) in Chemistry and Biochemistry of
D. L., and Edwards, K. J. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. B. (1998) Nature (London)394, 531–532 Flavoenzymes, Vol. III (Müller, F., ed), pp. 69–
249, 785–799 94, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida

--- Page 833 ---

830 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
References
161. Mizutani, H., Miyahara, I., Hirotsu, K., 186. Van Hellemond, J. J., Klockiewicz, M., 214. Chen, S., Clarke, P. E., Martino, P. A., Dang, P.
Nishina, Y., Shiga, K., Setoyama, C., and Gaasenbeek, C. P. H., Roos, M. H., and S. K., Yeh, C.-H., Lee, T. D., Prochaska, H. J.,
Miura, R. (1996) J. Biochem.120, 14–17 Tielens, A. G. M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, and Talalay, P. (1994) Protein Sci.3, 1296–1304
162. Mattevi, A., Vanoni, M. A., Todone, F., Rizzi, 31065–31070 215. Claiborne, A., Ross, R. P., and Parsonage, D.
M., Teplyakov, A., Coda, A., Bolognesi, M., 187. Waksman, G., Krishna, T. S. R., Williams, J., (1992)Trends Biochem. Sci.17, 183–186
and Curti, B. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. CH, and Kuriyan, J. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.236, 216. Parsonage, D., and Claiborne, A. (1995)
U.S.A.93, 7496–7501 800–816 Biochemistry34, 435–441
163. Vanoni, M. A., Cosma, A., Mazzeo, D., 188. Mulrooney, S. B., and Williams, C. H. (1994) 217. Yeh, J. I., Claiborne, A., and Hol, W. G. J.
Mattevi, A., Todone, F., and Curti, B. (1997) Biochemistry33, 3148–3154 (1996)Biochemistry35, 9951–9957
Biochemistry36, 5624–5632 189. Arscott, L. D., Gromer, S., Schirmer, R. H., 218. Poole, L. B. (1996) Biochemistry35, 65–75
164. Tan, A. K., and Ramsay, R. R. (1993) Biochemis- Becker, K., and Williams, C. H., Jr. (1997) Proc. 219. Mewies, M., McIntire, W. S., and Scrutton, N.
try32, 2137 –2143 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 3621–3626 S. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 7 – 20
165. Woo, J. C. G., and Silverman, R. B. (1995) J. 190. Lennon, B. W., and Williams, C. H., Jr. (1995) 220. Brandsch, R., and Bichler, V. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.
Am. Chem. Soc.117, 1663–1664 Biochemistry34, 3670–3677 266, 19056–19062
166. Walker, M. C., and Edmondson, D. E. (1994) 191. Pai, E. F., and Schulz, G. E. (1983) J. Biol. 221. Willie, A., Edmondson, D. E., and Jorns, M. S.
Biochemistry33, 7088–7098 Chem.258, 1752–1757 (1996)Biochemistry35, 5292–5299
166a.Pawelek, P. D., Cheah, J., Coulombe, R., 192. Karplus, P. A., and Schulz, G. E. (1987) J. Mol. 222. Kenney, W. C., Singer, T. P., Fukuyama, M., and
Macheroux, P., Ghisla, S., and Vrielink, A. Biol.195, 701–729 Miyake, Y. (1979) J. Biol. Chem.254, 4689–4690
(2000)EMBO J.19, 4204–4215 193. Mittl, P. R. E., and Schulz, G. E. (1994) Protein 223. Kim, J., Fuller, J. H., Kuusk, V., Cunane, L.,
167. Barber, M. J., Neame, P. J., Lim, L. W., White, Sci.3, 799–809 Chen, Z.-w, Mathews, F. S., and McIntire, W.
S., and Mathews, F. S. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 194. Zhang, Y., Bond, C. S., Bailey, S., Cunning- S. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 31202–31209
6611 – 6619 ham, M. L., Fairlamb, A. H., and Hunter, W. 224. Mewies, M., Basran, J., Packman, L. C., Hille,
168. Trickey, P., Basran, J., Lian, L.-Y., Chen, Z.-w, N. (1996) Protein Sci.5, 52–61 R., and Scrutton, N. S. (1997) Biochemistry36,
Barton, J. D., Sutcliffe, M. J., Scrutton, N. S., 195. Walsh, C., Bradley, M., and Nadeau, K. (1991) 7162–7168
and Mathews, F. S. (2000) Biochemistry39, Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 305–309 225. Ghisla, S., and Mayhew, S. G. (1976) Eur. J.
7678– 7688 196. Zheng, R., Cenas, N., and Blanchard, J. S. Biochem.63, 373–390
168a.Jang, M.-H., Basran, J., Scrutton, N. S., and (1995)Biochemistry34, 12697–12703 226. Hartman, H. A., Edmondson, D. E., and
Hille, R. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 13147–13154 197. Krauth-Siegel, R. L., and Schöneck, R. (1995) McCormick, D. B. (1992) Anal. Biochem.202,
169. Falzon, L., and Davidson, V. L. (1996) FASEB J.9, 1138–1146 348–355
Biochemistry35, 12111 –12118 198. Brown, N. L. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 227. Eirich, L. D., Vogels, G. D., and Wolfe, R. S.
170. Lindqvist, Y., Brändén, C.-I., Mathews, F. S., 400–403 (1979)J. Bacterial.140, 20–27
and Lederer, F. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 3198– 199. Schiering, N., Kabsch, W., Moore, M. J., 228. Jacobson, F., and Walsh, C. (1984) Biochemistry
3207 Distefano, M. D., Walsh, C. T., and Pai, E. F. 23, 979–988
171. Tegoni, M., and Cambillau, C. (1994) Protein (1991)Nature (London)352, 168–172 229. Jones, J. B., and Stadtman, T. C. (1980) J. Biol.
Sci.3, 303–313 199a.Engst, S., and Miller, S. M. (1999) Biochemistry Chem.255, 1049–1053
172. Gondry, M., and Lederer, F. (1996) Biochemis- 38, 3519–3529 230. Sancar, A. (1994) Biochemistry33, 2–9
try35, 8587–8594 200. Serre, L., Vellieux, F. M. D., Gomez-Moreno, M. 231. Otani, S., Takatsu, M., Nakano, M., Kasai, S.,
173. Tegoni, M., Gervais, M., and Desbois, A. M. C., Fontecilla-Camps, J. C., and Frey, M. Miura, R., and Matsui, K. (1974) The Journal of
(1997)Biochemistry36, 8932–8946 (1996)J. Mol. Biol.263, 20–39 Antibiotics27, 88–89
173a.Lehoux, I. E., and Mitra, B. (2000) Biochemistry 201. Aliverti, A., Bruns, C. M., Pandini, V. E., 232. Murthy, Y. V. S. N., and Massey, V. (1995) J.
39, 10055–10065 Karplus, P. A., Vanoni, M. A., Curti, B., and Biol. Chem.270, 28586–28594
174. Schaller, R. A., Mohsen, A.-W. A., Vockley, J., Zanetti, G. (1995) Biochemistry34, 8371–8379 233. Ghisla, S., and Massey, V. (1989) Eur. J.
and Thorpe, C. (1997) Biochemistry36, 7761– 202. Ermler, U., Siddiqui, R. A., Cramm, R., and Biochem.2, 243–289
7768 Friedrich, B. (1995) EMBO J.14, 6067–6077 234. Powell, M. F., and Bruice, T. C. (1983) J. Am.
175. Rudik, I., Ghisla, S., and Thorpe, C. (1998) 203. Ingelman, M., Bianchi, V., and Eklund, H. Chem. Soc.105, 1014–1021
Biochemistry37, 8437–8445 (1997)J. Mol. Biol.268, 147–157 235. Fox, J. L., and Tolin, G. (1966) Biochemistry5,
176. Mancini-Samuelson, G. J., Kieweg, V., Sabaj, 204. Menz, R. I., and Day, D. A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 3865–3872
K. M., Ghisla, S., and Stankovich, M. T. (1998) 271, 23117–23120 236. Lee, I.-S. H., Ostovíc, D., and Kreevoy, M.
Biochemistry37, 14605–14612 205. Takano, S., Yano, T., and Yagi, T. (1996) (1988)J. Am. Chem. Soc.110, 3989–3993
176a.Srivastava, D. K., and Peterson, K. L. (1998) Biochemistry35, 9120–9127 237. Brustlein, M., and Bruice, T. C. (1972) J. Am.
Biochemistry37, 8446–8456 205a.Morandi, P., Valzasina, B., Colombo, C., Curti, Chem. Soc.94, 6548–6549
177. Mohsen, A.-W. A., and Vockley, J. (1995) B., and Vanoni, M. A. (2000) Biochemistry39, 238. Jorns, M. S., and Hersch, L. B. (1975) J. Biol.
Biochemistry34, 10146–10152 727–735 Chem.250, 3620–3628
177a.Ackrell, B., McIntire, B., and Vessey, D. (2000) 206. Fieschi, F., Nivière, V., Frier, C., Décout, J.-L., 239. Ghisla, S., Thorpe, C., and Massey, V. (1984)
Trends Biochem. Sci.25, 9–10 and Fontecave, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, Biochemistry23, 3154–3161
178. Rétey, J., Seibl, J., Arigoni, D., Cornforth, J. W., 30392–30400 240. Kim, J.-J. P., Wang, M., and Paschke, R. (1993)
Ryback, G., Zeylemaker, W. P., and Veeger, C. 206a.Ingelman, M., Ramaswamy, S., Nivière, V., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.90, 7523–7527
(1970)Eur. J. Biochem.14, 232–242 Fontecave, M., and Eklund, H. (1999) 241. Dakoji, S., Shin, I., Becker, D. F., Stankovich,
179. Birch-Machin, M. A., Farnsworth, L., Ackrell, Biochemistry38, 7040–7049 M. T., and Liu, H.-w. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
B. A. C., Cochran, B., Jackson, S., Bindoff, L. 207. Tanner, J. J., Lei, B., Tu, S.-C., and Krause, K. 118, 10971–10979
A., Aitken, A., Diamond, A. G., and Turnbull, L. (1996) Biochemistry35, 13531–13539 242. Tompkins, L. S., and Falkow, S. (1995) Science
D. M. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.267, 11553–11558 208. Porter, T. D. (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci.16, 267, 1621–1622
180. Schmidt, D. M., Saghbini, M., and Scheffler, I. 154–158 242a.Vock, P., Engst, S., Eder, M., and Ghisla, S.
E. (1992) Biochemistry31, 8442–8448 209. Vang, M., Roberts, D. L., Paschke, R., Shea, T. (1998)Biochemistry37, 1848 – 1860
181. Sucheta, A., Ackrell, B. A. C., Cochran, B., and M., Masters, B. S. S., and Kin, J.-J. P. (1997) 243. Johnson, B. D., Mancini-Samuelson, G. J., and
Armstrong, F. A. (1992) Nature (London)356, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 8411 –8416 Stankovich, M. T. (1995) Biochemistry34,
361–362 209a.Uhlmann, H., and Bernhardt, R. (1995) J. Biol. 7047–7055
182. Thieme, R., Pai, E. F., Schirmer, R. H., and Chem.270, 29959–29966 244. Thorpe, C. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, 148–151
Schulz, G. E. (1981) J. Mol. Biol.152, 763–782 209b.Ziegler, G. A., and Schulz, G. E. (2000) 245. Djordjevic, S., Pace, C. P., Stankovich, M. T., and
183. Sled, V. D., Rudnitzky, N. I., Hatefi, Y., and Biochemistry39, 10986–10995 Kim, J.-J. P. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2163–2171
Ohnishi, T. (1994) Biochemistry33, 10069–10075 210. Kobayashi, K., Tagawa, S., Sano, S., and Asada, 246. Porter, D. J. T., Voet, J. G., and Bright, H. J.
184. Westenberg, D. J., Gunsalus, R. P., Ackrell, B. K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 27551–27554 (1973)J. Biol. Chem.248, 4400–4416
A. C., Sices, H., and Cecchini, G. (1993) J. Biol. 211. Sano, S., Miyake, C., Mikami, B., and Asada, 247. Alston, T. A., Porter, D. J. T., and Bright, H. J.
Chem.268, 815–822 K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 21354 –21361 (1983)J. Biol. Chem.258, 1136–1141
185. Hägerhäll, C., Fridén, H., Aasa, R., and 212. Tedeschi, G., Chen, S., and Massey, V. (1995) J. 248. Gadda, G., Edmondson, R. D., Russell, D. H.,
Hederstedt, L. (1995) Biochemistry34, 11080– Biol. Chem.270, 1198–1204 and Fitzpatrick, P. F. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
11089 213. Li, R., Bianchet, M. A., Talalay, P., and Amzel, 5563–5570
L. M. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 249. Lehoux, I., and Mitra, B. (1997) FASEB J.11,
8846–8850 A889

--- Page 834 ---

831
References
250. Ghisla, S., and Massey, V. (1980) J. Biol. Chem. 278. Yu, M. W., and Fritchie, C. J. J. (1975) J. Biol. 306a.Mattevi, A., Obmolova, G., Kalk, K. H.,
255, 5688–5696 Chem.250, 946–951 Westphal, A. H., de Kok, A., and Hol, W. G. J.
251. Hamilton, G. H. (1971) Prog. Bioorg. Chem.1, 279. Kenney, W. C., and Singer, T. P. (1977) J. Biol. (1993)J. Mol. Biol.230, 1183–1199
83–157 Chem.252, 4767–4772 306b.Izard, T., AEvarsson, A., Allen, M. D.,
252. Walsh, C. T., Krodel, E., Massey, V., and 280. Ostrowski, J., Barber, M. J., Rueger, D. C., Westphal, A. H., Perhan, R. N., de Kok, A.,
Abeles, R. H. (1973) J. Biol. Chem.248, 1946– Miller, B. E., Siegel, L. M., and Kredich, N. M. and Hol, W. G. J. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
1951 (1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 15796 – 15808 U.S.A.96, 1240–1245
253. Ghisla, S., and Massey, V. (1989) Eur. J. 281. Covès, J., Zeghouf, M., Macherel, D., Guigliar- 307. Reed, L. J., and Hackert, M. L. (1990) J. Biol.
Biochem.181, 1–17 elli, B., Asso, M., and Fontecave, M. (1997) Chem.265, 8971–8974
254. Curti, B., Ronchi, S., and Simonetta, M. P. Biochemistry36, 5921–5928 307a.Knapp, J. E., Mitchell, D. T., Yazdi, M. A.,
(1992) in Chemistry and Biochemistry of 282. Campbell, W. H., and Kinghorn, J. R. (1990) Ernst, S. R., Reed, L. J., and Hackert, M. L.
Flavoenzymes (Müller, F., ed), pp. 69–94, CRC Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 315–319 (1998)J. Mol. Biol.280, 655–668
Press, Boca Raton, Florida 283. Hyde, G. E., Crawford, N. M., and Campbell, 308. Dardel, F., Davis, A. L., Laue, E. D., and Perham,
255. Lederer, F. (1992) Protein Sci.1, 540–548 W. H. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 23542–23547 R. N. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.229, 1037–1048
256. Miura, R., and Miyake, Y. (1988) Bioorg. Chem. 283a.Terao, M., Kurosaki, M., Saltini, G., Demontis, 309. Green, J. D. F., Laue, E. D., Perham, R. N., Ali,
16, 97–110 S., Marini, M., Salmona, M., and Garattini, E. S. T., and Guest, J. R. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.248,
257. Todone, F., Vanoni, M. A., Mozzarelli, A., (2000)J. Biol. Chem.275, 30690–30700 328–343
Bolognesi, M., Coda, A., Curti, B., and 284. Bruice, T. C. (1980) Acc. Chem. Res.13, 256–262 310. Mattevi, A., Obmolova, G., Kalk, K. H.,
Mattevi, A. (1997) Biochemistry36, 5853–5860 285. Entsch, B., Palfey, B. A., Ballou, D. P., and Teplyakov, A., and Hol, W. G. J. (1993)
258. Rietveld, P., Arscott, L. D., Berry, A., Scrutton, Massey, V. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 17341–17349 Biochemistry32, 3887–3901
N. S., Deonarain, M. P., Perham, R. N., and 286. Gatti, D. L., Entsch, B., Ballou, D. P., and 311. Hendle, J., Mattevi, A., Westphal, A. H., Spee,
Williams, C. H. (1994) Biochemistry33, 13888– Ludwig, M. L. (1996) Biochemistry35, 567–578 J., de Kok, A., Teplyakov, A., and Hol, W. G. J.
13895 287. Schreuder, H. A., Hol, W. G. J., and Drenth, J. (1995)Biochemistry34, 4287–4298
258a.Krauth-Siegel, R. L., Arscott, L. D., (1990)Biochemistry29, 3101–3108 312. Ricaud, P. M., Howard, M. J., Roberts, E. L.,
Schönleben-Janas, A., Schirmer, R. H., and 288. Yamasaki, M., and Yamano, T. (1973) Biochem. Broadhurst, R. W., and Perham, R. N. (1996) J.
Williams, C. H., Jr. (1998) Biochemistry37, Biophys. Res. Commun.51, 612–619 Mol. Biol.264, 179–190
13968–13977 289. Merényi, G., and Lind, J. (1991) J. Am. Chem. 313. Maeng, C.-Y., Yazdi, M. A., Niu, X.-D., Lee, H.
259. Williams, C. H., Jr. (1995) FASEB J.9, 1267–1276 Soc.113, 3146–3153 Y., and Reed, L. J. (1994) Biochemistry33,
260. Barman, B. G., and Tollin, G. (1972) Biochemis- 290. Entsch, B., and van Berkel, W. J. H. (1995) 13801–13807
try11, 4760–4765 FASEB J.9, 476–483 314. McCartney, R. G., Sanderson, S. J., and Lindsay,
261. Su, Y., and Tripathi, G. N. R. (1994) J. Am. 291. Snell, E. E., and Broquist, H. P. (1949) Arch. J. G. (1997) Biochemistry36, 6819–6826
Chem. Soc.116, 4405–4407 Biochem. Biophys.23, 326–328 315. Yang, Y.-S., and Frey, P. A. (1986) Biochemistry
262. Zheng, Y.-J., and Ornstein, R. L. (1996) J. Am. 291a.Reed, L. J. (1998) Protein Sci.7, 220–224 25, 8173–8178
Chem. Soc.118, 9402–9408 292. Reed, L. J., DeBusk, B. G., Gunsalus, I. C., and 315a.Pan, K., and Jordan, F. (1998) Biochemistry37,
263. Müller, F., Hemmerich, P., and Ehrenberg, A. Hornberger, C. S. (1951) Science114, 93–94 1357–1364
(1971) in Flavins and Flavoproteins (Kamin, H., 293. Jukes, T. H. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 254–256 315b.Hennig, J., Kern, G., Neef, H., Spinka, M.,
ed), pp. 107–180, Univ. Park Press, Baltimore, 294. Schmidt, U., Grafen, P., Altland, K., and Bisswanger, H., and Hübner, G. (1997)
Maryland Goedde, H. W. (1969) Adv. Enzymol.32, 432–469 Biochemistry36, 15772 – 15779
264. Müller, F., Eriksson, L. E. G., and Ehrenberg, 295. Reed, K. E., Morris, T. W., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. 315c.Kee, K., Niu, L., and Henderson, E. (1998)
A. (1970) Eur. J. Biochem.12, 93–103 (1994)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 3720–3724 Biochemistry37, 4224 – 4234
265. Miura, R., Setoyama, C., Nishina, Y., Shiga, K., 296. Pares, S., Cohen-Addad, C., Sieker, L., 316. Han, D., Handelman, G., Marcocci, L., Sen, C.
Mizutani, H., Miyahara, I., and Hirotsu, K. Neuburger, M., and Douce, R. (1994) Proc. K., Roy, S., Kobuchi, H., Tritschler, H. J.,
(1997)FASEB J.11, A1306 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 4850–4853 Flohé, L., and Packer, L. (1997) BioFactors6,
265a.Miura, R., Setoyama, C., Nishina, Y., Shiga, K., 296a.Morris, T. W., Reed, K. E., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. 321–338
Mizutani, H., Miyahara, I., and Hirotsu, K. (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 16091–16100 317. Muller, Y. A., Schumacher, G., Rudolph, R., and
(1977)J. Biochem.122, 825–833 297. Roche, T. E., and Patel, M. E., eds. (1990) Schulz, G. E. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.237, 315–335
266. Smith, W. W., Burnett, R. M., Darling, G. D., Alpha-Keto Acid Dehydrogenase Complexes 318. Kerscher, L., and Oesterhelt, D. (1982) Trends
and Ludwig, M. L. (1977) J. Mol. Biol.117, Organization, Regulation, and Biomedical Biochem. Sci.7, 371–374
195–225 Ramifications, Vol. 573, New York Academy of 319. Muller, Y. A., and Schulz, G. E. (1993) Science
267. Chang, F.-C., and Swenson, R. P. (1999) Sciences, New York 259, 965–967
Biochemistry38, 7168–7176 298. Patel, M. S., and Roche, T. E. (1990) FASEB J. 319a.Tittmann, K., Golbik, R., Ghisla, S., and
268. Zhou, Z., and Swenson, R. P. (1996) Biochemistry 4, 3224–3233 Hübner, G. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10747–
35, 15980–15988 299. Stoops, J. K., Cheng, R. H., Yazdi, M. A., 10754
269. Ludwig, M. L., Pattridge, K. A., Metzger, A. Maeng, C.-Y., Schroeter, J. P., Klueppelberg, U., 320. Menon, S., and Ragsdale, S. W. (1997) Biochem-
L., and Dixon, M. M. (1997) Biochemistry36, Kolodziej, S. J., Baker, T. S., and Reed, L. J. istry36, 8484–8494
1259–1280 (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 5757–5764 320a.Bouchev, V. F., Furdui, C. M., Menon, S.,
269a.Lostao, A., Gómez-Moreno, C., Mayhew, S. 300. Yi, J., Nemeria, N., McNally, A., Jordan, F., Muthukumaran, R. B., Ragsdale, S. W., and
G., and Sancho, J. (1997) Biochemistry36, Machado, R. S., and Guest, J. R. (1996) J. Biol. McCracken, J. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121,
14334–14344 Chem.271, 33192–33200 3724–3729
270. Hoover, D. M., Drennan, C. L., Metzger, A. L., 301. Berg, A., Vervoort, J., and de Kok, A. (1996) J. 321. Smith, E. T., Blamey, J. M., and Adams, M. W.
Osborne, C., Weber, C. H., Pattridge, K. A., Mol. Biol.261, 432–442 W. (1994) Biochemistry33, 1008–1016
and Ludwig, M. L. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.294, 302. Wynn, R. M., Davie, J. R., Zhi, W., Cox, R. P., 322. Mai, X., and Adams, M. W. W. (1994) J. Biol.
725–743 and Chuang, D. T. (1994) Biochemistry33, Chem.269, 16726–16732
271. Moonen, C. T. W., and Müller, F. (1982) 8962–8968 323. Gehring, V., and Arnon, D. I. (1972) J. Biol.
Biochemistry21, 408–414 302a.Wynn, R. M., Davie, J. R., Chuang, J. L., Cote, Chem.247, 6963–6969
272. Jorns, M. S., Sancar, G. B., and Sancar, A. C. D., and Chuang, D. T. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 324. Sun, W., Williams, C. H., Jr., and Massey, V.
(1984)Biochemistry23, 2673–2679 273, 13110–13118 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 17226–17233
273. McKean, M. C., Beckman, J. D., and Frerman, 303. Mattevi, A., Obmolova, G., Kalk, K. H., van 325. Müh, U., Williams, C. H., and Massey, V.
F. E. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 1866–1870 Berkel, W. J. H., and Hol, W. G. J. (1993) J. (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 7994–8000
274. Roberts, D. L., Salazar, D., Fulmer, J. P., Mol. Biol.230, 1200–1215 326. Unkrig, V., Neugebauer, F. A., and Knappe, J.
Frerman, F. E., and Kim, J.-J. P. (1999) 304. Liu, T.-C., Korotchkina, L. G., Hyatt, S. L., (1989)Eur. J. Biochem.184, 723–728
Biochemistry38, 1977–1989 Vettakkorumakankav, N. N., and Patel, M. S. 327. Maiorino, M., Chu, F. F., Ursini, F., Davies, K.
275. Huang, L., Rohlfs, R. J., and Hille, R. (1995) J. (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 15545–15550 J. A., Doroshow, J. H., and Esworthy, R. S.
Biol. Chem.270, 23958–23965 305. Guan, Y., Rawsthorne, S., Scofield, G., Shaw, (1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 7728–7732
276. Balasubramanian, S., Coggins, J. R., and P., and Doonan, J. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 328. Wong, K. K., Murray, B. W., Lewisch, S. A.,
Abell, C. (1995) Biochemistry34, 341–348 5412–5417 Baxter, M. K., Ridky, T. W., Ulissi-DeMario, L.,
277. Macheroux, P., Petersen, J., Bornemann, S., 306. Mattevi, A., Obmolova, G., Schulze, E., Kalk, and Kozarich, J. W. (1993) Biochemistry32,
Lowe, D. J., and Thorneley, R. N. F. (1996) K. H., Westphal, A. H., de Kok, A., and Hol, W. 14102–14110
Biochemistry35, 1643–1652 G. J. (1992) Science255, 1544–1550

--- Page 835 ---

832 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
References
329. Frey, M., Rothe, M., Wagner, A. F. V., and 358. Keshavjee, K., Pyne, C., and Bognar, A. L. 387. Meiering, E. M., and Wagner, G. (1995) J. Mol.
Knappe, J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 12432– (1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 19925–19929 Biol.247, 294–308
12437 359. Scott, J. M. (1976) Biochem. Soc. Trans.4, 845– 388. Cannon, W. R., Garrison, B. J., and Benkovic,
330. Kraus, R. J., Foster, S. J., and Ganther, H. E. 850 S. J. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 2386–2395
(1983)Biochemistry22, 5853–5858 360. Brody, T., Watson, J. E., and Stokstad, E. L. R. 389. Nakano, T., Spencer, H. T., Appleman, J. R.,
331. Broderick, J. B., Duderstadt, R. E., Fernandez, (1982)Biochemistry21, 276–282 and Blakley, R. L. (1994) Biochemistry33,
D. C., Wojtuszewski, K., Henshaw, T. F., and 361. Kim, D. W., Huang, T., Schirch, D., and 9945–9952
Johnson, M. K. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, Schirch, V. (1996) Biochemistry35, 15772–15783 390. Howell, E. E., Villafranca, J. E., Warren, M. S.,
7390–7391 362. Lipman, R. S. A., Bailey, S. W., Jarrett, J. T., Oatley, S. J., and Kraut, J. (1986) Science231,
331a.Külzer, R., Pils, T., Kappl, R., Hüttermann, J., Matthews, R. G., and Jorns, M. S. (1995) 1123–1128
and Knappe, J. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 4897– Biochemistry34, 11217–11220 391. Benkovic, S. J., Fierke, C. A., and Naylor, A.
4903 363. Mathews, C. K. (1971) Bacteriophage Biochemis- M. (1988) Science239, 1105–1110
332. Wu, W., Lieder, K. W., Reed, G. H., and Frey, try, Van Nostrand-Reinhold, Princeton, New 392. Chen, Y.-Q., Kraut, J., Blakley, R. L., and
P. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10532–10537 Jersey Callender, R. (1994) Biochemistry33, 7023–7032
333. Wagner, A. F. V., Frey, M., Neugebauer, F. A., 364. Roth, B. (1986) Fed. Proc.45, 2765–2772 393. Basran, J., Casarotto, M. G., Barsukov, I. L.,
Schäfer, W., and Knappe, J. (1992) Proc. Natl. 365. Schweitzer, B. I., Dicker, A. P., and Bertino, J. and Roberts, G. C. K. (1995) Biochemistry34,
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 996–1000 R. (1990) FASEB J.4, 2441–2452 2872–2882
333a.Gauld, J. W., and Eriksson, L. A. (2000) J. Am. 366. Groom, C. R., Thillet, J., North, A. C. T., Pictet, 394. Jeong, S.-S., and Gready, J. E. (1995) Biochemis-
Chem. Soc.122, 2035–2040 R., and Geddes, A. J. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, try34, 3734–3741
334. Parast, C. V., Wong, K. K., Lewisch, S. A., 19890–19893 395. Appling, D. R. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2645–2651
Kozarich, J. W., Peisach, J., and Magliozzo, R. S. 367. Blaney, J. M., Hansch, C., Silipo, C., and 396. Stover, P. J., Chen, L. H., Suh, J. R., Stover, D.
(1995)Biochemistry34, 2393–2399 Vittonia, A. (1984) Chem. Rev.84, 333–407 M., Keyomarsi, K., and Shane, B. (1997) J. Biol.
335. Parast, C. V., Wong, K. K., Kozarich, J. W., 368. Dale, G. E., Broger, C., D’Arcy, A., Hartman, P. Chem.272, 1842–1848
Peisach, J., and Magliozzo, R. S. (1995) G., DeHoogt, R., Jolidon, S., Kompis, I., 397. Rosenblatt, D. S. (1995) in The Metabolic and
Biochemistry34, 5712–5717 Labhardt, A. M., Langen, H., Locher, H., Page, Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed.,
335a.Reddy, S. G., Wong, K. K., Parast, C. V., M. G. P., Stüber, D., Then, R. L., Wipf, B., and Vol. II (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S.,
Peisach, J., Magliozzo, R. S., and Kozarich, J. Oefner, C. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.266, 23–30 and Valle, D., eds), pp. 3111–3128, McGraw-
W. (1998) Biochemistry37, 558–563 369. Sirawaraporn, W., Sathitkul, T., Sirawaraporn, Hill, New York
336. Mastropaolo, D., Camerman, A., and Camer- R., Yuthavong, Y., and Santi, D. V. (1997) Proc. 398. Slieker, L. J., and Bencovic, S. J. (1984) J. Am.
man, N. (1980) Science210, 334–336 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 1124–1129 Chem. Soc.106, 1833–1838
337. Bailey, L. B., ed. (1995) Folate in Health and 370. Birdsall, B., Tendler, S. J. B., Arnold, J. R. P., 399. Kallen, R. G., and Jencks, W. P. (1966) J. Biol.
Disease, Dekker, New York Feeney, J., Griffin, R. J., Carr, M. D., Thomas, J. Chem.241, 5845– 5850,5851–5863
338. Curtius, H.-C., Matasovic, A., Schoedon, G., A., Roberts, G. C. K., and Stevens, M. F. G. 400. Walker, J. L., and Oliver, D. J. (1986) J. Biol.
Kuster, T., Guibaud, P., Giudici, T., and Blau, (1990)Biochemistry29, 9660–9667 Chem.261, 2214–2221
N. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 3923–3930 371. Jolivet, J., Cowan, K. H., Curt, G. A., Clen- 401. Kume, A., Koyata, H., Sakakibara, T.,
339. Blakley, R. L., and Benkovic, S. J., eds. (1984 – deninn, N. J., and Chabner, B. A. (1983) N. Ishiguro, Y., Kure, S., and Hiraga, K. (1991) J.
1986)Folates and Pterins, Wiley, New York (3 Engl. J. Med.309, 1094–1104 Biol. Chem.266, 3323–3329
Vols.) 372. Federspiel, N. A., Beverley, S. M., Schilling, J. 402. Pasternack, L. B., Laude, D. A., Jr., and
340. Hadorn, E. (1962) Sci. Am.206(April), 101–110 W., and Schimke, R. T. (1984) J. Biol. Chem. Appling, D. R. (1992) Biochemistry31, 8713–
341. Ghosh, D. K., and Stuehr, D. J. (1995) Biochem- 259, 9127–9140 8719
istry34, 801–807 373. Chu, E., Takimoto, C. H., Voeller, D., Grem, J. 403. Kennard, O., and Salisbury, S. A. (1993) J. Biol.
342. Witteveen, C. F. B., Giovanelli, J., and Kaufman, L., and Allegra, C. J. (1993) Biochemistry32, Chem.268, 10701–10704
S. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 4143–4147 4756–4760 404. Zieske, L. R., and Davis, L. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.
343. Rembold, H., and Gyure, W. L. (1972) Angew. 374. Friesheim, J. H., and Matthews, D. A. (1984) 258, 10355–10359
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.11, 1061–1072 inFolate Antogonists as Therapeutic Agents, Vol. 404a.Barber, R. D., and Donohue, T. J. (1998) J. Mol.
344. Jacobson, K. B., Dorsett, D., Pfleiderer, W., 1 (Sirotnak, F. M., Burchall, J. J., Ensminger, Biol.280, 775–784
McCloskey, J. A., Sethi, S. K., Buchanan, M. V., W. D., and Montgomery, J. A., eds), pp. 69– 404b.Fernández, M. R., Biosca, J. A., Torres, D.,
and Rubin, I. B. (1982) Biochemistry21, 5700– 131, Academic Press, Orlando, Florida Crosas, B., and Parés, X. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.
5706 375. Fan, J., Vitols, K. S., and Huennekens, F. M. 274, 37869–37875
345. Wiederrecht, G. J., Paton, D. R., and Brown, (1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 14862–14865 405. Mejillano, M. R., Jahansouz, H., Matsunaga, T.
G. M. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 2195–2200 376. Henderson, G. B., Hughes, T. R., and Saxena, O., Kenyon, G. L., and Himes, R. H. (1989)
346. Cremer-Bartels, G., and Ebels, I. (1980) Proc. M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 13382–13389 Biochemistry28, 5136–5145
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.77, 2415–2418 377. Thompson, P. D., and Freisheim, J. H. (1991) 406. D’Ari, L., and Rabinowitz, J. C. (1991) J. Biol.
347. Van Haastert, P. J. M., DeWitt, R. J. W., Biochemistry30, 8124–8130 Chem.266, 23953–23958
Grijpma, Y., and Konijn, T. M. (1982) Proc. 378. Chen, L., Qi, H., Korenberg, J., Garrow, T. A., 406a.Shen, B. W., Dyer, D. H., Huang, J.-Y., D’Ari,
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.79, 6270–6274 Choi, Y.-J., and Shane, B. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. L., Rabinowitz, J., and Stoddard, B. L. (1999)
348. Irby, R. B., and Adair, J., WL. (1994) J. Biol. 271, 13077–13087 Protein Sci.8, 1342–1349
Chem.269, 23981–23987 379. Roy, K., Mitsugi, K., and Sirotnak, F. M. (1997) 407. Schmidt, A., Wu, H., MacKenzie, R. E., Chen,
349. Stiefel, E. I. (1996) Science272, 1599–1600 J. Biol. Chem.272, 5587–5593 V. J., Bewly, J. R., Ray, J. E., Toth, J. E., and
350. Escalante-Semerena, J. C., Rinehart, K. L., Jr., 379a.Maziarz, K. M., Monaco, H. L., Shen, F., and Cygler, M. (2000) Biochemistry39, 6325 – 6335
and Wolfe, R. S. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, Ratnam, M. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 11086– 407a.Pawelek, P. D., and MacKenzie, R. E. (1998)
9447–9455 11091 Biochemistry37, 1109–1115
351. Wolfe, R. S. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 380. Park, H., Zhuang, P., Nichols, R., and Howell, 408. Wahls, W. P., Song, J. M., and Smith, G. R.
396–399 E. E. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 2252–2258 (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 23792–23798
352. Rouvière, P. E., and Wolfe, R. S. (1988) J. Biol. 381. Sawaya, M. R., and Kraut, J. (1997) Biochemis- 409. Klein, C., Chen, P., Arevalo, J. H., Stura, E. A.,
Chem.263, 7913–7916 try36, 586–603 Marolewski, A., Warren, M. S., Benkovic, S. J.,
353. White, R. H. (1993) Biochemistry32, 745–753 382. Reyes, V. M., Sawaya, M. R., Brown, K. A., and and Wilson, I. A. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.249, 153–
354. Hyatt, D. C., Maley, F., and Montfort, W. R. Kraut, J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 2710–2723 175
(1997)Biochemistry36, 4585–4594 383. Lee, H., Reyes, V. M., and Kraut, J. (1996) 409a.Greasley, S. E., Yamashita, M. M., Cai, H.,
355. Blakeley, R. L. (1984) in Folates and Pterins, Biochemistry35, 7012–7020 Benkovic, S. J., Boger, D. L., and Wilson, I. A.
Vol. I (Blakeley, P. L., and Bencovic, S. J., eds), 384. Verma, C. S., Caves, L. S. D., Hubbard, R. E., (1999)Biochemistry38, 16783–16793
pp. 191–253, Wiley, New York and Roberts, G. C. K. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.266, 409b.Thoden, J. B., Firestine, S., Nixon, A.,
356. Stover, P., and Schirch, V. (1993) Trends 776–796 Benkovic, S. J., and Holden, H. M. (2000)
Biochem. Sci.18, 102–106 385. Cheung, H. T. A., Birdsall, B., Frenkiel, T. A., Biochemistry39, 8791–8802
357. Lin, B.-F., and Shane, B. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. Chau, D. D., and Feeney, J. (1993) Biochemistry 410. Caperelli, C. A., and Giroux, E. L. (1997) Arch.
269, 9705–9713 32, 6846–6854 Biochem. Biophys.341, 98–103
357a.Cherest, H., Thomas, D., and Surdin-Kerjan, 386. Epstein, D. M., Benkovic, S. J., and Wright, P. 411. Schmitt, E., Blanquet, S., and Mechulam, Y.
Y. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 14056–14063 E. (1995) Biochemistry34, 11037–11048 (1996)EMBO J.15, 4749–4758

--- Page 836 ---

833
References
412. Kruschwitz, H. L., McDonald, D., Cossins, E. 437. Keltjens, J. T., Raemakers-Franken, P. C., and 456. Mu, D., Medzihradszky, K. F., Adams, G. W.,
A., and Schirch, V. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, Vogels, G. D. (1993) in Microbial Growth on C1 Mayer, P., Hines, W. M., Burlingame, A. L.,
28757–28763 Compounds (Murrell, J. C., and Kelly, D. P., eds), Smith, A. J., Cai, D., and Klinman, J. P. (1994)
413. Lutsenko, S., Daoud, S., and Kaplan, J. H. pp. 135–150, Intercept Ltd., Andover,UK J. Biol. Chem.269, 9926–9932
(1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 5249–5255 438. Leigh, J. A., Rinehart, K. L., Jr., and Wolfe, R. 457. Parsons, M. R., Convey, M. A., Wilmot, C. M.,
414. Rossini, C., Attygalle, A. B., González, A., S. (1985) Biochemistry24, 995–999 Yadav, K. D. S., Blakeley, V., Corner, A. S.,
Smedley, S. R., Eisner, M., Meinwald, J., and 439. Leigh, J. A., Rinehart, K. L., Jr., and Wolfe, R. Phillips, S. E. V., McPherson, M. J., and
Eisner, T. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. S. (1984) J. Am. Chem. Soc.106, 3636–3640 Knowles, P. F. (1995) Structure3, 1171–1184
94, 6792–6797 440. White, R. H. (1989) Biochemistry28, 860–865 458. Wilmot, C. M., Murray, J. M., Alton, G.,
415. Curthoys, N. P., and Rabinowitz, J. C. (1972) J. 440a.Ermler, U., Merckel, M. C., Thauer, R. K., and Parsons, M. R., Convery, M. A., Blakeley, V.,
Biol. Chem.247, 1965–1971 Shima, S. (1997) Structure5, 635–646 Corner, A. S., Palcic, M. M., Knowles, P. F.,
415a.Krupenko, S. A., and Wagner, C. (1999) J. Biol. 440b.Shima, S., Warkentin, E., Grabarse, W., Sordel, McPherson, M. J., and Phillips, S. E. V. (1997)
Chem.274, 35777–35784 M., Wicke, M., Thauer, R. K., and Ermler, U. Biochemistry36, 1608–1620
416. Hardy, L. W., Graves, K. L., and Nalivaika, E. (2000)J. Mol. Biol.300, 935–950 459. Moënne-Loccoz, P., Nakamura, N., Steine-
(1995)Biochemistry34, 8422–8432 441. Mukhopadhyay, B., Purwantini, E., Pihl, T. D., bach, V., Duine, J. A., Mure, M., Klinman, J. P.,
417. Powers, S. G., and Snell, E. E. (1976) J. Biol. Reeve, J. N., and Daniels, L. (1995) J. Biol. and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1995) Biochemistry34,
Chem.251, 3786–3793 Chem.270, 2827–2832 7020–7026
418. Carreras, C. W., and Santi, D. V. (1995) Ann. 441a.Allen, J. R., Clark, D. D., Krum, J. G., and 460. Parsons, M. R., Convery, M. A., Wilmot, C.
Rev. Biochem.64, 721–762 Ensign, S. A. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. M., Yadav, K. D., Blakley, V., Corner, A. S.,
419. Schiffer, C. A., Clifton, I. J., Davisson, V. J., U.S.A.96, 8432–8437 Phillips, S. E. V., McPherson, J. J., and
Santi, D. V., and Stroud, R. M. (1995) Biochem- 442. Duine, J. A., and Frank, J. (1981) Trends Knowles, P. F. (1995) Structure3, 1171–1184
istry34, 16279–16287 Biochem. Sci.6, 278–280 461. Warncke, K., Babcock, G. T., Dooley, D. M.,
420. Birdsall, D. L., Finer-Moore, J., and Stroud, R. 443. Ohta, S., Fujita, T., and Tobari, J. (1981) J. McGuirl, M. A., and McCracken, J. (1994) J.
M. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.255, 522–535 Biochem.90, 205–213 Am. Chem. Soc.116, 4028–4037
421. Sage, C. R., Rutenber, E. E., Stout, T. J., and 444. Itoh, S., Ogino, M., Fukui, Y., Murao, H., 462. Choi, Y.-H., Matsuzaki, R., Fukui, T., Shimizu,
Stroud, R. M. (1996) Biochemistry35, 16270– Komatsu, M., Ohshiro, Y., Inoue, T., Kai, Y., E., Yorifuji, T., Sato, H., Ozaki, Y., and
16281 and Kasai, N. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, Tanizawa, K. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 4712–
421a.Anderson, A. C., O’Neil, R. H., DeLano, W. L., 9960–9967 4720
and Stroud, R. M. (1999) Biochemistry38, 445. de Jong, G. A. H., Caldeira, J., Sun, J., 463. Choi, Y.-H., Matsuzaki, R., Suzuki, S., and
13829–13836 Jongejan, J. A., de Vries, S., Loehr, T. M., Tanizawa, K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 22598–
422. Huang, W., and Santi, D. V. (1997) Biochemis- Moura, I., Moura, J. J. G., and Duine, J. A. 22603
try36, 1869–1873 (1995)Biochemistry34, 9451–9458 463a.Schwartz, B., Green, E. L., Sanders-Loehr, J.,
422a.Strop, P., Changchien, L., Maley, F., and 445a.Keitel, T., Diehl, A., Knaute, T., Stezowski, J. and Klinman, J. P. (1998) Biochemistry37,
Montfort, W. R. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 2504– J., Höhne, W., and Görisch, H. (2000) J. Mol. 16591–16600
2511 Biol.297, 961–974 464. Medda, R., Padiglia, A., Pedersen, J. Z.,
423. Knighton, E. R., Kan, C.-C., Howland, E., 446. Matsushita, K., Shinagawa, E., Adachi, O., Rotilio, G., Agrò, A. F., and Floris, G. (1995)
Janson, C. A., Hostomska, Z., Welsh, K. M., and Ameyama, M. (1989) Biochemistry28, Biochemistry34, 16375–16381
and Matthews, D. A. (1994) Nature Struct. Biol. 6276–6280 464a.Holt, A., Alton, G., Scaman, C. H., Loppnow,
1, 186–194 446a.Oubrie, A., Rozeboom, H. J., Kalk, K. H., G. R., Szpacenko, A., Svendsen, I., and Palcic,
423a.Song, H. K., Sohn, S. H., and Suh, S. W. (1999) Olsthoorn, A. J. J., Duine, J. A., and Dijkstra, M. M. (1998) Biochemistry37, 4946 – 4957
EMBO J.18, 1104–1113 B. W. (1999) EMBO J.18, 5187–5194 465. Wang, S. X., Mure, M., Medzihradszky, K. F.,
424. Butler, M. M., Graves, K. L., and Hardy, L. W. 446b.Oubrie, A., Rozeboom, H. J., Kalk, K. H., Burlingame, A. L., Brown, D. E., Dooley, D.
(1994)Biochemistry33, 10521–10526 Duine, J. A., and Dijkstra, B. W. (1999) J. Mol. M., Smith, A. J., Kagan, H. M., and Klinman, J.
425. Graves, K. L., and Hardy, L. W. (1994) Biol.289, 319–333 P. (1996) Science273, 1078–1084
Biochemistry33, 13049–13056 446c.Elias, M. D., Tanaka, M., Izu, H., Matsushita, 465a.Wang, S. X., Nakamura, N., Mure, M.,
426. Santi, D. V., and Hardy, L. W. (1987) Biochemis- K., Adachi, O., and Yamada, M. (2000) J. Biol. Klinman, J. P., and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1997)
try26, 8599–8606 Chem. 275, 7321–7326 J. Biol. Chem.272, 28841–28844
426a.Roje, S., Wang, H., McNeil, S. D., Raymond, 446d.Dewanti, A. R., and Duine, J. A. (2000) 466. Backes, G., Davidson, V. L., Huitema, F.,
R. K., Appling, D. R., Shachar-Hill, Y., Biochemistry39, 9384–9392 Duine, J. A., and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1991)
Bohnert, H. J., and Hanson, A. D. (1999) J. Biochemistry30, 9201–9210
447. Xia, Z.-x, Dai, W.-w, Zhang, Y.-f, White, S. A.,
Biol. Chem.274, 36089–36096 466a.Zhu, Z., and Davidson, V. L. (1998) J. Biol.
Boyd, G. D., and Mathews, F. S. (1996) J. Mol.
427. Green, J. M., Ballou, D. P., and Matthews, R. Chem.273, 14254–14260
Biol.259, 480–501
G. (1988) FASEB J.2, 42–47 467. McIntire, W. S., Wemmer, D. E., Chistoserdov,
448. White, S., Boyd, G., Mathews, F. S., Xia, Z.,
428. Vanoni, M. A., Lee, S., Floss, H. G., and A., and Lidstrom, M. E. (1991) Science252,
Dai, W., Zhang, Y., and Davidson, V. L. (1993)
Matthews, R. G. (1990) J. Am. Chem. Soc.112, 817–824
Biochemistry32, 12955–12958
3987–3992 468. Huizinga, E. G., van Zanten, B. A. M., Duine,
449. Ishida, T., Kawamoto, E., In, Y., Amano, T.,
429. Matthews, R. G. (1982) Fed. Proc.41, 2600–2604 J. A., Jongejan, J. A., Huitema, F., Wilson, K.
Kanayama, J., Doi, M., Iwashita, T., and
430. te Brömmelstroet, B. W., Hensgens, C. M. H., S., and Hol, W. G. J. (1992) Biochemistry31,
Nomoto, K. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117,
Keltjens, J. T., van der Drift, C., and Vogels, G. 9789–9795
3278–3279
D. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 1852–1857 469. Kuusk, V., and McIntire, W. S. (1994) J. Biol.
449a.Itoh, S., Kawakami, H., and Fukuzumi, S.
431. Clark, J. E., and Ljungdahl, L. G. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.269, 26136–26143
(1998)Biochemistry37, 6562–6571
Chem.259, 10845–10849 470. Hyun, Y.-L., and Davidson, V. L. (1995)
449b.Oubrie, A., Rozeboom, H. J., and Dijkstra, B.
432. Zhao, S., Roberts, D. L., and Ragsdale, S. W. Biochemistry34, 816–823
W. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96,
(1995)Biochemistry34, 15075–15083 471. Chen, L., Durley, R., Poliks, B. J., Hamada, K.,
11787–11791
433. Müller, V., Blaut, M., and Gottschalk, G. Chen, Z., Mathews, F. S., Davidson, V. L.,
449c.Zheng, Y.-J., and Bruice, T. C. (1997) Proc.
(1993) in Methano-genesis: Ecology, Physiology, Satow, Y., Huizinga, E., Vellieux, F. M. D., and
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 11881–11886
Biochemistry and Genetics (Ferry, J. G., ed), pp. Hol, W. G. J. (1992) Biochemistry31, 4959–4964
450. McIntire, W. S. (1994) FASEB J.8, 513–521
360–406, Chapman and Hall, New York 471a.Chen, L., Doi, M., Durley, R. C. E.,
451. Anthony, C. (1996) Biochem. J.320, 697–711
434. Ferry, J. G., ed. (1993) Methanogenesis: Ecology, Chistoserdov, A. Y., Lidstrom, M. E.,
452. Klinman, J. P., and Mu, D. (1994) Ann. Rev.
Physiology, Biochemistry and Genetics, Chap- Davidson, V. L., and Mathews, F. S. (1998) J.
Biochem.63, 299–344
man & Hall, New York Mol. Biol.276, 131– 149
453. Klinman, J. P. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 27189–
435. Thauer, R. K., Hedderich, R., and Fischer, R. 472. Chen, L., Durley, R. C. E., Mathews, F. S., and
27192
(1993) in Methanogenesis: Ecology, Physiology, Davidson, V. L. (1994) Science264, 86–90
454. Davidson, V. L. (1992) Principles and Applica-
Biochemistry and Genetics (Ferry, J. G., ed), pp. 472a.Zhu, Z., and Davidson, V. L. (1999)
tions of Quinoproteins, Dekker, New York
209–252, Chapman and Hall, New York Biochemistry38, 4862 – 4867
455. Janes, S. M., Mu, D., Wemmer, D., Smith, A. J.,
436. Taylor, G. D., and Wolfe, R. S. (1974) J. Biol. 473. Mure, M., and Klinman, J. P. (1995) J. Am.
Kaur, S., Maltby, D., Burlingame, A. L., and
Chem.249, 4879 –4885 Chem. Soc.117, 8707–8718
Klinman, J. P. (1990) Science248, 981–987
474. Lee, Y., and Sayre, L. M. (1995) J. Am. Chem.
Soc.117, 11823–11828

--- Page 837 ---

834 Chapter 15. Coenzymes of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
References
474a.Su, Q., and Klinman, J. P. (1998) Biochemistry 502. Swallow, A. J. (1982) in Function of Quinones in 534. Ren, B., Huang, W., Åkesson, B., and Laden-
37, 12513–12525 Energy Conserving Systems (Trumpower, B. L., stein, R. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.268, 869 – 885
474b.Wilmot, C. M., Hajdu, J., McPherson, M. J., ed), pp. 59–71, Academic Press, New York 535. Ladenstein, R., and Wendel, A. (1983) Eur. J.
Knowles, P. F., and Phillips, S. E. V. (1999) 503. McTigue, J. J., Dhaon, M. K., Rich, D. H., and Biochem.133, 51–69
Science286, 1724–1728 Suttie, J. W. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.259, 4272–4278 536. Shen, Q., Chu, F.-F., and Newburger, P. E.
474c.Plastino, J., Green, E. L., Sanders-Loehr, J., and 504. Suttie, J. W. (1993) FASEB J.7, 445–452 (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 11463–11469
Klinman, J. P. (1999) Biochemistry38, 8204–8216 505. Morris, D. P., Soute, B. A. M., Vermeer, C., and 537. Chu, F.-F., Doroshow, J. H., and Esworthy, R.
474d.Singh, V., Zhu, Z., Davidson, V. L., and Stafford, D. W. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 8735– S. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 2571–2576
McCracken, J. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Soc.122, 931 8742 538. Duan, Y.-J., Komura, S., Fiszer-Szafarz, B.,
–938 506. Lingenfelter, S. E., and Berkner, K. L. (1996) Szafarz, D., and Yagi, K. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.
475. Itoh, S., Ogino, M., Haranou, S., Terasaka, T., Biochemistry35, 8234–8243 263, 19003–19008
Ando, T., Komatsu, M., Ohshiro, Y., Fuku- 507. Kuliopulos, A., Hubbard, B. R., Lam, Z., 539. Schnurr, K., Belkner, J., Ursini, F., Schewe, T.,
zumi, S., Kano, K., Takagi, K., and Ikeda, T. Koski, I. J., Furie, B., Furie, B. C., and Walsh, and Kühn, H. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 4653–
(1995)J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 1485 –1493 C. T. (1992) Biochemistry31, 7722–7728 4658
476. Itoh, S., Kawakami, H., and Fukuzumi, S. 507a.Wu, S.-M., Mutucumarana, V. P., Geromanos, 540. Friedman, P. A. (1984) N. Engl. J. Med.310,
(1997)J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 439–440 S., and Stafford, D. W. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 1458–1460
477. Gorren, A. C. F., Moenne-Loccoz, P., Backes, 11718–11722 540a.Shisler, J. L., Senkevich, T. G., Berry, M. J., and
G., de Vries, S., Sanders-Loehr, J., and Duine, 508. Wood, G. M., and Suttie, J. W. (1988) J. Biol. Moss, B. (1998) Science279, 102–105
J. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 12926–12931 Chem.263, 3234–3239 541. Visser, T. J. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 222–
478. Moënne-Loccoz, P., Nakamura, N., Itoh, S., 509. Metzler, D. E. (1977) Biochemistry. The Chemical 224
Fukuzumi, S., Gorren, A. C. F., Duine, J. A., Reactions of Living Cells, Academic Press, New 542. Toyoda, N., Harney, J. W., Berry, M. J., and
and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1996) Biochemistry35, York (p. 581) Larsen, P. R. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 20329–
4713–4720 510. Sadowski, J. A., Esmon, C. T., and Suttie, J. W. 20334
479. Pedersen, J. Z., EL-Sherbini, S., Finazzi-Agrò, (1976)J. Biol. Chem.251, 2770–2776 543. DePalo, D., Kinlaw, W. B., Zhao, C., Engel-
A., and Rotilio, G. (1992) Biochemistry31, 8–12 511. Anton, D. L., and Friedman, P. A. (1983) J. berg-Kulka, H., and St. Germain, D. L. (1994)
480. Warncke, K., Brooks, H. B., Lee, H.-i, Mc- Biol. Chem.258, 14084–14087 J. Biol. Chem.269, 16223–16228
Cracken, J., Davidson, V. L., and Babcock, G. 512. Naganathan, S., Hershline, R., Ham, S. W., 544. Davey, J. C., Becker, K. B., Schneider, M. J., St.
T. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 10063–10075 and Dowd, P. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, Germain, D. L., and Galton, V. A. (1995) J.
481. Gorren, A. C. F., and Duine, J. A. (1994) 9831–9839 Biol. Chem.270, 26786–26789
Biochemistry33, 12202–12209 513. Dowd, P., Hershline, R., Ham, S. W., and 545. Croteau, W., Whittemore, S. L., Schneider, M.
482. Hartmann, C., Brzovic, P., and Klinman, J. P. Naganathan, S. (1995) Science269, 1684–1691 J., and St. Germain, D. L. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.
(1993)Biochemistry32, 2234 –2241 514. Bouchard, B. A., Furie, B., and Furie, B. C. 270, 16569–16575
483. Steinebach, V., de Vries, S., and Duine, J. A. (1999)Biochemistry38, 9517– 9523 546. St. Germain, D. L., Schwartzman, R. A.,
(1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 5580–5588 514a.Zheng, Y.-J., and Bruice, T. C. (1998) J. Am. Groteau, W., Kanamori, A., Wang, Z., Brown,
484. Morton, R. A. (1971) Biol. Rev. Cambridge Chem. Soc.120, 1623–1624 D. D., and Galton, V. A. (1994) Proc. Natl.
Philos. Soc.46, 47–96 515. Dubois, J., Gaudry, M., Bory, S., Azerad, R., Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 7767–7771
485. Morton, R. A. (1977) Biol. Rev. Cambridge and Marquet, A. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 547. Tamura, T., and Stadtman, T. C. (1996) Proc.
Philos. Soc.46, 47–96 7897–7899 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 1006–1011
486. Morton, R. A. (1972) Vitamins5, 355–391 516. Dubois, J., Dugave, C., Fourès, C., Kaminsky, 548. Gladyshev, V. N., Jeang, K.-T., and Stadtman,
487. Suzuki, H., and King, T. E. (1983) J. Biol. Chem. M., Tabet, J.-C., Bory, S., Gaudry, M., and T. C. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93,
258, 352–358 Marquet, A. (1991) Biochemistry30, 10506– 6146–6151
488. Matsuma, K., Bowyer, J. R., Ohnishi, T., and 10512 548a.Sun, Q.-A., Wu, Y., Zappacosta, F., Jeang,
Dutton, L. P. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 1571–1579 517. Decottignies-Le Maréchal, P., Ducrocq, C., K.-T., Lee, B. J., Hatfield, D. L., and
489. He, D.-Y., Yu, L., and Yu, C.-A. (1994) J. Biol. Marquet, A., and Azerad, R. (1984) J. Biol. Gladyshev, V. N. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274,
Chem.269, 27885–27888 Chem.259, 15010–15012 24522–24530
490. He, D.-Y., Gu, L.-Q., Yu, L., and Yu, C.-A. 518. Lee, J. J., Principe, L. M., and Fasco, M. J. 549. Marcocci, L., Flohé, L., and Packer, L. (1997)
(1994)Biochemistry33, 880–884 (1985)Biochemistry24, 7063–7070 BioFactors6, 351–358
491. Folkers, K., Yamamuro, Y., and Ito, K., eds. 519. Hildebrandt, E. F., and Suttie, J. W. (1982) 550. Hill, K. E., Lloyd, R. S., Yang, J.-G., Read, R.,
(1980)Biomedical and Clinical Aspects of Biochemistry21, 2406–2411 and Burk, R. F. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266,
Coenzyme Q, Elsevier, Amsterdam 520. Fasco, M. J., Preusch, P. C., Hildebrandt, E., 10050–10053
492. Morton, R. A. (1972) Biochem. Soc. Symp.35, and Suttie, J. W. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 551. Himeno, S., Chittum, H. S., and Burk, R. F.
203–217 4372–4380 (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 15769–15775
493. Gibbs, M. (1971) Structure and Function of 521. Esmon, C. T. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 4743– 552. Steinert, P., Ahrens, M., Gross, G., and Flohé, L.
Chloroplasts, Springer-Verlag, Berlin and New 4746 (1997)BioFactors6, 311–319
York 522. Stenflo, J., Öhlin, A.-K., Owen, W. G., and 552a.Saito, Y., Hayashi, T., Tanaka, A., Watanabe,
494. Trumpower, B. L., ed. (1982) Function of Schneider, W. J. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 21–24 Y., Suzuki, M., Saito, E., and Takahashi, K.
Quinones in Energy Conserving Systems, 523. Pryor, W. A. (1982) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.393, (1999)J. Biol. Chem.274, 2866–2871
Academic Press, New York 1–22 553. Read, R., Bellew, T., Yang, J.-G., Hill, K. E.,
495. Suzuki, Y. J., Tsuchiya, M., Wassall, S. R., 524. Ham, A.-J. L., and Liebler, D. C. (1995) Palmer, I. S., and Burk, R. F. (1990) J. Biol.
Choo, Y. M., Govil, G., Kagan, V. E., and Biochemistry34, 5754– 5761 Chem.265, 17899–17905
Packer, L. (1993) Biochemistry32, 10692–10699 525. Valgimigli, L., Ingold, K. U., and Lusztyk, J. 554. Vendeland, S. C., Beilstein, M. A., Chen, C. L.,
496. Sun, I. L., Sun, E. E., Crane, F. L., Morré, D. J., (1996)J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 3545–3549 Jensen, O. N., Barofsky, E., and Whanger, P. D.
Lindgren, A., and Löw, H. (1992) Proc. Natl. 526. Christen, S., Woodall, A. A., Shigenaga, M. K., (1993)J. Biol. Chem.268, 17103–17107
Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 11126–11130 Southwell-Keely, P. T., Duncan, M. W., and 555. Vendeland, S. C., Beilstein, M. A., Yeh, J.-Y.,
497. Hughes, P. E., and Tove, S. B. (1980) J. Biol. Ames, B. N. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. Ream, W., and Whanger, P. D. (1995) Proc.
Chem.255, 7095–7097 94, 3217–3222 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 8749–8753
498. Valgimigli, L., Banks, J. T., Ingold, K. U., and 527. Schwarz, K., and Foltz, C. M. (1957) J. Am. 556. Yeh, J.-Y., Beilstein, M. A., Andrews, J. S., and
Lusztyk, J. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 9966– Chem. Soc.79, 3292–3293 Whanger, P. D. (1995) FASEB J.9, 392–396
9971 528. Shamberger, R. J. (1983) Biochemistry of 557. Calvin, H. I., Cooper, G. W., and Wallace, E.
499. Nagaoka, S.-i, and Ishihara, K. (1996) J. Am. Selenium, Plenum, New York (1981)Gamete Research4, 139–149
Chem. Soc.118, 7361–7366 529. Keating, K. I., and Dagbusan, B. C. (1984) 558. Shamberger, R. J. (1983) Biochemistry of
500. van Belzen, R., Kotlyar, A. B., Moon, N., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.81, 3433–3437 Selenium, Plenum, New York (pp.47–49)
Dunham, R. D., and Albracht, S. P. J. (1997) 530. Stadtman, T. C. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 559. Yamazaki, S. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257, 7926–
Biochemistry36, 886–893 16257–16260 7929
501. Salerno, J. C., Osgood, M., Liu, Y., Taylor, H., 531. Stadtman, T. C. (1996) Ann. Rev. Biochem.65, 560. Yamazaki, S., Tsai, L., Stadtman, T. C.,
and Scholes, C. P. (1990) Biochemistry29, 83–100 Teshima, T., and Nakaji, A. (1985) Proc. Natl.
6987–6993 532. Burk, R. F. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2274–2279 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 1364–1366
533. Low, S. C., and Berry, M. J. (1996) Trends 561. Berg, B. L., Baron, C., and Stewart, V. (1991) J.
Biochem. Sci.21, 203–208 Biol. Chem.266, 22386–22391

--- Page 838 ---

835
References
562. Gladyshev, V. N., Boyington, J. C., Khangulov, 569. Sliwkowski, M. X., and Stadtman, T. C. (1985) 576. Mozier, N. M., McConnell, K. P., and Hoffman,
S. V., Grahame, D. A., Stadtman, T. C., and J. Biol. Chem.260, 3140–3144 J. L. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 4527–4531
Sun, P. D. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 8095–8100 570. Veres, Z., Tsai, L., Scholz, T. D., Politino, M., 577. Harrison, D. J., Fluri, K., Seiler, K., Fan, Z.,
563. Boyington, J. C., Gladyshev, V. N., Khangulov, Balaban, R. S., and Stadtman, T. C. (1992) Effenhauser, C. S., and Manz, A. (1993) Science
S. V., Stadtman, T. C., and Sun, P. D. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 2975–2979 261, 895–897
Science275, 1305–1306 571. Diamond, A. M., Choi, I. S., Crain, P. F., 578. Kromayer, M., Wilting, R., Tormay, P., and
564. Arkowitz, R. A., and Abeles, R. H. (1990) J. Hashizume, T., Pomerantz, S. C., Cruz, R., Böck, A. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.262, 413–420
Am. Chem. Soc.112, 870–872 Steer, C. J., Hill, K. E., Burk, R. F., McCloskey, 579. Glass, R. S., Singh, W. P., Jung, W., Veres, Z.,
565. Arkowitz, R. A., and Abeles, R. H. (1991) J. A., and Hatfield, D. L. (1993) J. Biol. Chem. Scholz, T. D., and Stadtman, T. C. (1993)
Biochemistry30, 4090–4097 268, 14215–14223 Biochemistry32, 12555–12559
566. Stadtman, T. C., and Davis, J. N. (1991) J. Biol. 572. Diplock, A. T., and Lucy, J. A. (1973) FEBS 580. Veres, Z., Kim, I. Y., Scholz, T. D., and Stadtman,
Chem.266, 22147–22153 Lett.29, 205–210 T. C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 10597–10603
567. Arkowitz, R. A., and Abeles, R. H. (1989) 573. Sandholm, M., and Sipponen, P. (1973) Arch. 581. Mullins, L. S., Hong, S.-B., Gibson, G. E.,
Biochemistry28, 4639 –4644 Biochem. Biophys.155, 120–124 Walker, H., Stadtman, T. C., and Raushel, F.
567a.Self, W. T., and Stadtman, T. C. (2000) Proc. 574. Sarathchandra, S. V., and Watkinson, J. H. M. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 6684–6685
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 7208–7213 (1981)Science211, 600–601
568. Gladyshev, V. N., Khangulov, S. V., and 575. Reamer, D. C., and Zoller, W. H. (1980) Science
Stadtman, T. C. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 208, 500–502
U.S.A.91, 232–236
Study Questions
1. S-adenosylmethionine is also a biological methyl 6. Write the equations for each of the reactions shown
group donor. The product of its methyl transferase below. Using the E0' values below, calculate approxi-
reactions is S-adenosylhomocysteine. This product mate Gibbs energies for each reaction, and show
is further degraded by S-adenosylhomocysteine by the relative length of the arrows on which side
hydrolase, an enzyme that contains tightly bound of the reaction the equilibrium lies.
NAD+, to form homocysteine and adenosine. a) The oxidation of malate by NAD+
b) The oxidation of succinate by NAD+
Write a step-by-step mechanism for the action of c) The oxidation of succinate by enzyme-bound
this hydrolase. FAD
d) What can you say about the cofactor required
2. Compare the chemical mechanisms of enzyme- for oxidation of succinate from your calcula-
catalyzed decarboxylation of the following: tions?
a) a β-oxo-acid such as acetoacetate or oxalo-
acetate The values of E0' for several half reactions are
b) an α-oxo-acid such as pyruvate given below. Everything has been rounded to one
c) an amino acid such as L-glutamate significant figure so that a calculator is unnecessary.
3. Describe the subunit structure of the enzyme Reaction E0' (volts)
pyruvate dehydrogenase. Discuss the functioning
of each of the coenzymes that are associated with NAD+ + H+ + 2 e–→ NADH –0.3
these subunits and write detailed mechanisms for
enzyme bound FAD + 2 H+ + 2 e–→
each step in the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction.
enzyme bound FADH 0.0
2
4. Free formatecan be assimilated by cells via the fumarate + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ succinate 0.0
intermediate10-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (10-
formyl-THF). oxalacetate + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ malate –0.2
a) Describe the mechanism of synthesis of this
compound from formate and tetrahydrofolate. 7. Some acetogenic bacteria, which convert CO to
2
b) Diagram a hypothetical transition state for the acetic acid, form pyruvate for synthesis of carbo-
first step of this reaction sequence. hydrates, etc., by formation of formaldehyde and
c) Describe two or more uses that the human conversion of the latter to glycine by reversal of
body makes of 10-formyl-THF. the PLP and lipoic acid-dependent glycine decar-
boxylase, a 4-protein system. The glycine is then
5. Using partial structural formulas, describe the converted to serine, pyruvate, oxaloacetate, etc.
reactions by which serine and methionine react to Propose a detailed pathway for this sequence.
formN-formylmethionine needed for protein
synthesis.

--- Page 839 ---

836 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
Transition metal ions function in many biological oxidation-reduction processes. (Left) A
Asp 346 heme ring in nitrite reductase chelates an iron ion in its center, holding the Fe2+ or Fe3+ with
Tyr114
bonds from four nitrogen atoms and a fifth bond from an imidazole ring below. Above the
iron is a nitrite ion, NO–, awaiting reduction to nitric oxide NO in a denitrifying bacterium.
2
His 345 Ser147 From Ranghino et al. (2000) Biochemistry39, 10958–10966. (Right) The active site of a bacterial
Trp116 dimethylsulfoxide reductase has an atom of molybdenum or tungsten at its center. The
O metal is held by four sulfur atoms from two molybdopterin molecules and an oxygen atom
N, C, P
S of a serine side chain. Two other oxygen atoms are bound as oxo groups and may participate
His 200 Mo in catalysis. From Stewart et al. (2000) J. Mol. Biol. 299, 593 – 600.
Contents
837 A. Iron 877 C. Nickel
837 1. Uptake by Living Cells 877 1. Urease
838 Siderophores 878 2. Hydrogenases
839 Uptake of iron by eukaryotic cells 879 3. Cofactor F and Methyl-Coenzyme M
430
840 Transferrins Reductase
841 2. Storage of Iron 881 4. Tunichlorins
843 3. Heme Proteins 881 5. Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenases and
843 Some names to remember Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenase/Acetyl-CoA
844 Hemes and heme proteins Synthase
845 4. The Cytochromes 882 D. Copper
846 The c-type cytochromes 883 1. Electron-Transferring Copper Proteins
847 Cytochromes b, a, and o 884 2. Copper, Zinc-Superoxide Dismutase
848 5. Mechanisms of Biological Electron Transfer 884 3. Nitrite and Nitrous Oxide Reductases
848 Electron-transfer pathways? 885 4. Hemocyanins
849 “Docking” 885 5. Copper Oxidases
849 Coupling and gating of electron transfer 887 6. Cytochrome c Oxidase
850 Effects of ionic equilibria on electron transfer 887 E. Manganese
850 6. Reactions of Heme Proteins with Oxygen or 888 F. Chromium
Hydrogen Peroxide 889 G. Vanadium
850 Oxygen-carrying proteins 890 H. Molybdenum
852 Catalases and peroxidases 890 1. Molybdenum Ions and Coenzyme Forms
853 Mechanisms of catalase and peroxidase catalysis 892 2. Enzymatic Mechanisms
855 Haloperoxidases 893 3. Nutritional Need for Mo
857 7. The Iron–Sulfur Proteins 893 I. Tungsten
857 Ferredoxins, high-potential iron proteins,
and rubredoxins 895 References
858 Rubredoxins 903 Study Questions
859 Chloroplast-type ferredoxins
859 The 3Fe – 4S clusters Boxes
859 Properties of iron–sulfur clusters 842 Box 16-A Magnetic Iron Oxide in Organisms
860 Functions of iron–sulfur enzymes 868 Box 16-B Cobalamin (Vitamin B )
862 8. The (µ-oxo) Diiron Proteins 12
862 Hemerythrin Tables
862 Purple acid phosphatases 871 Table 16-1 Isomerization Reactions Involving
863 Diiron oxygenases and desaturases Hydrogen Transfer and Dependent
863 9. Ribonucleotide Reductases upon a Vitamin B Coenzyme
12
863 10. Superoxide Dismutases
866 B. Cobalt and Vitamin B
12
867 1. Coenzyme Forms
869 2. Reduction of Cyanocobalamin and Synthesis
of Alkyl Cobalamins
870 3. Three Nonenzymatic Cleavage Reactions of
Vitamin B Coenzymes
12
870 4. Enzymatic Functions of B Coenzymes
12
871 Cobalamin-dependent ribonucleotide reductase
872 The isomerization reactions
874 Stereochemistry of the isomerization reactions
874 Aminomutases
875 Transfer reactions of methyl groups
876 Corrinoid-dependent synthesis of acetyl-CoA

--- Page 840 ---

837
16
Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
Asp 346
Tyr114
His 345 Ser147
Trp116
O
N, C, P
S
His 200 Mo
Although the amounts present within living cells bacteria, possess no oxygen-requiring enzymes and are
are very small, the ions of the transition metals Fe, Co, almost devoid of both iron and copper. All other
Ni, Cu, and Mn are extremely active centers for catalysis, organisms appear to require iron for life.
especially of reactions that take advantage of the
ability of these metals to exist in more than one oxida-
tion state.1– 4 Iron, copper, and nickel are also compo- 1. Uptake by Living Cells
nents of the electron carrier proteins that function as
oxidants or reductants in many biochemical processes. A major problem for cells is posed by the relative
These metals are all nutritionally essential, as are insolubility of ferric hydroxide and other compounds
chromium and vanadium. Among the heavier transi- from which iron must be extracted by the organism. A
tion elements molybdenum is a constituent of an consequence is that iron is often taken up in a chelated
important group of enzymes that includes the sulfite form and is transferred from one organic ligand, often
oxidase of human liver and nitrogenase of nitrogen- a protein, to another with little or no existence as free
fixing bacteria. Tungsten occasionally substitutes for Fe3+or Fe2+. As can be calculated from the estimated
molybdenum. solubility product of Fe(OH) (Eq. 16-1),7 the equilibrium
3
concentration of Fe3+ at pH 7 is only 10–17 M.
A. Iron K = [Fe3+][OH–]3 < 10–38 M4 (16-1a)
sp
Iron is one of the most abundant elements in the or [Fe3+] / [H+]3 < 104 M4 at 25° C (16-1b)
earth’s crust, being present to the extent of ~ 4% in a
typical soil. Its functions in living cells are numerous For a 2 µm3 bacterial cell this amounts to just one free
and diverse.2,5– 8 The average overall iron content of Fe3+ ion in almost 100 million cells at any single moment.
both bacteria and fungi is ~ 1 mmol / kg, but that of The importance of chelated forms of iron becomes
animal tissues is usually less. Seventy percent of the obvious. It is also evident from Eq. 16-1 that, in addi-
3– 5 g of iron present in the human body is located in tion to chelation, a low external pH can also facilitate
the blood’s erythrocytes, whose overall iron content is uptake of Fe3+ by organisms.
~ 20 mM. In other tissues the total iron averages closer to The values of the formation constants for chelates
0.3 mM and consists principally of storage forms. The of Fe2+ typically lie between those of Mn2+ and Co2+
total concentration of iron in all of the iron-containing (Fig. 6-6, Table 6-9). For example, K = 1014.3 M–1 for
1
enzymesof tissues amounts to only about 0.01 mM. formation of the Fe2+ chelate of EDTA. The smaller
Although these concentrations are low, the iron is and more highly charged Fe3+ is bonded more strongly
concentrated in oxidative enzymes of membranes and (K = 1025 M–1). These binding constants are indepen-
1
may attain much higher concentrations locally. Only a dent of pH. However, the binding of any metal ion is
few parasitic or anaerobic bacteria, e.g. the lactic acid affected by pH, as discussed in Chapter 6. A fact of

--- Page 841 ---

838 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
considerable biochemical significance is the stronger that chelate the iron.
binding of Fe3+ to oxygen-containing ligands than to The three catechol groups of enterobactin are carried
nitrogen atoms, while Fe2+ tends to bind preferentially on a cyclic serine triester structure. A variety of both
to nitrogen. It is also significant that Fe3+ bound to cyclic and linear structures are found among other
oxygen ligands tends to exchange readily with other catechol siderophores.14– 19 For example, parabactin
ferric ions in the medium, whereas Fe3+ bound to andagrobactin (Fig. 16-1) contain a backbone of
nitrogen-containing ligands such as heme exchanges spermidine20 (Chapter 24). After the Fe3+–enterobactin
slowly. This fact is important for both iron-transport complex enters a bacterial cell the ester linkages of a
compounds and enzymes. siderophore are cleaved by an esterase. Because of the
extremely high formation constant of ~ 1052 M–1 for
Siderophores. If a suitably high content of iron the complex11 the only way for a cell to release the
(e.g., 50 µM or more for E. coli) is maintained in the Fe3+ is through this irreversible destruction of the iron
external medium, bacteria and other microorganisms carrier.11d Reduction to Fe2+ may be involved in release
have little problem with uptake of iron. However, of iron from some siderophores.11e
when the external iron concentration is low, special The first known siderophore, isolated in 1952 by
compounds called siderophores are utilized to render Neilands,22 is ferrichrome (Fig. 16-1), a cyclic hexa-
the iron more soluble.7– 11c For example, at iron con- peptide containing hydroxamate groups at the iron-
centrations below 2 µM,E. coli and other enterobacte- binding centers. Oxygen atoms form the bonds to iron
ria secrete large amounts of enterobactin (Fig. 16-1).
The stable Fe3+–enterobactin complex is taken up by a
O
transport system that involves receptors on the outer
bacterial membrane.9,12,13 Siderophores from many C O –
bacteria have in common with enterobactin the pres- R N
R'
ence of catechol(ortho-dihydroxybenzene) groups
Hydroxamate group
A B R
O CO
3–
CO O
O
Fe OH
O O
OH
O OH
NH
N O
HN O CO H H
OH O
O H O CH3 OH
O HN O H
H O N N
O
N O
H H
C H D OH
H O
C
O N C H
C N
H H N
C N C
H – S CH3
HC C O
H N 3 O – O N C O N
Fe3+
S
O C O O C N H COO –
H 3 C C O – CH 3
H
C N C
H H
N H C Figure 16-1 Structures of several siderophores and of their metal
H C N O complexes. (A) Enterobactin of E. coli and other enteric bacteria;12
C
(B) parabactin (R = H) from Paracoccus denitrificans and agrobactin (R = OH)
O H
H from Agrobacterium tumefaciens;20 (C) ferrichrome;9 (D) pyochelin from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.21

--- Page 842 ---

A. Iron 839
in this compound also. Ferrichrome binds Fe3+ with a receptors of bacteria have been “parasitized” by vari-
formation constant of ~ 1029 M–1. The binding is not as ous bacteriophages and toxic proteins. For example,
tight as with enterobactin and the iron can be released FepA is also a receptor for the toxic colicins B and D
by enzymatic reduction to Fe2+ which is much less (Box 8-D) and tonB is a receptor for bacteriophage
tightly bound than is Fe3+. The released ferrichrome T1.9,13
can be secreted and used repeatedly to bring in more Some bacteria do not form siderophores but take
iron. Ferrichrome is produced by various fungi and up Fe2+. Even E. coli, when grown anaerobically,
bacilli and is only one of a series of known hydroxa- synthesizes an uptake system for Fe2+. It utilizes a
mate siderophores.16 Since iron is essential to virtually 75-residue peptide encoded by gene feoA and a 773-
all parasitic organisms the ability to obtain iron is often residue protein encoded by feoB.28,11b
the limiting factor in establishing an infection.23,24
InE. coli there are seven different outer membrane Uptake of iron by eukaryotic cells. The yeast
receptors for siderophores.25 One of these, the gated Saccharomyces cerevisiae utilizes two systems for uptake
porinFepA, is specific for ferric enterochelin. With of iron.29,30 A low-affinity system transports Fe2+ with
the assistance of another protein, TonB, it allows the an apparent K of ~ 30 µM, while a high-affinity system
m
ferric siderophore to penetrate the outer membrane.26 has a K of ~ 0.15 µM. Study of these systems has been
m
A different receptor, FhuA, binds ferrichrome. Both greatly assisted by the use of genetic methods devel-
FepA and FhaA are large 22-strand porins resembling oped for both bacteria and yeast (Chapter 26). The
the 16-strand porin shown in Fig. 8-20. However, they low-affinity iron uptake depends upon a protein trans-
are nearly 7 nm long with internal diameters three porter encoded by gene FET4 and on a reductase
times those of the 16-strand porins. In addition, loops encoded by genes FRE1 and FRE2, proteins that are
of polypeptide chain on the outer edges can close embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane.29,31-33 It
while an N-terminal domain forms a “cork” that remains might seem reasonable that the FET3 copper oxido-
in place until the Fe3+-siderophore complex enter the reductase should keep Fe2+reduced while it is trans-
channel and binds. Like the hatches in an air lock on ported. However, it appears to oxidize Fe2+ to Fe3+.
a spacecraft, the outer loops then close, after which the The high-affinity uptake system is more puzzling. It
inner cork unwinds to allow the siderophore complex requires a permease encoded by FTR I and an additional
to enter the periplasmic space. The apparatus requires protein encoded by FET3.30,33– 35 The Fet3 protein is a
an energy supply, which apparently is provided by an copper oxidoreductase related to ceruloplasmin
additional complex consisting of proteins TonB, ExbA, (Section D). The protein Fre1p (encoded by FRE1) is a
and ExbD. They evidently couple the electrochemical metalloreductase that reduces Cu2+ to Cu+, as well as
gradient across the cell membrane (Chapter 8, B1 and Fe3+ to Fe2+. It is essential for copper uptake (Section
C5 and Chapter 18) with the operation of the channel D).33 It has long been known that ceruloplasmin is
gates. Some bacteria use a different strategy for passage required for mobilization of iron from mammalian
across the outer membrane.11c The channel of a receptor tissues.30 Hereditary ceruloplasmin deficiency causes
protein contains a molecule of an iron-free siderophore. accumulation of iron in tissues.36 Yeast also contains
When a molecule of Fe3+-siderophore binds in the bothmitochondrial and vacuolar iron transporters.37,37a,b
outside part of the channel the Fe3+ jumps to the inner The uptake of iron by animals is not as well under-
siderophore, which then dissociates from the receptor, stood38– 40 but it resembles that of yeast.41 A general
carrying the Fe3+-siderophore complex into the peri- divalent cation transporter that is coupled to the mem-
plasmic space. This mechanism also seems to be brane proton gradient is involved in intestinal iron
available in E. coli. The ferric uptake regulation (Fur) uptake.42,60 Ascorbic acid promotes the uptake of iron,
protein binds excess free Fe2+, the resulting complex presumably by reducing it to Fe(II), which is more
acting as a repressor of all of the iron uptake genes in readily absorbed than Fe(III), and also by promoting
E. coli.11e ferritin synthesis.43 Uptake is also promoted by meat
Additional proteins are required for passage in the diet.44 Within the body iron is probably trans-
through the membrane.11b,23,25,27 These are ABC trans- ferred from one protein to another with only a transient
porters, which utilize hydrolysis of ATP as an energy existence as free Fe2+. An average daily human diet
source (Chapter 8, Section C,4). For uptake of the Fe3+- contains ~ 15 mg of iron, of which ~ 1 mg is absorbed.
ferrichrome complex protein FhuD is the periplasmic This is usually enough to compensate for the small
binding protein, FhuC is an integral membrane com- losses of the metal from the body, principally through
ponent, and the cytosolic FhuC contains the ATPase the bile. Once it enters the body, iron is carefully con-
center.11b Another ABC transporter, found in many served. The 9 billion red blood cells destroyed daily
bacteria, carries unchelated Fe3+ across the inner mem- yield 20 – 25 mg of iron which is almost all reused or
brane. The binding protein component for Hemophilus stored. The body apparently has no mechanism for
influenzae, designated Hit, resembles one lobe of mam- excretion of large amounts of iron; a person’s iron
malian transferrin (Fig. 16-2).11b The siderophore content is regulated almost entirely by the rate of

--- Page 843 ---

840 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
uptake. This rate is increased during pregnancy and, Transferrins bind Fe2+ weakly and it is likely that a
in young women, to compensate for iron lost in men- transferrin– Fe2+– HCO – complex formed initially
3
strual bleeding. Nevertheless, control of iron uptake is undergoes oxidation to the Fe3+– CO 2– complex within
3
imperfect and perhaps 500 million people around the cells and within the bloodstream. A conformational
world suffer from iron deficiency.44,45 For others, an change closes the protein around the iron ions.56 In
excessive intake of iron or a genetic defect lead to yeast the previously mentioned copper oxidoreductase
accumulation of iron to toxic levels, a condition called encoded by the FET3 gene appears to not only oxidize
hemochromatosis.44,46,46a,b This condition may also Fe2+ but also transfer the resulting Fe3+ to transferrin.
arise in any disease that leads to excessive destruction Ceruloplasmin may play a similar role in mammals.33
of hemoglobin or accumulation of
damaged erythrocytes. Examples
are β-thalassemia (Chapter 28) and A
cerebral malaria.47 Treatment with
chelating agents designed to remove
iron is often employed.47,48
Transferrins. Within the body
iron is moved from one location to
another while bound as Fe3+ to
transferrins, a family of related
680 - to 700-residue 80-kDa pro-
teins.38,49– 53 Each transferrin mole-
cule contains two Fe+3 binding sites,
one located in each of two similar
domains of the folded peptide
chain. A dianion, usually CO 2–,
3
is bound together with each Fe3+.
Milk transferrin (lactoferrin51a,b,c B H
80 O
also found in leukocytes), hen egg H 250
transferrin (ovotransferrin),52,52a
O N61 62
a tr n a d n s r f a e b r b ri i n t 5 a 4 n ,5 d 4a h a u ll m h a a n v e se s r i u m m ilar O – 92 H N H 60 H N
structures. Each Fe3+ is bonded to
N
oxygen anions from two tyrosine
82 301 O – O
side chains, an aspartate carboxy- 3+
late, an imidazole group, and the H H H
Fe
bound carbonate ion (Fig. 16-2B). O – O O N
122
Transferrin of blood plasma is
+
encoded by a separate gene but has H N H – O O – H N123
a similar structure. Transferrin of H –O
chickens appears to be identical to H O H N
N H 124
conalbumin of egg whites. The H
H
iron-binding proteins of body fluids H N + H
N
O
are sometimes given the group 117
namesiderophilins. Transferrins 209 H N 121
191 H
may function not only in transport
of iron throughout the body but
Figure 16-2 (A) Ribbon drawing of the polypeptide chain of a transferrin,
also as iron buffers that provide a human lactoferrin. The N lobe is to the left and the C lobe to the right.
relatively constant iron concentra- Each active site contains bound Fe3+ and a molecule of oxalate dianion
tion within tissues. which replaces the physiological CO 2–. From Baker et al.51 Courtesy of
3
The entrance of iron into the Edward Baker. (B) Schematic diagram showing part of the hydrogen-bond
body through the intestinal mucosal network involved in binding the Fe3+ in the N lobe of hen ovotransferrin.
Some side chain groups and water molecules have been omitted. The
cells may involve the transferrin
positions of hydrogen atoms and the charge state of acid–base groups are
present in those cells44 and the
uncertain. Most of the hydrogen-bond distances (O - - O, O - - N, N - - N)
influx of iron may also be regulated
indicated by dashed lines are between 0.27 and 0.3 nm. Release of the
by blood plasma transferrin. There bound Fe3+ may be accomplished in part by protonation of the bound
is also a nontransferrin pathway.42,55 CO 2– to form HCO –. See Kurokawa et al.52
3 3

--- Page 844 ---

A. Iron 841
Iron is transferred from the A
plasma transferrin into cells of the
body following binding of the Fe3+–
transferrin complex to specific
receptors. The surface of an imma-
ture red blood cell (reticulocyte)
may contain 300,000 transferrin
receptors, each capable of catalyzing
the entry of ~ 36 iron ions per hour.38
The receptor is a 180-kDa dimeric
glycoprotein. When the Fe3+–
transferrin complex is bound, the
receptors aggregate in coated pits B
and are internalized. The mecha-
nism of release of the Fe3+may
occur by different mechanisms in
the two lobes.57 The pH of the
endocytic vesicles containing the
receptor complex is probably low-
ered to ~ 5.6 as in lysosomes. This
may protonate the bound CO 2– in
3
the complex51c,54a,58 and assists in
the release of the Fe3+, possibly after
reduction to Fe2+. Both the apo-
transferrin and its receptor are
returned to the cell surface for reuse, C
the apotransferrin being released
into the blood. Chelating agents
such as pyrophosphate, ATP, and
citrate as well as simple anions59
may also assist in removal of iron
from transferrin. The same trans-
membrane transporter that is
involved in intestinal iron uptake42
is needed to remove iron from the
endosome after release.60
2. Storage of Iron
D
Within tissues of animals,
plants, and fungi much of the iron is
packaged into the red-brown water-
soluble protein ferritin,which
stores Fe(III) in a soluble, nontoxic,
and readily available form.61– 64
Although bacteria store very little
iron,65 some of them also contain a
type of ferritin.66–67a On the other
hand, the yeast S. cerevisieae stores
iron in polyphosphate-rich granules,
even though a ferritin is also
present.65 Ferritin contains 17 – 23% Figure 16-3 Structure of the protein shell of ferritin (apoferritin). (A) Ribbon
drawing of the 163-residue monomer. From Crichton.62 (B) Stereo drawing of
iron as a dense core of hydrated
a hexamer composed of three dimers. (C) A tetrad of four subunits drawn as a
ferric oxide ~ 7 nm in diameter
space-filling diagram and viewed down the four-fold axis from the exterior of
surrounded by a protein coat made
the molecule. (D) A half molecule composed of 12 subunits inscribed within a
up of twenty-four subunits of mo- truncated rhombic dodecahedron. B–D from Bourne et al.74

--- Page 845 ---

842 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
lecular mass 17 - to 21-kDa. Each subunit is folded as storage form of iron, hemosiderin, seems to consist
a four-helix bundle (Fig. 16-3). Mammalian ferritins of ferritin partially degraded by lysosomes and con-
consist of combinations of subunits of two or more taining a higher iron content than does ferritin. Depo-
types. For example, human ferritins contain similarly sitions of hemosiderin in the liver can rise to toxic
folded 19-kDa L (light) and 21-kDa H (heavy) sub- levels if excessive amounts of iron are absorbed.
units.68 The twenty-four subunits are arranged in a Iron can be deposited in ferritin by allowing apo-
cubic array (Fig. 7-13, Fig. 16-3). The outer diameter ferritin to stand with an Fe(II) salt and a suitable oxidant,
of the 444-kDa apoferritin is ~ 12 nm. The completely which may be O . Physiological transfer of Fe(III)
2
filled ferritin molecule contains 23% Fe and over 2000 from transferrin to ferritin is thought to require prior
atoms of iron in a crystalline lattice. Larger ferritins reduction to Fe(II). The reoxidation by O to Fe(III) for
2
may contain as many as 4500 atoms of iron with the deposition in the ferritin core (Eq. 16-2) is catalyzed by
approximate composition [Fe(O)OH] FeOPO H .69 ferrooxidase sites located in the centers of the helical
8 3 2
Phosphate ions are sometimes bound into surface bundles of the H-chains.70– 73
layers of the ferritin cores.69a Ferritin cores are readily
visible in the electron microscope, and ferritin is often 2 Fe2+ + O + 4 H O →
2 2
used as a labeling reagent in microscopy. Another 2 Fe (O) OH + H O + 4 H+ (16-2)
core 2 2
BOX 16-A MAGNETIC IRON OXIDE IN ORGANISMS
An unusual form of stored iron is the magnetic example, in medical magnetic imaging. Magnetic
iron oxide magnetite (Fe O ). Honeybees,a,b materials in the human body are of interest not only
3 4
monarch butterflies,b–c homing pigeons,c– e migrating in terms of a possible sensory function but also
birds, and even magnetotactic bacteriaf contain because of possible effects of electromagnetic fields
deposits of Fe O that are suspected of being used on human health and behavior.o
3 4
in nagivation.c,g Some bacteria have magnetic iron
sulfide particles.h-j Human beings have magnetic
bones in their sinusesk and in their brainsl and may
be able to sense direction magnetically. A set of
possible magnetoreceptor cells, as well as associated
nerve pathways, have been identified in trout.j In
the magnetotactic bacteria found in the Northern
Hemisphere the magnetic domains are oriented
parallel with the axis of motility of the bacteria
which tend to swim toward the geomagnetic North
and downward into sediments. Similar bacteria from
the Southern Hemisphere prefer to swim south and
downward. The magnetic polarity of the bacterial
magnetite crystals can be reversed by strong magnetic
pulses, after which the bacteria swim in the direction
opposite to their natural one.m Magnetic ferritin
can be produced artificially in the laboratory.n The
Magnetotactic soil bacterium containing 36 magnetite-
resulting particles may have practical uses, for containing magnetosomes. Courtesy of Dennis Bazylinski.
a Hsu, C.-Y., and Li, C.-W. (1994) Science265, 95–97 i Pósfai, M., Buseck, P. R., Bazylinski, D. A., and Frankel, R. B.
b Nichol, H., and Locke, M. (1995) Science269, 1888–1889 (1998)Science280, 880–883
bcEtheredge, J. A., Perez, S. M., Taylor, O. R., and Jander, R. (1999) j Walker, M. M., Diebel, C. E., Haugh, C. V., Pankhurst, P. M.,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 13845–13846 Montgomery, J. C., and Green, C. R. (1997) Nature (London)390,
c Gould, J. L. (1982) Nature (London)296, 205–211 371–376
d Guilford, T. (1993) Nature (London)363, 112–113 k Baker, R. R., Mather, J. G., and Kennaugh, J. H. (1983) Nature
e Moore, B. R. (1980) Nature (London)285, 69–70 (London)301, 78–80
f Blakemore, R. P., and Frankel, R. B. (1981) Sci. Am.245(Dec), l Kirschvink, J. L., Kobayashi-Kirschvink, A., and Woodford, B. J.
58–65 (1992)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.89, 7683–7687
g Maugh, T. H., II,(1982) Science215, 1492 – 1493 mBlakemore, R. P., Frankel, R. B., and Kalmijn, A. J. (1980) Nature
h Dunin-Borkowski, R. E., McCartney, M. R., Frankel, R. B., (London)286, 384–385
Bazylinski, D. A., Pósfai, M., and Buseck, P. R. (1998) Science n Meldrum, F. C., Heywood, B. R., and Mann, S. (1992) Science
282, 1868–1870 257, 522–523
o Barinaga, M. (1992) Science256, 967

--- Page 846 ---

A. Iron 843
The ferrooxidase site is a dinuclear iron center (see
3. Heme Proteins
Section 8) in which two iron ions (probably Fe2+) are
bound as in Fig. 16-4. They are then converted to Fe3+
In 1879, German physiological chemist Hoppe-
ions by O , which may bind initially to the Fe2+, form-
2 Seyler showed that two of the most striking pigments
ing a transient blue intermediate that is thought to
of nature are related. The red iron-containing heme
have a peroxodiferric structure, perhaps of the follow-
from blood and the green magnesium complex
ing type.71–73 Reaction of this intermediate with H O
2 chlorophyll a of leaves have similar ring structures.
Later, H. Fischer proved their structures and provided
Fe3+ Fe3+ them with the names and numbering systems that are
– –
O O used today. This information is summarized in the
following section.
may yield H O plus a biomineral precursor Fe2+– O –
2 2 Some names to remember. Porphins are planar
Fe2+, which is incorporated into the core.72a Ferritin H
molecules which contain large rings made by joining
subunits predominate in tissues with high oxygen levels,
four pyrrole rings with methine bridges. In the
e.g., heart and blood cells, while the L subunits pre-
chlorins, found in the chlorophylls, one of the rings
dominate in tissues with slower turnover of iron, e.g.,
(ring D in chlorophyll, Fig. 23-20) is reduced. The
liver.72 The L subunits lack ferrooxidase activity but,
specific class of porphins known as porphyrins have
in the centers of their helical bundles, contain polar
eight substituents around the periphery of the large
side chains that may help to initiate growth of the
ring. Like the chlorins and the corrins of vitamin B
mineral core.64 12
(Section B), the porphyrins are all formed biosyntheti-
cally from porphobilinogen. This compound is
Q141 polymerized in two ways (see Fig. 24-21) to give por-
phyrins of types I and III (Fig. 16-5). In type I porphy-
rins, polymerization of porphobilinogen has taken
E107
O H H O N place in a regular way so that the sequences of the
O H H carboxymethyl and carboxyethyl side chains (often
–
O O referred to as acetic acid and propionic acid side chains,
E27 O – Fe A Fe B respectively) are the same all the way around the
A144 outside of the molecule. However, most biologically
O – O O –
H65 N CH 3 important porphyrins belong to type III, in which the
O first three rings A, B, and C have the same sequence of
N carboxymethyl and carboxyethyl side chains, but in
H E62
E61 which ring D has been incorporated in a reverse fashion.
Thus, the carboxyethyl side chains of rings C and D
are adjacent to each other (Fig. 16-5). Porphyrins
containing all four carboxymethyl and four carboxy-
Figure 16-4 The dinuclear iron center or ferroxidase center
of human ferritin based on the structure of a terbium(III) ethyl side chains intact are known as uroporphyrins.
derivative.73 Courtesy of Pauline Harrison.
COOH
HOOC CH2
Removal of Fe(III) from storage in ferritin cores
CH2 CH2
may require reduction to Fe(II) again, possibly by
ascorbic acid75 or glutathione. Some bacterial ferritins
contain a bound cytochrome b which may assist in H2N
reduction.67,67a Released iron in the Fe2+state can be CH2 N
incorporated into iron-containing proteins or into heme. H
The enzyme ferrochelatase76–76b catalyzes the transfer Porphobilinogen
of free Fe2+ into protoporphyrin IX (Section 3) to form
protoheme (Fig. 16-5). Iron in the Fe(II) state may
Uroporphyrins I and III are both excreted in small
also be oxidized to Fe3+ through action of the copper-
amounts in the urine. Another excretion product is
containing ceruloplasmin (Section D) and be incorpo-
coproporphyrin III, in which all of the carboxymethyl
rated into heme by direct transfer from ferritin.53
side chains have been decarboxylated to methyl groups.
The feathers of the tropical touraco are colored with
copper(II) complex of coproporphyrin III and this

--- Page 847 ---

844 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
porphyrin as well as others are commonly found in is also called hemin, and may be crystallized as a
birds’ eggs. The heme proteins are all derived from chloride salt.78b Iron tends to have a coordination
protoporphyrin IX, which is formed by decarboxylation number of six, and other ligands can attach to the iron
and dehydrogenation of two of the carboxyethyl side from the two axial positions on opposite sides of the
chains of uroporphyrin III to vinyl groups (Fig. 16-5). planar heme. If these are nitrogen ligands, such as
pyridine or imidazole, the resulting compounds,
Hemes and heme proteins. Protoporphyrin IX calledhemochromes, have characteristic absorption
contains a completely conjugated system of double spectra. An example is cytochrome b , which contains
5
bonds. In the center two hydrogen atoms are attached, two axial imidazole groups.
one each to two of the nitrogens; they are free to move Several modifications of protoheme are indicated
to other nitrogens in the center with rearrangement of in Fig. 16-5. To determine which type of heme exists
the double bonds. Thus, there is tautomerism as well in a particular protein, it is customary to split off the
as resonance within the heme ring.77–78a The two heme by treatment with acetone and hydrochloric acid
central hydrogens can be replaced by many metal ions and to convert it by addition of pyridine to the pyri-
to form stable chelates. The complexes with Fe2+ are dine hemochrome for spectral analysis. By this means,
known as hemes and the Fe2+ complex with protopor- protoheme was shown to occur in hemoglobin, myo-
phyrin IX as protoheme. Heme complexes of Fe2+ globin, cytochromes of the b and P450 types, and
may be designated as ferrohemes and the Fe3+ com- catalases and many peroxidases. Cytochromes a and
pounds as ferrihemes. The Fe3+ protoporphyrin IX a contain hemea, while one of the terminal oxidase
3
A Uroporphyrin I B Coproporphyrin III
COOH COOH
COOH
CH
3
HOOC HC
A B 3 A B
COOH COOH
N N N N
H
H HH
N N N N
HOOC
D C D C
HC CH
3 3
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH COOH
C Protoheme and variants
CH Oin chlorocruoroheme
CH
2 CH CH CH CH C CH H in heme aand o
2 2 2
HC CH
3
OH CH
3
3
HC C
3
N N CH 2 Both vinyl groups of protoheme are
converted to CH CH inheme c
3
Fe
S protein
N N
Figure 16-5 Structures of some biologically
HC CH
3 3 CH important porphyrins. (A) Uroporphyrin I.
3
OH (B) Coproporphyrin III. Note that a different
OH in heme d
tautomeric form is pictured in B than in A.
Tautomerism of this kind occurs within all
COOH COOH COOH of the porphyrins. (C) Protoheme, the Fe2+
complex of protoprophyrin IX, present in
CHO in heme a
hemoglobin, cytochromes b, and other proteins.
CH in heme o
3

--- Page 848 ---

A. Iron 845
A Siroheme
O
O
in both rings
H 2 N C C ofheme d 1
in Siroamide heme
B Acrylochlorin heme
COOH
COOH HO
COOH O
H H 3 C HC C
3 OH
HOOC H HOOC
COOH C
HC HC
3 3
N N N N O
Fe Fe
Figure 16-6 Structures of N N N N
isobacteriochlorin prosthetic
HC CH
groups. (A) Siroheme from 3 3
nitrite and sulfite reductases; HOOC COOH
(B) acrylochlorin heme from
dissimilatory nitrite reductases
ofPseudomonasandParacoccus. COOH COOH COOH COOH
systems of enteric bacteria contains the closely related globins, peroxidase, and catalase, usually have no
hemeo (Fig. 16-5).79,80 A second terminal oxidase of ligand other than weakly bound H O in the distal
2
those same bacteria contains hemed (formerly a ). position.93
2
Hemec (present in cytochromes c and f) is a variation Hemes are found in all organisms except the
in which two SH groups of the protein have added to anaerobic clostridia and lactic acid bacteria. Heme
the vinyl groups of protoheme to form two thioether proteins of blood carry oxygen reversibly, whereas
linkages (Fig. 16-5). A few cytochromes c have only those of terminal oxidase systems,hydroxylases,
one such linkage. In myeloperoxidase (Section 6) three andoxygenases“activate” oxygen, catalyzing reac-
covalent linkages, different than those in cytochrome c, tions with hydrogen ions and electrons or with carbon
join the heme to the protein.81,82 There is a possibility compounds. The heme-containing peroxidases and
that heme a may sometimes form a Schiff base with a catalases catalyze reactions not with O but with H O .
2 2 2
lysyl amino group through its formyl group.83,84 Another group of heme proteins includes most of the
Hemed is a chlorin,85 as is acrylochlorin heme cytochromes, which are purely electron-transferring
from certain bacterial nitrite reductases (Fig. 16-6).86,87 compounds.
Siroheme (Fig. 16-6), which is found in both nitrite
and sulfite reductases of bacteria (Chapter 24),88,89
is an isobacteriochlorin in which both the A and B 4. The Cytochromes
rings are reduced. It apparently occurs as an amide
siroamide (Fig. 16-6) in Desulfovibrio.90 Heme d of The iron in the small proteins known as cyto-
1
nitrite reductases of denitrifying bacteria is a dioxo- chromes acts as an electron carrier, undergoing alter-
bacteriochlorin derivative (Fig. 16-6).91,92 nate reduction to the +2 state and oxidation to the
As in myoglobin, hemoglobin (Fig. 7-23), and +3 state. The cytochromes, discovered in 1884 by
cytochrome c (see Fig 16-8), one axial coordination McMunn,94 were first studied systematically in the
position on the iron of most heme proteins (customarily 1920s by Keilin (Chapter 18) and have been isolated
called the proximal position) is occupied by an imida- from many sources.95– 97 The classification into groups
zole group of a histidine side chain. However, in a,b, and c according to the position of the longest
cytochrome P450 and chloroperoxidase a thiolate (– S–) wavelength light absorption band (the α band; Fig.
group from a cysteinyl side chain, and in catalase a 16-7) follows a practice introduced by Keilin. How-
phenolate anion from a tyrosyl side chain, occupies ever, it is now customary to designate a new cyto-
the proximal position. The sixthordistalcoordination chrome by giving the heme type (a,b,c or d) together
position is occupied by the sulfur atom of methionine with the wavelength of the α band, e.g., cytochrome
in cytochrome c and most other cytochromes with c or cyt b .
552 557.5
low-spin iron but cytochromes b and c have histidine. Cytochromes of the b type including bacterial
5 3
The high-spin heme proteins, such as cytochromes c’, cytochrome o contain protoheme. Because the sixth

--- Page 849 ---

846 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
position is ligated, most cytochromes b do not react of cytochromes f and c . Cytochromes b tend to have
3
with O . However, cytochromes oandd serve as lowerE°’ values, close to zero, than most cytochromes
2
terminal electron acceptors (cytochrome oxidases) and c, while cytochrome a has E°’ ~ +0.385 V.
3
are oxidizable by O . Another protoheme-containing
2
cytochrome, involved in hydroxylation (Chapter 18), is The c-type cytochromes. Mitochondrial cyto-
cytochrome P450. Here the 450 refers to the position chrome c is one of the few intracellular heme pigments
of the intense “Soret band” (also called the γ band) of that is soluble in water and that can be removed easily
the spectrum (Fig. 16-7) in a difference spectrum run in from membranes. A small 13-kDa protein typically
the presence and absence of CO. Other properties are containing about 104 amino acid residues, cytochrome
also used in arriving at designations for cytochromes. c has been isolated from plants, animals, and eukary-
For example, cytochrome a has a spectrum similar to otic microorganisms.95– 97,99,100 Complete amino acid
3
that of cytochrome a but it reacts readily with both CO sequences have been determined for over 100 species.
and O . Within the peptide chain 28 positions are invariant
2
Another property that distinguishes various cyto- and a number of other positions contain only conser-
chromes is the redox potential E°’ (Table 6-8), which in vative substitutions. Cytochrome c was one of the first
this discussion is given for pH 7.0. Cytochromes carry proteins to be used in attempting to trace evolutionary
electrons between other oxidoreductase proteins of relationships between species by observing differences
widely varying values of E0'. Because of the various in sequence. Humans and chimpanzees have identical
heme environments cytochromes have greatly differing cytochrome c, but 12 differences in amino acid sequence
values of E0', allowing them to function in many differ- occur between humans and the horses and 44 between
ent biochemical systems.97a,97b For mitochondrial cyto- human and Neurospora.96 The related cytochrome c of
2
chrome c the value of E°’ is ~ + 0.265 V but for the closely the photosynthetic bacterium Rhodospillum rubrum is
related cytochrome f of chloroplasts it is ~ +0.365 V thought to have diverged in evolution 2 x 109 years
and for cytochrome c of Desulfovibrioabout– 0.330 V. ago from the precursor of mammalian cytochrome c.
3
There is more than an 0.6-volt difference between E°’ Even so, 15 residues remain invariant.101
Structural studies95– 97,101 – 103 on cytochromes of the
c and c types show that the heme group provides a
2
core around which the peptide chain is wound. The
16 104 residues of mitochondrial cytochrome c are enough
to do little more than envelope the heme. In both the
14 oxidized and reduced forms of the protein, methionine
80 (to the left in Fig. 16-8A) and histidine 18 (to the
right) fill the axial coordination positions of the iron.
12
The heme is nearly “buried” and inaccessible to the
surrounding solvent.
10
The shorter chains of the 82- to 86-residue cyto-
chromes c (from Pseudomonas102),c ,102a and c
550 553 555
8 (from Chlorobium105) as well as the longer 112-residue
polypeptide of cytochrome c from Rhodospirillum
2
6 rubrum93 have nearly the same folding pattern as that in
mitochondrial cytochrome c. However, the 128-residue
chain of the dimeric cytochrome c’ from Rhodospirillum
4
molischianumforms an antiparallel four-helix bundle
(Fig. 16-8).106–109 This is the same folding pattern present
2
in the ferritin monomer (Fig. 16-3), hemerythrin (Fig.
2-22), and many other proteins including cytochrome
0 b of E. coli.110 Cytochrome f, which functions in
16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 562
Wave number, cm–1× 10-3 photosynthetic electron transport, is also a c-type
cytochrome but with a unique protein fold.111,112
Most cytochromes have only one heme group per
polypeptide chain,112 but the 115-residue cytochrome
c from the sulfate-reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio
3
binds four hemes (Fig. 16-8C).104,113 – 115 Each one seems
Figure 16-7 Absorption spectra of oxidized and reduced to have a different redox potential in the – 0.20 to
horse heart cytochrome c at pH 6.8. From data of Margoliash – 0.38 V range.114 Another c-type cytochrome, also
and Frohwirt.98 from Desulfovibrio, contains six hemes in a much larger
66-kDa protein and functions as a nitrite reductase.116
4-01
×
,tneiciffeoc
noitcnitxe
raloM
γ (soret)
Oxidized
Reduced
α
β
600 500 400 350 300 250 220
Wavelength, nm

--- Page 850 ---

A. Iron 847
Figure 16-8 Structures of three A
cytochromes of the c type. (A)
Horse mitochondrial cytochrome c;
(B) a subunit of the dimeric
cytochrome c’ from Rhodospirillum
molischianum; (C) cytochrome c
3
from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans.
(A) and (B) courtesy of Salemme;101
(C) from Simõeset al.104 Courtesy
of Maria A. Carrondo.
B
C
Triheme and octaheme proteins are also known.117 chrome b 129,129a delivers electrons to a fatty acid desat-
5
Many cytochromes c are soluble but others are urating system located in the ER of liver cells and to
bound to membranes or to other proteins. A well- many other reductive biosynthetic enzymes.130– 132 The
studied tetraheme protein binds to the reaction centers protein contains 132 amino acid residues plus another
of many purple and green bacteria and transfers elec- 85 largely hydrophobic N-terminal residues that pro-
trons to those photosynthetic centers.118 – 120 Cytochrome vide a nonpolar tail which is thought to be buried in
c plays a similar role in Rhodobacter, forming a complex the ER membranes.130 Solubilization of the protein
2
of known three-dimensional structure.121 Additional causes loss of this N-terminal sequence. The heme in
cytochromes participate in both cyclic and noncyclic cytochrome b is not covalently bonded to the protein
5
electron transport in photosynthetic bacteria and but is held tightly between two histidine side chains.
algae (see Chapter 23).120,122– 124 Some bacterial mem- The polypeptide chain is folded differently than in
branes as well as those of mitochondria contain a either cytochrome c or myoglobin.
cytochrome bc complex whose structure is shown The folding pattern of cytochrome b is also found
1 5
in Fig. 18-8.125,126 in the complex heme protein flavocytochrome b
2
from yeast (Chapter 15)133 and probably also in liver
Cytochromes b, a, and o. Protoheme-containing sulfite oxidase134,135 Both are 58-kDa peptides which
cytochromes b are widely distributed.127,128 There are can be cleaved by trypsin to 11-kDa fragments that
at least five of them in E. coli. Whether in bacteria, have spectroscopic similarities and sequence homology
mitochondria, or chloroplasts, the cytochromes b function with cytochrome b . Sulfite oxidase also has a molyb-
5
within electron transport chains, often gathering elec- denum center (Section H). The 100-residue N-terminal
trons from dehydrogenases and passing them on to portion of flavocytochrome b has the cytochrome b
2 5
c-type cytochromes or to iron–sulfur proteins. Most folding pattern but the next 386 residues form an
cytochromes b are bound to or embedded within eight-stranded (α /β) barrel that binds a molecule
8
membranes of bacteria, mitochondria, chloroplasts, of FMN.133,136 All of these proteins pass electrons to
or endoplasmic reticulum (ER). For example, cyto- cytochrome c. In contrast, the folding of cytochrome

--- Page 851 ---

848 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
b of E. coli resembles that of cytochrome c’ (Fig. terms of this classic Marcus theory together with
562
16-8).110,137 However, it has methionine side chains effects of quantum mechanical tunneling.144,147– 150
as both the fifth and sixth iron ligands. According to Marcus the electron transfer rate from
Cytochromes b of mitochondrial membranes are a donor to an acceptor at a fixed separation depends
involved in passing electrons from succinate to ubiqui- upon∆G°, a nuclear reorganization parameter (λ), and
none in complex II138 and also from reduced ubiqui- the electronic coupling strength H  between reac-
AB
none to cytochrome c in the 248-kDa complex III (Fig. tant and product in the transition state (Eq. 16-3):
1
18-8). A similar complex is present in photosynthetic
purple bacteria.123,139 Cytochrome b functions in the k = (4 π3/h2λ k T)| H |2 exp [– (∆G° + λ)2/ 4λ k T]
560 ET B AB B
transport of electrons from succinate dehydrogenase (16-3)
to ubiquinone,138 and cytochrome b of secretory
561
vesicle membranes has a specific role in reducing Here H  is a quantum mechanical matrix whose
AB
ascorbic acid radicals.140 strength decreases exponentially with the distance of
In bacteria some cytochromes b and d serve as separationR as e–βR where β is a coefficient of the order
1
terminal electron carriers able to react with O , nitrite, of 9 – 14 nm–1. At the closest contact (R = 0) the rate k ,
2 ET
or nitrate, while others act as carriers between redox by extrapolation from experimental data on small syn-
systems.141– 143a The aldehyde heme a is utilized by thetic compounds, is close to the molecular vibration
animals and by some bacteria in cytochrome c oxidase, frequency of 1013 s–1.151,152 At distances greater than 2 nm
a complex enzyme whose three-dimensional structure the rate would be negligible were it not for other factors.
is known (see Fig. 18-10) and which is discussed further Using mutant proteins as well as a variety of redox
in Chapter 18. pairs and electron-transfer distances the validity of the
Marcus equation with respect to the thermodynamic
driving force and distance dependence has been veri-
5. Mechanisms of Biological Electron Transfer fied.153 This is even true for cytochrome c mutants
functioning in living yeast cells.146
The heme groups of the cytochromes as well as A huge amount of experimental work with proteins
many other transition metal centers act as carriers of has been done to test and refine the theories of electron
electrons. For example, cytochrome c may accept an transport. For example, electron donor groups with
electron from reduced cytochrome c and pass it to various reduction potentials have been attached to
1
cytochrome oxidase or cytochrome c peroxidase. The various sites on the surface of a protein containing a
electron moves from one heme group to another over heme or other electron accepting group. Ruthenium
distances as great as 2 nm. Similar electron-transfer complexes such as Ru(III) (NH ) 3+ form tight covalent
3 5
reactions between defined redox sites are met in photo- linkages to imidazole nitrogens154,155 such as that of
synthetic reaction centers (Fig. 23-31), in metalloflavo- His 33 of horse heart cytochrome c. This metal can
proteins (Fig. 15-9), and in mitochondrial membranes. be reduced rapidly to Ru(II) by an external reagent,
What are the factors that determine the probability after which the transfer of an electron from the Ru(II)
of an electron transfer reaction and the rate at which it across a distance of 1.2 nm to the heme Fe(III) can be
may occur? They include: (1) The distance from the followed spectroscopically. The reduction potentials
electron donor to the acceptor. (2) The thermodynamic E° for the Ru(III) / Ru(II) and Fe(III) / Fe(II) couples at
driving force ∆G° for the reaction. This can be approx- pH 7 in these compounds are 0.16 and 0.27 V, respec-
imated using the difference in standard electrode tively. Thus, an electron will jump spontaneously
potentials (as in Table 6-1) between donor and acceptor. from the Ru(II) to the Fe(III) with ∆G° = – 15.4 kJ/ mol.
∆G° = – 96.5 ∆E° kJ/ mol at 25° C. (3) The chemical A rate constant of ~5 s–1, which was nearly independent
makeup of the material through which the electron of temperature, was observed. Since the structures
transfer takes place. (4) Any changes in the geometry of Fe(II) and Fe(III) forms of cytochrome c differ only
or charge state of the donor or acceptor that accompany slightly,156 the electron transfer apparently occurs with
the transfer. (5) The orientation of the acceptor and only a small amount of geometric rearrangement. The
donor groups.144– 146 It is usually assumed that the distribution of charges and dipoles within the protein
Franck–Condon principle is obeyed, i.e., that the elec- may be such that the Fe2+ and Fe3+ complexes have
tron jump occurs so rapidly (< 10–12 s) that there is no almost equal thermodynamic stability.
change in the positions of atomic nuclei (see also
Chapter 23). Subsequent rearrangement of nuclear Electron-transfer pathways? In spite of the
positions may occur at rates that allow a rapid overall success of the Marcus theory, rates of electron-transfer
reaction. from the iron of cytochrome c have been found to vary
The various factors that affect the rate of electron for different pathways.150,153,155 For example, transfer
transfer were incorporated by Marcus into a quantita- of an electron from Fe(II) in reduced cytochrome c to
tive theory. Electron transfer is often discussed in an Ru(III) complex on His 33 was fast (~ 440 s–1)157 but

--- Page 852 ---

A. Iron 849
Figure 16-9 Stereoscopic
α-carbon plot of yeast cyto-
chrome c peroxidase (top)
and yeast cytochrome c
(below) as determined from
a cocrystal by Pelletier and
Kraut.164 The heme rings of
the two proteins appear in
bold lines, as does the ring
of tryptophan 191 and the
backbone of residues 191–
193 of the cytochrome c
peroxidase. Drawing from
Milleret al.165
the rate of transfer to an equidistant Fe(III) ion on Met cytochrome c into its natural acceptors, cytochrome c
65 was at most 0.6 s–1. These results suggested that oxidase and cytochrome c peroxidase (Fig. 16-9).160
distinct electron-transfer pathways exist. One sugges- A major factor in these effects is probably the large
tion was that the sulfur atom of Met 80 donates an dipole moment in the cytochrome c that arises from
electron to Fe3+ leaving an electron-deficient radical. the unequal distribution of surface charges. This
The“hole” so created could be filled by an electron charge distribution must assist in the proper docking
jumping in from the – OH group of the adjacent Tyr 67, of the cytochrome with its natural electron donors and
which might then accept an electron from an external acceptors. The positive surface charges presumably
acceptor via Tyr 74 at the protein surface. Do elec- also facilitate the reaction with hexacyanoferrate (II)
trons flow singly or as pairs from the surface through or ascorbate, both of which are negatively charged
hydrogen-bonded paths? Use of both semisynthesis155 reductants that react rapidly with cytochrome c.
and directed mutation153 of cytochromes c is permitting Measurements of many kinds have been made
a detailed study of these effects. A striking result is between natural donor–acceptor pairs such as cyto-
that substitution of the conserved residue phenylalanine chrome c–cytochrome b ,161,162 cytochrome c–cytochrome
5
82 in a yeast cytochrome c with leucine or isoleucine c peroxidase (Fig. 16-9),153,163–166 trimethylamine dehy-
retards electron transfer by a factor of ~ 104. drogenase–FMN to Fe S center (Fig. 15-9),167 and
4 4
methylamine dehydrogenase (TTQ radical)–amicya-
“Docking.” It is now recognized that there are nin (Cu2+).168 Designed metalloproteins are being
distinct“docking sites” on the surface of electron- studied as well.169 Femtosecond laser spectroscopy is
transport proteins. For rapid electron transfer to occur providing a new approach.169a
the two electron carriers must be properly oriented
and docked by formation of correct polar and nonpolar Coupling and gating of electron transfer.
interactions. Early indications of the importance of Electrons are thought to be transferred into or out of
docking came from study of modified cytochromes c. cytochrome c through the exposed edge of the heme.
Each one of the 19 lysine side chains was individually The rate depends upon effective coupling, which in
altered by acylation or alkylation to remove the positive turn may depend upon orientation as well as the
charge or to replace it with a negative charge. The rate structure and dynamics of the protein.170 Proteins
of electron transfer into cytochrome c from hexacyano- with much β structure appear to provide stronger
ferrate was decreased by a factor of 1.3 – 2.0 when any coupling than those that are largely composed of α
one lysine at positions 8, 13, 27, 72, or 79, which are helices.144,171 The high nuclear reorganization energy
clustered around the heme edge, was modified.158 λ of α helices may block electron transfer along some
Modification of Lys 22, 55, 99, or 100, distant from this pathways.153 A conformational change,167,169 transfer
edge, had no effect. Electron transfer into cytochrome of a proton, or binding of some other specific ion172
c from its natural electron donor ubiquinol:cytochrome before electron transfer occurs can be the “gating” process
c reductase was also strongly inhibited by modification that determines the rate of electron transfer.162,167,173
of lysines that surround the heme edge.159 Modification Electron transfer can also be “coupled” to an unfavor-
of these lysines also inhibited electron transfer out of able, but fast, equilibrium.

--- Page 853 ---

850 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
Effects of ionic equilibria on electron transfer. rapid reactions. Two oxygen atoms, each with six
The charge on an ion of Fe2+ in a heme is exactly bal- valence electrons, might reasonably be expected to
anced by two negative charges on the porphyrin ring. form dioxygen, O , as a double-bonded structure with
2
However, when the Fe2+ loses an electron to become oneσ and one π bond as follows (left):
Fe3+ an extra positive charge is suddenly present in the
center of the protein. This change in charge will have
O O O O
a powerful electrostatic effect on charged groups in the
immediate vicinity of the iron and even at the outer Dioxygen
surface of the molecule. For example, an anion from
the medium or from a neighboring protein molecule However, O is paramagnetic and contains twoun-
2
might become bound to the heme protein (Eq. 16-4). paired electrons.175 From this evidence O might be
2
assigned the structure on the right.175 The oxygen
X– + [ Fe (II) (heme) ] → [ Fe (III) (heme) ]+ X– + e– molecule is very stable, and it is relatively difficult
(16-4) to add an electron to form the reactive superoxide
anion radical O –.
2
In this case the presence of a high concentration of X–
in the medium would favor the oxidation of Fe(II) to O O –
Fe(III). The reduced heme would be a better reducing
Superoxide anion radical
agent and the oxidized form a weaker oxidant than in
the absence of X–. If –YH were a group in the protein
the loss of an electron could cause –YH to dissociate so For this reason, oxidative attack by O tends to be
2
that Y– and the Fe(III) would interact more tightly (Eq. slow. However, once an electron has been acquired,
16-5). it is easy for additional electrons to be added to the
structure and further reduction occurs more easily.
HY— [ Fe (II) (heme) ] → The biochemical question suggested is, “How can
Y–— [ Fe (III) (heme) ]+ + H+ + e– (16-5) some heme proteins carry O 2 reversibly without any
oxidation of the iron contained in them while others
We see that electron transfer can be accompanied by activateoxygen toward reaction with substrates?”
loss of a proton and that E°’ may become pH depen- Among this latter group, cytochrome c oxidase transfers
dent. (See also Eq. 16-18.) Even with cytochrome c, electrons to both oxygen atoms so that only H O is a
2
although there is little structural change upon electron product, whereas the hydroxylases and oxygenases,
transfer, there is an increased structural mobility in the which are discussed in Chapter 18, incorporate either
oxidized form.156 This may be important for coupling one or two of the atoms of O , respectively, into an
2
and could also facilitate associated proton-transfer organic substrate. Before examining these reactions
reactions. For example, it is possible that in some let us reconsider the heme oxygen carriers.
cytochromes the imidazole ring in the fifth coordina-
tion position may become deprotonated upon oxida- Oxygen-carrying proteins. In Chapter 7, we
tion. This possibility is of special interest because examined the behavior of hemoglobin in the coopera-
cytochromes are components of proton pumps in tive binding of four molecules of O and studied its
2
mitochondrial membranes (Chapter 18). structural relationship to the monomeric muscle pro-
tein myoglobin.176 The iron in functional hemoglobin
and myoglobin is always Fe(II) and is only very slowly
6. Reactions of Heme Proteins with Oxygen converted by O into the Fe(III) forms methemoglobin
2
or Hydrogen Peroxide or metmyoglobin.177,178 Erythrocytes contain an enzyme
system for immediately reducing methemoglobin back
As Ingraham remarked,174“Living in a bath of to the Fe(II) state (see Box 15-H).
20% oxygen, we tend to forget how reactive it is.” Binding of O to the iron in the heme is usually
2
From a thermodynamic viewpoint, all living matter considered not to cause a change in the oxidation state
is extremely unstable with respect to combustion by of the metal. However, oxygenated heme has some of
oxygen. Ordinarily, a high temperature is required the electronic characteristics of an Fe3+– OO– peroxide
and if we are careful with fire, we can expect to escape anion. Bonding of the heme iron to oxygen is thought
a catastrophe. However, one mole of properly chelated to occur by donation of a pair of electrons by the oxy-
copper could catalyze consumption of all of the air in gen to the metal. In deoxyhemoglobin the Fe(II) ion is
an average room within one second.174 Biochemists in the “high-spin” state; four of the five 3d orbitals in
are interested in both the fact that O is kinetically the valence shell of the iron contain one unpaired
2
stable and unreactive and also that oxidative enzymes electron and the fifth orbital contains two paired elec-
such as cytochrome c oxidase are able to promote trons. The binding of oxygen causes the iron to revert

--- Page 854 ---

A. Iron 851
to the “low-spin” state in which all of the electrons are
paired and the paramagnetism of hemoglobin is lost.
The stability of heme–oxygen complexes is thought to
be enhanced by “back-bonding,” i.e., the donation of
an electron pair from one of the filled d orbitals of the
iron atom to form a bond with the adjacent oxygen.179 N His E7
This can be indicated symbolically as follows: N
H
Phe CD1
– Val E11 O
O O O
O O
+
Fe Fe Fe
N
These structures, which have been formulated by
assuming that one of the unshared electron pairs on His F8
O 2 forms the initial bond to the metal, are expected to N
lead to an angular geometry which has been observed H
in X-ray structures of model compounds,180 in oxy-
myoglobin (Fig. 16-10),181,182 and in oxyhemoglobin.183
Neutron diffraction studies have shown that the outer-
most oxygen atom of the bound O is hydrogen bonded
to the H atom on the N ε atom of th 2 e distal imidazole F p i o g s u it r io e n 1 o 6 f - h 1 y 0 d G ro e g o e m n e b t o ry n d o f t o b o N n ε d o i f n t g h o e f d O is 2 t a to l h m is y t o id g i l n o e b i E n 7 and
ring of His E7 (Fig. 16-10). Carbon monoxide binds
side chain. After Perutz.182
with the C ≡ O axis perpendicular to the heme plane
and unable to form a corresponding hydrogen bond.184
This decreases the affinity for CO and helps to protect
us from carbon monoxide poisoning. The coordination of the heme iron to histidine also
All oxygen-carrying heme proteins have another appears to provide the basis for the cooperativity in
imidazole group that binds to iron on the side oppo- binding of oxygen by hemoglobin.186 The radius of
site the oxygen site. Without this proximal imidazole high-spin iron, whether Fe(II) or Fe(III), is so large that
group, heme does not combine with oxygen. Coordi- the iron cannot fit into the center of the porphyrin ring
nation with heterocyclic nitrogen compounds favors but is displaced toward the coordinated imidazole
formation of low-spin iron complexes and simple group by a distance of ~ 0.04 nm for Fe(II).187 Thus,
synthetic compounds that closely mimic the behavior in deoxyhemoglobin both iron and the imidazole
of myoglobin have been prepared by attaching an group lie further from the center of the ring than they
imidazole group by a chain of appropriate length to do in oxyhemoglobin. In the latter, the iron lies in the
the edge of a heme ring.179,185 Similar compounds center of the porphyrin ring because the change to the
bearing a pyridine ring in the fifth coordination position low-spin state is accompanied by a decrease in ionic
have a low affinity for oxygen. Thus, the polarizable radius.186,188 The change in protein conformation
imidazole ring itself seems to play a role in promoting induced by this small shift in the position of the iron
oxygen binding. The π electrons of the imidazole ring ion was described in Chapter 7. However, the exact
may also participate in bonding to the iron as is indi- nature of the linkage between the Fe position and the
cated in the following structures.179 The π bonding conformational changes is not clear.
to the iron would allow the iron to back-bond more The mechanical response to the movement of the
strongly to an O atom entering the sixth coordination iron and proximal histidine, described in Chapter 7,
2
position. These diagrams illustrate another feature may explain this linkage. However, oxygenation may
found frequently in heme proteins: The N – H group also induce a change in the charge distribution within
of the imidazole is hydrogen bonded to a peptide the hydrogen-bond network of the protein. The carbo-
backbone carbonyl group. nyl group shown in the foregoing structure is attached
to the F helix (see Fig. 7-23) and is
also hydrogen bonded to other amide
groups. Electron withdrawal into
H N H N
O H N N + Fe + O H + N N + Fe the heme–oxygen complex would
tend to strengthen the hydrogen
bond as indicated by the resonance
forms shown and also to weaken

--- Page 855 ---

852 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
competing hydrogen bonds.189,190 This could affect the enzyme. Support for this protective function comes
charge distribution in the upper end of the F helix and from the existence of the human hereditary condition
could conceivably induce a momentary conformational acatalasemia.195,196 Persons with extremely low
change that could facilitate the rearrangement of catalase activity are found worldwide but are especially
structure that was discussed in Chapter 7 (Fig. 7-25). numerous in Korea. In Japan it is estimated that there
Theα β contact in which a change of hydrogen bond- are 1800 persons lacking catalase. Because about half
1 2
ing takes place is located nearby behind the F and G of them have no symptoms, catalase might be judged
helices. In any event, it is remarkable that nature has unessential. However, many of the individuals affected
so effectively made use of the subtle differences in the develop ulcers around their teeth. Apparently, hydro-
properties of iron induced by changes in the electron gen peroxide produced by bacteria accumulates and
distribution within the d orbitals of this transition oxidizes hemoglobin to methemoglobin (Box 15-H)
metal. depriving the tissues of oxygen.
A few groups of invertebrates, e.g., the sipun- Catalase from most eukaryotic species is tetra-
culid worms, use a nonheme iron-containing protein, meric.197 The protein from beef liver consists of 506-
hemerythrin, as an oxygen carrier.191,192 Its 113- residue subunits.198 Human catalase is similar.198a
residue subunits are often associated as octamers of The proximal ligand to the heme Fe3+ is a tyrosinate
C symmetry, each peptide chain having a four-helix anion (Tyr 358), while side chains of His 75 and Asn
4
bundle structure (Fig. 2-22). Instead of a heme group, 148 lie close to the heme on the distalH O -binding
2 2
each monomer contains two atoms of high-spin Fe(II) side (Fig. 16-11). Larger ~ 650-residue fungal and
held by a cluster of histidine and carboxylate side chains bacterial catalases have a similar folding pattern but
(see Fig. 16-20).193,194 Hemerythrin is a member of a an extra C-terminal domain with a flavodoxin-like
group of such diiron oxoproteins which are considered structure.197,199 Catalase is gradually inactivated by its
further in Section 8. The copper oxygen carrier very reactive substrate. As isolated, beef liver catalase
hemocyanin is discussed in Section D. usually contains about two subunits in which the heme
ring has been oxidatively cleaved to biliverdin200
Catalases and peroxidases. Many iron and (Fig. 24-24) and various other alterations have been
copper proteins do not bind O reversibly but “activate” found.197 Each subunit of mammalian catalases nor-
2
it for further reaction. We will look at such metallo- mally contains a bound molecule of NADPH which
protein oxidases in Chapter 18. Here we will consider helps to protect against inactivation by H O .201,202
2 2
heme enzymes that react not with O but with peroxides. Catalases from Neurospora and from E. coli contain
2
The peroxidases,194a which occur in plants, animals, and hemed rather than protoporphyrin.197,203 Some lacto-
fungi, catalyze the following reactions (Eq. 16-6, 16-7): bacilli, lacking heme altogether, form a manganese-
containing pseudocatalase.204,205
H O + AH → 2 H O + A (16-6) Of the plant peroxidases, which are found in
2 2 2 2
abundance in the peroxisomes, the 40-kDa mono-
ROOH + AH → R — OH + H O + A (16-7) merichorseradish peroxidase has been studied the
2 2
most.206– 208a It occurs in over 30 isoforms and has an
Here AH is an oxidizable organic compound such as extracellular role in generating free radical intermedi-
2
an alcohol or a pair of one-electron donor molecules. ates for polymerization and crosslinking of plant cell
Catalases, which are found in almost all aerobic cells,194b wall components.209 Secreted fungal peroxidases, e.g.,
may sometimes account for as much as 1% of the dry such as those from Coprinus210 and Arthromyces,211
weight of bacteria. The enzyme catalyzes the break- form a second class of peroxidases with related struc-
down of H O to water and oxygen by a mechanism tues.212 A third class is represented by ascorbate
2 2
similar to that employed by peroxidases. If Eq. 16-7 is peroxidase from the cytosol of the pea212– 214 and by
rewritten with H O for AH and O for A, we have the small 34-kDa cytochrome c peroxidase from
2 2 2 2
the following equation: yeast mitochondria215(Fig. 16-11). The latter has a
strong preference for reduced cytochrome c as a sub-
Catalase strate (Eq. 16-9).216,217
2 H O 2 H O + O (16-8)
2 2 2 2
The action of catalase is very fast, almost 104 times 2H+
faster than that of peroxidases. The molecular activity R–OOH 2 Cytochrome c (Fe2+)
per catalytic center is about 2 x 105 s–1.
Cytochrome c
Catalase exerts a protective function by preventing
peroxidase
the accumulation of H O which might be harmful to
2 2
cell constituents. The complete intolerance of obligate R–OH 2 Cytochrome c (Fe3+)
anaerobes to oxygen may result from their lack of this H 2 O (16-9)

--- Page 856 ---

A. Iron 853
A
B
Figure 16-11 (A) Stereo drawing showing folding pattern
for beef liver catalase and the positions of the NADPH (upper
left) and heme (center). From Fita and Rossmann.198 (B)
Diagram of proposed structure of an Fe(III) – OOH ferric
peroxide complex of human catalase (see also Fig. 16-14).
A possible mechanism by which the peroxide is cleaved
(stepb in Fig. 16-14) is indicated by the arrows. His 75 and
Asn 148 are directly involved, and a charge relay system
below the ring may also participate. From Putnam et al.198a
there is also a buried tryptophan, which has already
been highlighted in Fig. 16-9. A conserved and essen-
tial feature on the distal side is another histidine,
which is hydrogen bonded to an asparagine224 and
which can also hydrogen bond to the substrate H O .
2 2
Fungal peroxidases also have a conserved arginine on
the distal side. However, even an octapeptide with a
bound heme cut from cytochrome c acts as a “micro-
Because the three-dimensional structures of the peroxi- peroxidase” with properties similar to those of natural
dase, its reductant cytochrome c, and the complex of peroxidases.225
the two (Fig. 16-9) are known, cytochrome c peroxidase Peroxidases and catalases contain high-spin Fe(III)
is the subject of much experimental study. Other and resemble metmyoglobin in properties. The en-
fungal peroxidases, some of which contain manganese zymes are reducible to the Fe(II) state in which form
rather than iron, act to degrade lignin (Chapter 25).218 they are able to combine (irreversibly) with O . We
2
A lignin peroxidase from the white wood-rot fungus see that the same active center found in myoglobin
Phanerochaete chrysosporium has a surface tryptophan and hemoglobin is present but its chemistry has been
with a specifically hydroxylated Cβ carbon atom modified by the proteins. The affinity for O has been
2
which may have a functional role in catalysis.218a,b altered drastically and a new group of catalytic activities
The human body contains lactoperoxidase, a for ferriheme-containing proteins has emerged.
product of exocrine secretion into milk, saliva, tears,
etc., and peroxidases with specialized functions in Mechanisms of catalase and peroxidase
saliva, the thyroid,eosinophils,219 and neutrophils.220 catalysis. Attention has been focused on a series
The functions are largely protective but the enzymes of strikingly colored intermediates formed in the
also participate in biosynthesis. Mammalian peroxi- presence of substrates. When a slight excess of H O
2 2
dases have heme covalently linked to the proteins, as is added to a solution of horseradish peroxidase,
indicated in Fig. 16-12.220– 222a the dark brown enzyme first turns olive green as
The active site structure of peroxidases (Fig. 16-13) compound I is formed, and then pale red as it turns
is quite highly conserved. As in myoglobin, an imida- intocompound II. The latter reacts slowly with sub-
zole group is the proximal heme ligand, but it is usually strate AH or with another H O molecule to regenerate
2 2 2
hydrogen bonded to an aspartate carboxylate as a the original enzyme. This sequence of reactions is
catalytic diad (Fig. 16-13).223 In cytochrome c peroxidase indicated by the colored arrows in Fig. 16-14, steps a–d.

--- Page 857 ---

854 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
Protein
Third linkage
in myeloperoxidase
H
3
C +S CH
3
Asn 82
H C CH
3
H
O O H 2 C C Arg 48
C N N CH 2 Trp 51
His 52
Fe
Protein
N N
HC CH O O
2 2
C
Protein
COOH
COOH
His 175
Figure 16-12 Linkage of heme to mammalian peroxidases.
There are two ester linkages to carboxylate side chains from Trp 191
the protein.220,221 Myeloperoxidase contains a third
linkage.222,222a
Asp 235
Titrations with such reducing agents as ferrocyanide
or K IrBr have established that compound I is con- Figure 16-13 The active site of yeast cytochrome c peroxi-
2 6
verted into compound II by a one-electron reduction dase. Access for substrates is through a channel above the
front edge of the heme ring as viewed by the reader. A
and compound II to free peroxidase by another one-
pathway for entrance of electrons may be via Trp 191 and
electron reduction. Thus, the iron in compound I may
His 175. From Holzbaur et al.206 Based on coordinates of
formally be designated Fe(V) and that in II as Fe(IV).
Finzelet al.215
However, this does not tell us whether or not the oxy-
gen atoms of H O are present in compounds I and II.
2 2
The enzyme in the Fe3+ form can be reduced to Fe2+
(Fig. 16-14, step e), as previously mentioned, and when bound to an electron-deficient porphyrin π-cation
the Fe2+ enzyme reacts with H O it is apparently con- radical.229 The reaction with peroxide probably involves
2 2
verted into compound II (Fig. 16-14, step f). This suggests initial formation of a peroxide anion complex (Fig.
that the latter is an Fe2+ complex of the peroxide anion. 16-14, step a) which is cleaved with release of water
Here, P2– represents the porphyrin ring: (stepb).215,230 The resulting Fe(V)+= O compound is
converted to compound I by transfer of a single elec-
P2–— Fe+(II)— OOH
However, spectroscopic evidence suggests that com- CH
2
pound II is a ferryl iron complex which could be
HC CH
3
derived from the preceding structure by addition of
a proton and loss of water.226,227 HC + C
3
P2–— Fe2+(IV) = O N O N CH 2
Compound II Fe (IV)
N N
High concentrations of H O convert II into com-
2 2 HC CH
pound III, which is thought to be the same as the 3 3
oxyperoxidase that is formed upon addition of O to
2
the Fe(II) form of the free enzyme (Fig. 16-14, step g)
and corresponds in structure to oxyhemoglobin.228
COOH
COOH
Compound I was at one time thought to be a com-
plex of H O or its anion with Fe(III), but its magnetic Compound I. The unpaired electron and the
2 2 positive charge are delocalized over the
and spectral properties are inconsistent with this struc-
porphyrin ring and perhaps into the
ture. Rather, it too appears to contain ferryl iron proximal histidine ring

--- Page 858 ---

A. Iron 855
tron from the porphyrin to the iron. HO HO
2 2 2
In cytochrome c peroxidase com- f
pound I contains a free radical on
the nearby Trp 191 ring instead of
on the porphyrin radical.216 Con- O O
sistent with this is the fact that 2 g O
Fe (II)
horseradish peroxidase contains Fe (II)
phenylalanine in place of Trp 191.
If we consider the fate of sub-
h
Oxyperoxidase
strate AH during the action of a
peroxidas 2 e, we see that donation of e – e O 2 – (Compound III) H 2 O i
an electron to compound I to con- HO
2 2
vert it into II (Fig. 16-14, step c) will
generate a free radical ·AH as well H 2 O 2 H + OH
O
as a proton. The radical may then
+
donate a second electron to II to Fe (III) Fe (III)
a
form the free enzyme. Alternatively,
a second molecule of AH may react
2 Ferric peroxide
(Fig. 16-14, step c)to form a second
+
radical·AH. The two ·AH radicals H
b Fast
may then disproportionate to form
HO
A and AH or they may leave the 2
2 c’
enzyme and react with other mole- HO +
2 O O
cules in their environment. Com- O 2 Fe (IV) or Fe (V)+
pound II of horse radish peroxidase HO
Catalase 2 2
is able to exchange the oxygen atom
of its Fe(IV) = O center with water
Compound I
rapidly at pH 7, presumably by AH
2
donation of a proton from the near- c
+
by histidine side chain (correspond- AH + H
ing to His 52 of Fig. 16-13).227,230a,b
This histidine presumably also O
d
functions in proton transfer during
Fe (IV)
reactions with substrates (see Fig.
16-11B).224 AH + H + AH
2
The catalase compound I Compound II
appears to be converted in a two- Ferryl
electron reduction by H O directly
2 2
to free ferricatalase without inter- Figure 16-14 The catalytic cycles and other reactions of peroxidases and
vention of compound II (Fig. 16-14, catalases. The principal cycle for peroxidases is given by the colored arrows.
stepc’). The catalytic histidine That of catalases is smaller, making use of step a, b, and c’, which is marked by
probably donates a proton to help a light green line.
form water from one of the oxygen
· P+— Fe (IV) = O + H O → H O + O + P — Fe (III)+ with substrates in a two-electron process232– 235 with
2 2 2 2
Compound I transfer of an oxygen atom to the substrate, a charac-
(16-10)
teristic also of reactions catalyzed by cytochromes
P450 (see Eq. 18-57).
atoms of the H O . Nevertheless, compound II does
2 2
form slowly, especially if a slow substrate such as Haloperoxidases. Many specialized peroxidases
ethanol is present. The previously mentioned bound are active in halogenation reactions. Chloroperoxi-
NADPH apparently reduces compound II formed in dases from fungi236,237 catalyze chlorination reactions
this way, converting the inactivated enzyme back to like that of Eq. 16-11 using H O and Cl– as well as the
2 2
active catalase.201,231 This may involve unusual one- usual peroxidase reaction.
electron oxidation steps for the NADPH.231 Under Chloroperoxidase is isolated in a low-spin Fe(III)
some circumstances compound II of peroxidases reacts state. The reduced Fe(II) enzyme is a high-spin form

--- Page 859 ---

856 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
O O
+ Cl– + H2O2 O C H
Cl
HN OH
O O
+ H2O + OH–
I–, H2O2 peroxidase
(16-11)
I
O C H
with spectroscopic properties similar to those of the HN OH
oxygenases of the cytochrome P450 family, which are
discussed in Chapter 18.238,239 Like the cytochromes (16-15)
P450 chloroperoxidase contains a thiolate group of a
cysteine side chain as the fifth iron ligand.235,239,240
Chloroperoxidase forms compounds I and II, as do exposed surfaces of membranes (Eq. 16-15).242 Iodi-
other peroxidases. A chloride ion may combine with nated tyrosine derivatives are formed in the thyroid
compound I to form a complex of hypochlorite with gland by a similar reaction catalyzed by thyroid
the Fe(III) heme. peroxidase.232 Even horseradish peroxidase can
oxidize iodide ions but neither it nor lactoperoxidase
· P+—Fe (IV) = O + Cl–→ P — Fe (III)+— OCl will carry out chlorination or bromination reactions.
(16-12)
Myeloperoxidase, present in specialized lyso-
somes of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutro-
This intermediate could then halogenate substrate phils),243 utilizes H O and a halide ion to kill ingested
2 2
AH (Eq. 16-13, step a), lose HOCl (Eq. 16-13, step b), bacteria.244,245 Phagocytosis induces increased respira-
or generate Cl by reaction with Cl– (Eq. 16-13, step c). tion by the leukocyte and generation of H O , partly
2 2 2
These are all well-established reactions for the enzyme. by the membrane-bound NADPH oxidase described
In each case the chlorine in the peroxidase complex can in Chapter 18. Some of the H O is used by myeloper-
2 2
be viewed as an electrophile which is transferred to an oxidase to attack the bacteria, apparently through
attacking nucleophile. A fourth reaction that can go generation of HOCl by peroxidation of Cl–. Human
myeloperoxidase is a tetramer of two 466-residue
chains and two 108-residue chains, which carry the
AH ACl
a covalently linked heme.222a,246 Another oxygen-
dependent killing mechanism that may also be used
HO HOCl by neutrophils is the generation of the reactive singlet
2 b oxygen.247 This can occur by reaction of hypochlorite
P Fe(III) OCl P Fe(III) OH
with H O (Eq. 16-16) or from an enzyme-bound hypo-
c H+
chlorite
2
in
2
termediate such as that shown in Eq. 16-13.
d
H+, Cl – Cl Hereditary deficiency of myeloperoxidase is relatively
2 H 2 O common.245
P Fe(III)
(16-13)
OCl– + H O →O (1∆g) + H O + Cl–
2 2 2 2
singlet O (16-16)
through the same intermediate is conversion of alkenes 2
toα,β-halohydrins (Eq. 16-14).241 Lactoperoxidase of
milk, reacting with I– + H O , promotes an analogous
2 2 Lactoperoxidase248 and chloroperoxidase249 also
iodination of tyrosine and histidine residues of proteins.
generate singlet oxygen. The possible biological
With radioactive 125I– or 131I– it provides a convenient
significance is discussed in Chapter 18. Eosinophil
and much used method for labeling of proteins in
peroxidase appears to promote formation of hydroxyl
radicals.250 Bromoperoxidases are found in many
X – + H+ red and green marine algae.251 Many of them contain
HO X vanadium and function by a mechanism different
C C C C than that used by heme peroxidases (see Section G).252,253
Another related nonheme enzyme is the seleno-
H2O2 H2O
protein glutathione peroxidase. It reacts by a mecha-
(16-14)
nism very different (Eq. 15-59) from those discussed

--- Page 860 ---

A. Iron 857
here, as does NADPH peroxidase, a flavoprotein A S-Cys B
with a cysteine sulfinate side chain in the active Cys-S S-Cys
site.254–255a A lignin-degrading peroxidase from the S
Fe Fe Fe
white wood rot fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium is Cys-S S
a simple heme protein,256 while other peroxidases Cys-S S-Cys Cys-S S-Cys
secreted by this organism contain Mn.257,258 Rubredoxin Fe 2 S 2 or [2Fe–2S]
Fe–S cluster
7. The Iron–Sulfur Proteins
C D
S-Cys
Not all of the iron within cells is chelated by por- Cys-S
S S Fe
phyrin groups. Hemerythrin (see Fig. 16-20) has been Fe
known for many years, but the general significance S S-Cys Cys-S Fe S
Fe Fe S
of nonheme iron proteins was not appreciated until S
Cys-S
large-scale preparation of mitochondria was devel- Fe S Fe
S
oped by Crane in about 1945. The iron content of Cys-S S-Cys
mitochondria was found to far exceed that of the
FeS or [3Fe–4S] FeS or [4Fe–4S]
3 4 4 4
heme proteins present. In 1960, Beinert, who was
studying the mitochondrial dehydrogenase systems
for succinate and for NADH, observed that when the Figure 16-15 Four different iron–sulfur clusters of a type
electron transport chain was partially reduced by found in many proteins. From Beinert259 with permission.
these substrates and the solutions were frozen at low
temperature and examined, a strong EPR signal was
observed at g = 1.94. The signal was obtained only
upon reduction by substrate, and fractionation pointed distance of ~ 0.28 nm. The four labile sulfur atoms
to the nonheme iron proteins. Six or more proteins of (S2–) form an interpenetrating tetrahedron 0.35 nm on
this type are involved in the mitochondrial electron a side with each of the sulfur atoms bonded to three
transport chain (Eq. 18-1), and numerous others have iron atoms. The cluster is ordinarily able to accept
become recognized as members of the same large only a single electron. The iron–sulfur cluster struc-
family of iron–sulfur proteins (Fe– S proteins).259,260 ture was a surprise, but after its discovery it was
found that ions such as [ Fe S (S– CH CH COO–) ]6–
4 4 2 2 4
Ferredoxins, high-potential iron proteins, and assemble spontaneously from their components and
rubredoxins. The presence of nonheme iron proteins have a similar cluster structure.259,266a Thus, living
is most evident in the anaerobic clostridia, which things have simply improved upon a natural bonding
contain no heme. It was from these bacteria that the arrangement.
first Fe – S protein was isolated and named ferredoxin. The bacterial ferredoxins from Peptococcus,
This protein has a very low reduction potential of Clostridium (Fig. 16-16B),267,268 Desulfovibrio, and other
E°’(pH 7) = – 0.41 V. It participates in the pyruvate – anaerobes each contain two Fe S clusters with essen-
4 4
ferredoxin oxidoreductase reaction (Eq. 15-35), in tially the same structure as that of the Chromatium
nitrogen fixation in some species, and in formation HIPIP.267,269 Each cluster can accept one electron.
of H . A small green-brown protein, the ferredoxin of Much of the amino acid sequence in the first half of the
2
Peptococcus aerogenes contains only 54 amino acids but ferredoxin chain is repeated in the second half, sug-
complexes eight atoms of iron. If the pH is lowered gesting that the chain may have originated as a result
to ~ 1, eight molecules of H S are released. Thus, the of gene duplication. Many invariant positions are
2
protein contains eight “labile sulfur” atoms in an iron present in the sequence, including those of the cysteine
sulfide linkage. There are also eight iron atoms. residues forming the Fe – S cluster. Ferredoxins with
Another group of related electron carriers, the single Fe S clusters are also known.270
4 4
high-potential iron proteins (HIPIP) contain four The ferredoxins have reduction potentials E°’
labile sulfur and four iron atoms per peptide chain.261– 266 (pH 7) from about – 0.4 V to as low as – 0.6 V. However,
X-ray studies showed that the 86-residue polypeptide the corresponding values for HIPIP proteins range
chain of the HIPIP of Chromatium is wrapped around from + 0.05 to + 0.50 V at pH 7.271 This wide range of
a single iron–sulfur cluster which contains the side potentials initially seemed strange because the structures
chains of four cysteine residues plus the four iron and of the active centers of both the clostridial ferredoxins
four sulfur atoms (Fig. 16-15D).261 This kind of cluster and the Chromatium HIPIP appear virtually identical.272
is referred to as [4Fe – 4S], or as Fe S . Each cysteine Part of the explanation lies in the fact that Fe S clusters
4 4 4 4
sulfur is attached to one atom of Fe, with the four iron can exist in three oxidation states (Eq. 16-17) that
atoms forming an irregular tetrahedron with an Fe–Fe differ, one from another, by a single electron.273

--- Page 861 ---

858 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
[FeS]
+ [FeS]2+ [FeS]3+ clostridial ferredoxins have the middle oxidation state
4 4 4 4 4 4
in common. The cluster is a little smaller in the more
e– e– oxidized states; in the Chromatium HIPIP the Fe – Fe
Reduced Fd Oxidized Fd; Oxidized high distance changes from 0.281 to 0.272 nm upon oxidation.
reduced high potential iron
potential iron protein; Super-
protein oxidized Fd (16-17) Rubredoxins. The simplest of the Fe – S proteins
are the rubredoxins. These proteins contain iron but
no labile sulfur. The rubredoxin of Clostridium pasteur-
Here the charges shown are those on the cluster. The ianum is a 54-residue peptide containing four cysteines
cysteine ligands from the protein each add an addi- whose side chains form a distorted tetrahedron about
tional negative charge. The Chromatium HIPIP and the a single iron atom (Fig. 16-16A).274 Not shown for any
A
S42 S9 S42 S9
Me Me
S39 S6 S39 S6
B
Figure 16-16 (A) Superimposed
stereoscopic α-carbon traces of the
peptide chain of rubredoxin from
Clostridium pasteurianum with either
Fe3+ (solid circles) or Zn2+ (open
C circles) bound by four cysteine side
chains. From Dauter et al.274 (B)
Alpha-carbon trace for ferredoxin
from Clostridium acidurici. The two
Fe S clusters attached to eight cys-
4 4
teine side chains are also shown. The
open circles are water molecules.
Based on a high-resolution X-ray
structure by Duéeet al.267 Courtesy of
E. D. Duée. (C) Polypeptide chain of
a chloroplast-type ferredoxin from the
cyanobacteriumSpirulina platensis.
The Fe S cluster is visible at the top
2 2
of the molecule. From Fukuyama et
al.276 Courtesy of K. Fukuyama.

--- Page 862 ---

A. Iron 859
of the structures in Fig. 16-16 are NH—S hydrogen Aconitase (Eq. 13-17) isolated under aerobic conditions
bonds that connect backbone NH groups of the peptide contains an Fe S cluster and is catalytically inactive.
3 4
chain to the sulfur atoms of the cysteine groups, form- Incubation with Fe2+ activates the enzyme and recon-
ing the clusters.275 These bonds may have important verts the Fe S to an Fe S cluster (Fig. 13-4).260,289,290
3 4 4 4
effects on properties of the cluster. Rubredoxins also
participate in electron transport and can substitute for Properties of iron–sulfur clusters. These
ferredoxins in some reactions. Larger 14-kDa and 18-kDa clusters were viewed for many years as unstable and
rubredoxins able to bind two iron ions participate in unable to exist outside of a protein. However, if pro-
electron transport in a hydroxylase system of Pseudomonas tected from oxygen and manipulated in the presence
(Chapter 18).277 A smaller 7.9-kDa 2-Fe desulforedoxin of soluble organic thiols they are stable and “cofactor-
functions in sulfate-reducing bacteria.278 like.”260 Intact clusters can be “extruded” from proteins
by treatment with thiols in nonaqueous media. Both
Chloroplast-type ferredoxins. Members of a Fe S and Fe S clusters as well as more complex forms
4 4 2 2
large class of [2Fe – 2S] or Fe S ferredoxins each con- have been synthesized291 and nonenzymatic cluster
2 2
tain two iron atoms and two labile sulfur atoms with interconversions have been demonstrated. Binding
the linear structure of Fig. 16-15B.279,279a Best known to proteins stabilizes the clusters further, but some
are the chloroplast ferredoxins, which transfer electrons (Fe– S) proteins are labile and difficult to study. This
from photosynthetic centers of chloroplasts to the flavo- is evidently because of partial exposure of the cluster
protein reductase that reduces NADP+ to NADPH.280,280a to the surrounding solvent. Not only can O cause
2
The structure of a cyanobacterial protein of this type oxidation of exposed clusters291a but also superoxide,292
is shown in Fig. 16-16C.276 A second group of Fe S nitric oxide, and peroxynitrite can react with the iron.
2 2
ferredoxins are found in bacteria including E. coli281 Aconitase has only three cysteine side chains available
and in human mitochondria.282 For example, in for coordination with Fe and the protein is unstable.
steroid hormone-forming tissues the ferredoxin Apparently, a superoxidized [Fe S ]3+cluster is formed
4 4
adrenodoxin282a carries electrons to cytochromes in the presence of O but loses Fe2+ to give an [Fe S ]+
2 3 4
P450. Its Fe S center receives electrons from adreno- cluster.293
2 2
doxin reductase (Chapter 15 banner).282b The nitrogen- Another interesting cluster conversion is the join-
fixingClostridium pasteurianum also contains a ing of two Fe S clusters in a protein to form a single
2 2
ferredoxin of this class.283 In Pseudomonas putida Fe S cluster at the interface between a dimeric protein.
4 4
(Chapter 18) the related 106-residue putidaredoxin Such a cluster is present in the nitrogenase iron protein
transfers electrons to cytochromes P450.284 (Fig. 24-2) and probably also in biotin synthase.294 The
clusters in such proteins can also be split to release the
The 3Fe – 4S clusters. A 106-residue ferredoxin monomers.
from Azotobacter vinelandii contains seven iron atoms Synthetic iron–sulfur clusters have weakly basic
in two Fe – S clusters that operate at very different properties273 and accept protons with a pK of from
a
redox potentials of – 0.42 and + 0.32 V.285 Other similar 3.9 to 7.4. Similarly, one clostridial ferredoxin, in the
seven-iron proteins are known.286 From EPR measure- oxidized form, has a pK of 7.4; it is shifted to 8.9 in the
a
ments it appeared that both clusters function between reduced form.295 If we designate the low-pH oxidized
the 2+ and 3+ (oxidized and superoxidized) states of form of such a protein as HOx+ and the reduced form
Eq. 16-17, despite the widely differing potentials. A as HRed, we can depict the reduction of each Fe S
4 4
super-reduced all-Fe(II) form with E
°’(pH
7) = – 0.70 V cluster as follows.
can also be formed.286 X-ray crystallographic studies
have revealed that the protein contains one Fe S HOx+ + e–→ HRed (16-18)
4 4
cluster and one Fe S cluster (Fig. 16-15C).286– 288 The
3 4
structures and environments of the Fe S clusters are Comparing with Eq. 6-64 and using the Michaelis pH
3 4
similar to those of Fe S clusters but they lack one iron functions (first two terms of Eq. 7-13) for HOx+ and
4 4
and one cysteine side chain. An Fe S cluster may HRed, it is easy to show that the value of E°’ (E ) at
4 4 1/ 2
sometimes lose S2– to form an Fe S cluster such as the which equal amounts of oxidized protein (HOx+ + Ox)
3 4
one in the A. vinelandii ferredoxin. A less likely possi- and reduced protein (HRed + Red–) are present is
bility is isomerization to a linear Fe S structure.289 given by Eq. 16-19, in which K and K are the K
3 4 ox red a
values for dissociation of the protonated oxidized and
S reduced forms, respectively.
Cys S S S Cys
Fe Fe Fe
Cys S S S Cys (1+ K /[H+])
S E = E0 (lowpH)+0.0592log red V
1/2 (1+ K /[H+])
ox
(16-19)

--- Page 863 ---

860 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
At the high pH limit this becomes E = E° (low pH) + NMR299,300 and other spectroscopic techniques (Fig.
1/ 2
0.0592 (pK – pK ) and V = – 0.371 + 0.0592 (7.4 – 8.9) 16-18),260 by theoretical computations,301– 304 and by
ox red
V = – 0.431 V. Thus, the value of E changes from protein engineering and “rational design.”305,306
1/ 2
– 0.371 to – 0.460 V as the pH is increased. In the pH
range between the pK values of 7.4 and 8.9 reduction Functions of iron–sulfur enzymes. Numerous
a
of the protein will lead to binding of a proton from the iron–sulfur clusters are present within the membrane-
medium and oxidation to loss of a proton. Human bound electron transport chains discussed in Chapter
and other vertebrate ferredoxins also show pH-depen- 18. Of special interest is the Fe S cluster present in
2 2
dent redox potentials.282 This suggests, as with the a protein isolated from the cytochrome bc complex
cytochromes, a possible role of Fe – S centers in the (complex III) of mitochondria. First purified by Rieske
operation of proton pumps in membranes. Neverthe- et al.,307 this protein is often called the Rieske iron–
less, many ferredoxins, such as that of C. pasteurianum, sulfur protein.308 Similar proteins are found in cyto-
show a constant value of E°’ from pH 6.3 to 10296 and chrome bc complexes of chloroplasts.125,300,309,310 In
appear to be purely electron carriers.
Both the iron and labile sulfur can be removed
from Fe – S proteins and the active proteins can often
be reconstituted by adding sulfide and Fe2+ ions.
Using this approach, the natural isotope 56Fe (nuclear
A
spin zero) has been exchanged with 57Fe, which has a
magnetic nucleus297 and 32S has been replaced by 77Se.
The resulting proteins appear to function naturally
and give EPR spectra containing hyperfine lines that
result from interaction of these nuclei with unpaired
B
electrons in the Fe S clusters (Fig. 16-17). These obser-
4 4
vations suggest that electrons accepted by Fe S clusters
4 4
are not localized on a single type of atom but interact
with nuclei of both Fe and S. The native proteins as
well as many mutant forms are being studied by
C
D
E
32S
80S
77Se
Figure 16-18 Mössbauer X-ray absorption spectra of iron–
sulfur clusters. (See Chapter 23 for a brief description of the
method.) Quadrupole doublets are indicated by brackets
and isomer shifts are marked by triangles. (A) [Fe S ]1+
2 2
Figure 16-17 Electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum cluster of the Rieske protein from Pseudomonas mendocina, at
of the Fe – S protein putidaredoxin in the natural form (32S) temperature T = 200 K. (B) [Fe S ]1+ state of D. gigas ferre-
3 4
and with labile sulfur replaced by selenium isotopes. Well- doxin II, T = 90 K. (C) [Fe S ]0 state of D. gigas ferredoxin II,
3 4
developed shoulders are seen in the low-field end of the T = 15 K. (D) [Fe S]2+ cluster of E. coli FNR protein, T = 4.2 K.
4 4
spectrum of the 77Se (spin = 1/ 2)-containing protein. From (E) [Fe S ]1+ cluster of E. coli sulfite reductase, T = 110 K.
4 4
Orme-Johnsonet al.298 Courtesy of W. H. Orme-Johnson. From Beinert et al.260
noitprosbA
-2 0 2
Velocity (mm/s)

--- Page 864 ---

A. Iron 861
some bacteria Rieske-type proteins deliver electrons to (4 FAD + 4 FMN),312,314,315 while the 64-kDa β subunits
oxygenases.300 The 196-residue mitochondrial protein contain both siroheme and a neighboring Fe S cluster
4 4
has an unusually high midpoint potential, E of ~ 0.30 V. (Fig. 16-19).89,304,312,316 The iron of the siroheme and
m
The Fe S cluster, which is visible in the atomic struc- the closest iron atom of the cluster are bridged by a
2 2
ture of complex III shown in Fig. 18-8, is coordinated single sulfur atom of a cysteine side chain.
by two cysteine thiolates and two histidine side chains. A somewhat similar double cluster is present in
In a Rhodobacter protein they occur in the following all-Fehydrogenases from Clostridium pasteurianum.316a,b,c
conserved sequences:311 C133-T-H-L-G-C138 and These enzymes also contain two or three Fe S clusters
4 4
C153-P-C-H-G-S158. One iron is bound by C133 and and, in one case, an Fe S cluster.316a At the presumed
2 2
C153 and the other by H135 and H156 as follows: active site a special H cluster consists of an Fe S
3 4
cluster with one cysteine sulfur atom shared by an
adjoining Fe S cluster: Because many hydrogenases
H135 2 2
H contain nickel, their chemistry and functions are dis-
N
cussed in Section C,2.
C133 S N The role of the iron–sulfur clusters in many of the
S
Fe (III) Fe (II) proteins that we have just considered is primarily one
S of single-electron transfer. The Fe – S cluster is a place
C153 S N
for an electron to rest while waiting for a chance to
N
H react. There may sometimes be an associated proton
H156 pumping action. In a second group of enzymes,
exemplified by aconitase (Fig. 13-4), an iron atom of a
These proteins may also have an ionizable group with cluster functions as a Lewis acid in facilitating removal
a pK of ~ 8.0, perhaps from one of the histidines that of an – OH group in an α,β dehydration of a carboxylic
a
is linked to the oxidation–reduction reaction. acid (Chapter 13). A substantial number of other
Iron–sulfur clusters are found in flavoproteins bacterial dehydratases as well as an important plant
such as NADH dehydrogenase (Chapter 18) and dihydroxyacid dehydratase also apparently use
trimethylamine dehydrogenase (Fig. 15-9) and in the Fe– S clusters in a catalytic fashion.317 Fumarases A
siroheme-containing sulfite reductases and nitrite and B from E. coli,317 L-serine dehydratase of a Pepto-
reductases.312 These two reductases are found both streptococcus species,317– 319 and the dihydroxyacid
in bacteria and in green plants.
Spinach nitrite reductase,313 which
is considered further in Chapter 24,
utilizes reduced ferredoxin to carry
out a six-electron reduction of NO –
2
to NH or of SO 2– to S2–. The 61-kDa
3 3
monomeric enzyme contains one
siroheme and one Fe S cluster. A
4 4
sulfite reductase from E. coli utilizes
NADPH as the reductant. It is a
large β α oligomer.312 The 66-kDa
8 4
α chains contain bound flavin
The hydrogenase Fe–S H cluster
Figure 16-19 Stereoscopic view
ofE. coli assimilatory sulfite reduc-
tase. The siroheme (Fig. 16-6) is in
the center with one edge toward
the viewer and the Fe S cluster is
4 4
visible on its right side. A single
S atom from a cysteine side chain
bridges between the Fe of the
siroheme and the Fe S cluster.
4 4
A phosphate ion is visible in the
sulfite-binding pocket at the left
center of the siroheme. From Crane
et al.312 Courtesy of E. D. Getzoff.

--- Page 865 ---

862 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
dehydratase320,321 may all use their Fe S clusters in a Hemerythrin. When both iron atoms are in the
4 4
manner similar to that of aconitase (Eq. 13-17). How- Fe(II) state, hemerythrin, like hemoglobin, functions as
ever, the Fe – S enzymes that dehydrate R-lactyl-CoA to a carrier of O . In the oxidized Fe(III) methemerythrin
2
crotonyl-CoA,322 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA to crotonyl- form the iron atoms are only 0.32 nm apart. Three
CoA,323,324 and R-2-hydroxyglutaryl-CoA to E-glutaco- bridging (µ) groups lie between them: two carboxylate
nyl-CoA325 must act by quite different mechanisms, groups and a single oxygen atom which may be either
perhaps similar to those utilized in vitamin B -depen- O2– or OH–. One coordination position on one of the
12
dent reactions. In these enzymes, as in pyruvate formate hexacoordinate iron atoms is open and appears to be
lyase (Eq. 15-38), the Fe – S center may act as a radical the site of binding of oxygen. The O is thought to
2
generator. accept two electrons, oxidizing the two iron atoms to
The molybdenum-containing enzymes considered Fe(III) and itself becoming a peroxide dianion O 2–.
2
in Section F also contain Fe – S clusters. Nitrogenases The process is completely reversible. The conversion
(Chapter 24) contain a more complex Fe–S–Mo cluster. of the oxygen to a bound peroxide ion is supported by
Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (Section C) contains studies of resonance Raman spectra (see Chapter 23)
2 Ni, ~ 11 Fe, and 14 S2– as well as Zn in a dimeric which also suggest that the peroxide group is proto-
structure. In these enzymes the Fe – S clusters appear nated. In the diferrous protein the µ-oxo bridge is
to participate in catalysis by undergoing alternate thought to be an–OH group. Upon oxygenation the
reduction and oxidation. proton could be shared with or donated to the peroxo
For a few enzymes such as aconitase and group (Eq. 16-20).334 A similar binding of O as a
2
amido-transferases,326 an Fe–S cluster plays a peroxide dianion appears to occur in the copper-
regulatory role in addition to or instead of a catalytic containing hemocyanins (Section C,3).
function.327 Cytosolic aconitase is identical to iron
regulatory proteins 1 (IRP1), which binds to iron
H
responsive elements in RNA to inhibit translation of
genes asso-ciated with iron uptake. A high iron con- O His
His
centration promotes assembly of the Fe S cluster (see His
4 4 FeII FeII
Chapter 28, Section C,6). Another example is provided O O
His His
by the E. coli transcription factor SOXR. This protein,
O O
which controls a cellular defense system against
oxygen-derived superoxide radicals, contains two Fe S
2 2
centers. Oxidation of these centers by superoxide
Deoxyhemerythrin
radicals appears to induce the transcription of genes
encoding superoxide dismutase and other proteins O2
involved in protecting cells against oxidative injury O H
(Chapter 18).328– 330
O O His
His
His
FeIII FeIII
8. The ((cid:1)-oxo) Diiron Proteins O O
His His
O O
Both the ferroxidase center of ferritin (Fig. 16-4)
and the oxygen-carrying hemerythrin are members
of a family of diiron proteins with similar active site Oxyhemerythrin (16-20)
structures.331,332 The pair of iron atoms, with the
bridging (µ) ligands such as O , HO–, HOO–, O 2–, is
2 2
often held between four α helices, as can be seen in Purple acid phosphatases. Diiron-tyrosinate
Fig. 2-22 and in Fig. 16-20C. In most cases each iron proteins with acid phosphatase activity occur in mam-
is ligated by at least one histidine, one glutamate side mals, plants, and bacteria. Most are basic glycoproteins
chain, and frequently a tyrosinate side chain. As many with an intense 510 - to 550-nm light absorption band.
as three side chains may bind to each iron. In addition, Well-studied members come from beef spleen, from
one or two carboxylate groups from glutamate or the uterine fluid of pregnant sows (uteroferrin),335
aspartate side chains bridge to both irons, as does the and from human macrophages and osteoclasts.336–336b
µ-oxo group, which is typically H O or –OH. Examples One of the two iron atoms is usually in the Fe(III)
2
of this structure are illustrated in Figs. 16-4 and 16-20. oxidation state, but the second can be reduced to
Although the active sites of all of the diiron proteins Fe(II) by mild reductants such as ascorbate. This half-
appear similar, the chemistry of the catalyzed reactions reduced form is enzymatically active and has a pink
is varied. color and a characteristic EPR signal. Treatment with
oxidants such as H O or hexacyannoferrate (III)
2 2

--- Page 866 ---

A. Iron 863
A B
His 73
His 77
His 101
Fe (1)
Asp 106 O
Glu 58
Fe (2)
His 54
His 25
Methemerythrin
(Fe3+/Fe3+)
C
E105 H146 E105 H146
Figure 16-20 (A) The active site of
hemerythrin showing the two iron atoms
(green) and their ligands which include
theµ oxo bridge and two bridging car-
boxylate groups. From Lukat et al.193 The
active site is between four parallel helices E229 E229
as shown in Fig. 2-22. (B) Stereoscopic
E143 E143
view of the backbone structure of a ∆9
stearoyl-acyl carrier protein desaturase
which also contains a diiron center.
Notice the nine-antiparallel-helix bundle.
The diiron center is between four helices
as in hemerythrin. (C) Stereoscopic view E196 E196
of the diiron center of the desaturase.333 H232 H232
(B) and (C) courtesy of Ylva Lindqvist.
generates purple inactive forms which lack a detectable In green plants a soluble ∆9 stearoyl-acyl carrier
EPR signal.337,338 The Fe3+ of the active enzyme can protein desaturase uses O and NADH or NADPH to
2
be replaced339 with Ga3+ and the Fe2+ with Zn2+ with introduce a double bond into fatty acids. The structure
retention of activity; also, some plants contain phos- of this protein (Fig. 16-20B,C) is related to those of
phatases with Fe – Zn centers.340,341 The catalytic methane oxygenase and ribonucleotide reductase.333,347
mechanism resembles those of other metallophos- The desaturase mechanism is discussed in Chapter 21.
phatases (Chapter 12) and the change of oxidation
state of the Fe may play a regulatory role. On the
other hand, a principal function of uteroferrin may 9. Ribonucleotide Reductases
be in transplacental transport of iron to the fetus.342
Ribonucleotides are reduced to the 2'-deoxyribo-
Diiron oxygenases and desaturases. In the nucleotides (Eq. 16-21) that are needed for DNA
(µ-oxo) diiron oxygenases O is initially bound in a synthesis by enzymes that act on either the di- or tri-
2
manner similar to that in hemerythrin but one atom phosphates of the purine and pyrimidine nucleo-
of the bound O is reduced to H O using electrons sides348–351 (Chapter 25). These ribonucleotide reductases
2 2
supplied by a cosubstrate such as NADPH. The other utilize either thioredoxin or glutaredoxin (Box 15-C)
oxygen atom enters the substrate. This is illustrated as the immediate hydrogen donors (Eq. 16-22). The
by Eq. 16-21 for methane monooxygenase.332,343– 345 pair of closely spaced – SH groups in the reduced
A toluene monooxygenase has similar properties.346 thioredoxin or glutaredoxin are converted into a
disulfide bridge at the same time that the 2'-OH of
CH + NADH + H+ + O → CH OH + NAD+ + H O the ribonucleotide di- (or tri-) phosphate is converted
4 2 3 2
(16-21) to H 2 O. While some organisms employ a vitamin B 12 -

--- Page 867 ---

864 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
dependent enzyme for this purpose, most utilize iron– + +
tyrosinate enzymes (Class I ribonucleotide reductases).
These are two-protein complexes of composition α β . OH OH
2 2
The enzyme from E. coli contains 761-residue α chains
and 375-residue β chains. That from Salmonella typh-
imurium351a is similar, as are corresponding mammalian
enzymes and a virus-encoded ribonucleotide reductase
formed in E. coli following infection by T4 bacterio- + OH OH , etc.
phage.352 In every case the larger α dimer, which is
2
usually called the R1 protein, contains the substrate +
binding sites, allosteric effector sites, and redox-active
SH groups. Each α chain is folded into an unusual A chain of hydrogen-bonded side chains apparently
(α /β) barrel.353,354 As in the more familiar (α /β) provides a pathway for transfer of an unpaired electron
10 8
barrels, the active site is at the N termini of the β from the active site to the Tyr 122 radical and from
strands. there to the radical generating center.363 The tyrosyl
radical can be destroyed by removal of the iron by
exposure to O or by treatment of ribonucleotide
2
reductases with hydroxyurea, which reduces the
P—P—O—CH2 Base P—P—O—CH2 Base
O O radical and also destroys catalytic activity:
H H
HO H
OH OH R(SH) 2 OH H
Thioredox 2 in RS 2 N OH
or glutaredoxin
O C
(16-22) Hydroxyurea
Each polypeptide chain of the β dimer or R2 NH2
2
protein contains a diiron center which serves as a
free radical generator.354a,b,c A few bacteria utilize a A second group of ribonucleotide reductases
dimanganese center.355 Oxygenation of this center is (Class II), found in many bacteria, depend upon the
linked to the uptake of both a proton and an electron cobalt-containingvitamin B coenzyme which is
12
and to the removal of a hydrogen atom from the ring discussed in Section B. These enzymes are monomeric
of tyrosine 166 to form H O and an organic radical or homodimeric proteins of about the size of the larger
2
(Eq. 16-23):356– 360 α subunits of the Class I enzymes. The radical gener-
ating center is the 5'-deoxyadenosyl coenzyme.350,364,365
2 Fe(II)2+ + O + H+ + e– + Y122-OH → Class III or anaerobic nucleotide reductases are
2
Fe(III)3+– O2–– Fe(III)3+– Y122 – O· + H O used by various anaerobic bacteria including E. coli
2
(16-23) when grown anaerobically350,366– 369a and also by some
bacteriophages.370 Like the Class I reductases, they
The tyrosyl radical is used to initiate the ribonucleotide have an α β structure but each β subunit contains an
2 2
reduction at the active site in the R1 protein ~ 3.5 nm Fe S cluster which serves as the free radical genera-
4 4
away. The tyrosyl radical is very stable and was dis- tor,369 that forms a stable glycyl radical at G580.369a
covered by a characteristic EPR spectrum of isolated In this respect the enzyme resembles pyruvate formate-
enzyme. Alteration of this spectrum when bacteria lyase (Eq. 15-40). As with other enzymes using Fe S
4 4
were grown in deuterated tyrosine indicated that the clusters as radical generators, S-adenosylmethionine
radical is located on a tyrosyl side chain and that the is also required. All ribonucleotide reductases may
spin density is delocalized over the tyrosyl ring.361,362 operate by similar radical mechanisms.350,351
Using protein engineering techniques the ring was When a 2'-Cl or -F analog of UDP was used in
located as Tyr 122 of the E. coli enzyme. A few of the place of the substrate an irreversible side reaction
resonance structures that can be used to depict the occurred by which Cl– or F–, inorganic pyrophos-
radical are the following: phate, and uracil were released.349 When one of these
enzyme-activated inhibitors containing 3H in the 3'
position was tested, the tritium was shifted to the 2'
position with loss of Cl– and formation of a reactive
3'-carbonyl compound (Eq. 16-24) that can undergo β
elimination at each end to give an unsaturated ketone
which inactivates the enzyme. This suggested that the
Fe-tyrosyl radical abstracts an electron (through a

--- Page 868 ---

A. Iron 865
A B
PPO O
H
4’ S224
S O B C462
O – 3’HS
O
H O 2’ HS
E441 HO
C225
H
C439 NH
O
N437
Figure 16-21 (A) Scheme showing the diiron center of the R2 subunit of E. coli ribonucleotide reductase. Included are the side
chains of tyrosine 122, which loses an electron to form a radical, and of histidine 118, aspartate 237, and tryptophan 48. These
side chains provide a pathway for radical transfer to the R1 subunit where the chain continues to tyrosines 738 and 737 and
cysteine 429.354a– c From Andersson et al.354c (B) Schematic drawing of the active site region of the E. coli class III ribonucleotide
reductase with a plausible position for a model-built substrate molecule. Redrawn from Lenz and Giese373 with permission.
chain of intermediate groups) from an – SH group, the final step (step e) the redox active pair is reduced
now identified as C439 in the E. coli enzyme371–372 by reduced thioredoxin or glutaredoxin. The active
(Fig. 16-21). The resulting thiyl radical is thought to site must open to release the product and to permit
abstract a hydrogen atom from C’-3 of a true substrate this reduction, which may involve participation of still
to form a substrate radical (Eq. 16-25, step a) which, other– SH groups in the protein.
with the help of the C462 – SH group,
facilitates the loss of –OH from C-2 in
stepb. The resulting C2 radical would P P O CH2 Base P P O CH2 Base
O a O
be reduced by the nearby redox-active
thiol pair C462 and C225 (Fig. 16-21 H H H
S SH
and Eq. 16-25, step c). In Eq. 16-25 the
HO OH HO HO
reaction is shown as a hydride transfer Cys 439 Cys 439 H
with an associated one-electron shift H S
but the mechanism is uncertain. In b S Cys 462
stepd of Eq. 16-25 the thiyl radical is Cys 225
regenerated and continues to function
in subsequent rounds of catalysis. In P P O CH2 Base P P O CH2 Base
O O
c
H H
P P O CH2 Uracil SH S
O O H – S HO H
Cys 439 Cys 439
3H 2' H S Cys 462 S
Cys 225 S Cys 462
HO Cl d
Cys 225
–
Cl
P P O CH2 Uracil P P O CH2 Base
O O e
H
H H H H S
S S
O H HO H TR(SH)2 TR S Cys 462
β Elimination Cys 439 S Cys 225
S
S Cys 462
Enzyme inactivation (16-24) Cys 225 (16-25)

--- Page 869 ---

866 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
+
10. Superoxide Dismutases H
a
–
O O
2 2
Metalloenzymes of at least three different types
M2+
–
catalyze the destruction of superoxide radicals that O
2
arise from reactions of oxygen with heme proteins, M3+ b
H
+
reduced flavoproteins, and other metalloenzymes.
These superoxide dismutases (SODs) convert super-
·
oxide anion radicals O – into H O and O (Eq. 16-26). HO
2 2 2 2 2 2
The H O can then be destroyed by catalase (Eq. 16-8). (16-27)
2 2
2 O – + 2 H+—→ H O + O
2 2 2 2 (16-26)
·
open for binding of O –. As indicated in Eq. 16-27,
2
The much studied Cu / Zn superoxide dismutase of uptake of one proton is associated with each reaction
eukaryotic cytoplasm is described in Section D. How- step. As illustrated in Fig 16-22 for step a of Eq. 16-27,
ever, eukaryotic mitochondria contain manganese the first proton may be taken up to convert the bound
SOD and some eukaryotes also synthesize an iron- –OH to H O. The enzyme in the Fe2+ form has a pK of
2 a
containing SOD. For example, the protozoan Leishma- 8.5 that has been associated with tyrosine 34. Perhaps
nia tropica, which takes up residence in the phagolyso- this residue is involved in the proton uptake process.378
somes of a victim’s macrophages, synthesizes an iron- A similarly located Tyr 41 from Sulfolobus is covalently
containing SOD374 to protect itself against superoxide modified, perhaps by phosphorylation.378a
generated by the macrophages. Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis secretes an iron SOD which assists its survival
in living tissues and is also a target for the immune B. Cobalt and Vitamin B
12
response of human hosts.375
Iron and manganese SODs have ~ 20-kDa subunits The human body contains only about 1.5 mg of
in each of which a single ion of Fe or Mn is bound by cobalt, almost all of it is in the form of cobalamin,
three imidazole groups and a carboxylate group.376,377 vitamin B . Ruminant animals, such as cattle and
12
The metal ion undergoes a cyclic change in oxidation sheep, have a relatively high nutritional need for
state as illustrated by Eq. 16-27. Notice that two protons cobalt and in regions with a low soil cobalt content,
must be taken up for formation of H O . In Cu / Zn such as Australia, cobalt deficiency in these animals is
2 2
SOD the copper cycles between Cu2+ and Cu+. The a serious problem. This need for cobalt largely reflects
structure of the active site of an Fe SOD is shown in the high requirement of the microorganisms of the
Fig. 16-22. That of Mn SOD is almost identical.376 In rumen (paunch) for vitamin B . All bacteria require
12
addition to the histidine and carboxylate ligands, the vitamin B but not all are able to synthesize it. For
12
metal binds a hydroxyl ion –OH or H O and has a site example,E. coli lacks one enzyme in the biosynthetic
2
A B Y34
O H
Q69
N H +
H
O
H
H
H H
N –O N
H73 N 3+ N H160
M
O
– O 2 O –
N
D156 H26
N
H
Figure 16-22 (A) Structure of the active site of iron superoxide dismutase from E. coli. From Carlioz et al.379 Courtesy of
M. Ludwig. (B) Interpretive drawing illustrating the single-electron transfer from a superoxide molecule to the Fe3+ of super-
oxide dismutase and associated proton uptake. Based on Lah et al.376

--- Page 870 ---

B. Cobalt and Vitamin B 867
12
pathway and must depend upon other bacteria to The most surprising structural feature is the Co – C
complete the synthesis. single bond of length 0.205 nm. Thus, the coenzyme
is an alkyl cobalt, the first such compound found in
nature. In fact, alkyl cobalts were previously thought
1. Coenzyme Forms to be unstable. Vitamin B contains Co(III), and cyano-
12
cobalamin can be imagined as arising by replacement
For several years after the discovery of cobalamin of the single hydrogen on the inside of the corrin ring
its biochemical function remained a mystery, a major by Co3+ plus CN–. However, bear in mind that three
reason being the extreme sensitivity of the coenzymes other nitrogens of the corrin ring and a nitrogen of
to decomposition by light. Progress came after Barker dimethylbenzimidazole also bind to the cobalt. Each
and associates discovered that the initial step in the nitrogen atom donates an electron pair to form coordi-
anaerobic fermentation of glutamate by Clostridium nate covalent linkages. Because of resonance in the
tetanomorphumis rearrangement to β-methylaspar- conjugated double-bond system of the corrin, all four
tate380,381 (Eq. 16-28). of the Co – N bonds in the ring are nearly equivalent
and the positive charge is distributed over the nitrogen
atoms surrounding the cobalt.
+ The strength of the axial Co – C bond is directly
H3N H
influenced by the strength of bonding of the dimethyl-
–
C CH2
– imidazole whose conjugate base has a microscopic
OOC CH2 COO
pK of 5.5.386 Protonation of this base breaks its bond
l-Glutamate a
to cobalt and may thereby strengthen the Co–C bond.387
Steric factors are also important in determining the
+ strength of this bond. NMR techniques are now
H3N H
playing an important role in investigation of these
C COO – factors.386– 388
–
OOC C
In both bacteria and liver, the 5'-deoxyadenosyl
H3C H coenzyme is the most abundant form of vitamin B
12
,
threo-β-Methylaspartate (16-28) while lesser amounts of methylcobalamin are
present. Other naturally occurring analogs of the
coenzymes include pseudo vitamin B whichcon-
12
The latter compound can be catabolized by reactions tains adenine in place of the dimethylbenzimidazole.
that cannot be used on glutamate itself. Thus, the
initial rearrangement is an indispensable step in the
energy metabolism of the bacterium. A new coen- CH 3
zyme required for this reaction was isolated in 1958
+
Co(III)
after it was found that protection from light during
the preparation was necessary. The coenzyme was
characterized in 1961 by X-ray diffraction382 as
Bz
5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin. It is related to cyano-
Methylcobalamin
cobalamin (Box 16-B) by replacement of the CN group
by a 5'-deoxyadenosyl group as indicated in the fol-
lowing abbreviated formulas.383– 385 Here the planes Like dimethylbenzimidazole, it is combined with
represent the corrin ring system and Bz the dimethyl- ribose in the unusual α linkage. A compound called
benzimidazole that is coordinated with the cobalt from factor A is the vitamin B analog with 2-methyladenine.
12
below the ring. Related compounds have been isolated from such
sources as sewage sludge which
abounds in anaerobic bacteria. It
HO OH has been suggested that plants may
contain vitamin B -like materials
12
N
H which do not support growth of
N bacteria. Thus, we may not have
O N
CN H 2 C 130° discovered all of the alkyl cobalt
coenzymes.
+ + N NH
Co(III) Co(III) 2
Bz Bz
Cyanocobalamin 5’-Deoxyadenosylcobalamin

--- Page 871 ---

868 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
BOX 16-B COBALAMIN (VITAMIN B )
12
NH with enthusiasm. Twenty-two years later vitamin
2
O B 12 was isolated (as the crystalline derivative cyano-
H cobalamin) and was shown to be the curative agent.
O HC H 3 C 8 NH 2 It is present in liver to the extent of 1 mg kg–1 or
H 2 N H 3 5 B ~10–6 M. Although much effort was expended in
O
HN 3 CN N 10 H preparation of concentrated liver extracts for the
2 A treatment of pernicious anemia, the lack of an assay
OH 3 C H 3 2 C 1 N N Co+ N C C C H H 3 3 o p t r h o e g r r e th ss a n sl o tr w ea . tment of human patients made
H 13 H
19 D In the early 1940s nutritional studies of young
HN 15
2 18 17 CH 3 animals raised on diets lacking animal proteins and
O H CH 3 O maintained out of contact with their own excreta
(which contained vitamin B ) demonstrated the
HN O N CH 3 NH 2 need for “animal protein fac 1 t 2 or” which was soon
H HO N α CH 3 shown to be the same as vitamin B 12 . The animal
H 3 C O O H feeding experiments also demonstrated that waste
P liquors from streptomyces fermentations used in
–O O O Cya
M
no c
=
o b
13
a
5
la
5
min production of antibiotics were extremely rich in
r
CH 2 OH (C 63 H 58 N 14 PO 14 Co) vitamin B 12 . Later this vitamin was recognized as a
growth factor for a strain of Lactobacillus lactis which
responded with half-maximum growth to as little as
0.013µg / l (10–11 M).
The story of vitamin B began with pernicious In 1948, red cobalt-containing crystals of vitamin
12
anemia, a disease that usually affects only persons B were obtained almost simultaneously by two
12
of age 60 or more but which occasionally strikes pharmaceutical firms. Charcoal adsorption from
children.a Before 1926 the disease was incurable liver extracts was followed by elution with alcohol
and usually fatal. Abnormally large, immature, and and numerous other separation steps. Later fermen-
fragile red blood cells are produced but the total tation broths provided a richer source. Chemical
number of erythrocytes is much reduced from 4 – 6 x studies revealed that the new vitamin had an enor-
106 mm–3to 1– 3 x 106 mm–3. Within the bone marrow mous molecular weight, that it contained one atom
mitosis appears to be blocked and DNA synthesis is of phosphorus which could be released as P, a
i
suppressed. The disease also affects other rapidly molecule of aminopropanol, and a ribofuranoside
growing tissues such as the gastric mucous mem- of dimethyl benzimidazole with the unusual α
branes (which stop secreting HCl) and nervous configuration.
tissues. Demyelination of the central nervous Note the relationship of the dimethylbenzimida-
system with loss of muscular coordination (ataxia) zole to the ring system of riboflavin (Box 15-B).
and psychotic symptoms is often observed. Several molecules of ammonia could be released
from amide linkages by hydrolysis, but all attempts
to remove the cobalt reversibly from the ring system
N CH3 were unsuccessful. The structure was determined
in 1956 by Dorothy C. Hodgkin and coworkers
using X-ray diffraction.b At that time, it was the
HO HO N CH3 largest organic structure determined by X-ray dif-
H2N
fraction. The complete laboratory synthesis was
CH2
α accomplished in 1972.c
O
HO C The ring system of vitamin B , like that of
12
H CH3 HO porphyrins (Fig. 16-5), is made up of four pyrrole
R-1-Amino-2-propanol α-Ribofuranoside of dimethylimidazole rings whose biosynthetic relationship to the corre-
sponding rings in porphyrins is obvious from the
structures. In addition, a number of “extra” methyl
In 1926, Minot and Murphy discovered that groups are present. A less extensive conjugated
pernicious anemia could be controlled by eating system of double bonds is present in the corrin ring
one-half pound of raw or lightly cooked liver per of vitamin B than in porphyrins, and as a result,
12
day, a treatment which not all patients accepted many chiral centers are found around the periphery

--- Page 872 ---

B. Cobalt and Vitamin B 869
12
BOX 16-B (continued)
of the somewhat nonplanar rings. transcobalamind,i and cobalophilin. The latter
Cyanocobalamin, the form of vitamin B isolated is a glycoprotein found in virtually every human
12
initially, contains cyanide attached to cobalt. It occurs biological fluid and which may protect the vitamin
only in minor amounts, if at all, in nature but is from photodegradation by light that penetrates
generated through the addition of cyanide during tissues.j A variety of genetic defects involving
the isolation. Hydroxocobalamin (vitamin B ) uptake, transport, and conversion to vitamin B
12a 12
containing OH– in place of CN–does occur in nature. coenzyme forms are known.f,k
However, the predominant forms of the vitamin are Normal blood levels of vitamin B are
12
the coenzymes in which an alkyl group replaces the ~ 2 x 10–10 M or a little more, but in vegetarians
CN– of cyanocobalamin. the level may drop to less than one-half this value. A
Intramuscular injection of as little as 3 – 6 µg of deficiency of folic acid can also cause megaloblastic
crystalline vitamin B is sufficient to bring about anemia, and a large excess of folic acid can, to some
12
a remission of pernicious anemia and 1 µg daily extent, reverse the anemia of pernicious anemia and
provides a suitable maintenance dose (often admin- mask the disease.
istered as hydroxocobalamin injected once every
2 weeks). For a normal person a dietary intake of a Karlson, P. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 286
2– 5 µg / day is adequate. There is rarely any diffi- b Hodgkin, D. C. (1965) Science150, 979 – 988
culty in meeting this requirement from ordinary c Maugh, T. H., II (1973) Science179, 266 – 267
d Gräsbeck, R., and Kouvonen, I. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8,
diets. Vitamin B has the distinction of being syn-
12 203– 205
thesized only by bacteria, and plants apparently e Allen, R. H., Stabler, S. P., Savage, D. G., and Lindenbaum, J.
contain none. Consequently, strict vegetarians some- (1993)FASEB J.7, 1344 – 1353
times have symptoms of vitamin B deficiency. f Fenton, W. A., and Rosenberg, L. E. (1995) in The Metabolic and
12 Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 2 (Scriver, C. R.,
Pernicious anemia is usually caused by poor
Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 3129 – 3149,
absorption of the vitamin. Absorption depends McGraw-Hill, New York
upon the intrinsic factor, a mucoprotein (or muco- g Seetharam, S., Ramanujam, K. S., and Seetharam, B. (1992)
proteins) synthesized by the stomach lining.a,d – f J. Biol. Chem.267, 7421–7427
h Birn, H., Verroust, P. J., Nexo, E., Hager, H., Jacobsen, C.,
Pernicious anemia patients often have a genetic
Christensen, E. I., and Moestrup, S. K. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
predilection toward decreased synthesis of the 26497– 26504
intrinsic factor. Gastrectomy, which decreases syn- i Fedosov, S. N., Berglund, L., Nexo, E., and Petersen, T. E. (1999)
thesis of the intrinsic factor, or infection with fish J. Biol. Chem.274, 26015–26020
j Frisbie, S. M., and Chance, M. R. (1993) Biochemistry32, 13886 –
tapeworms, which compete for available vitamin B
12 13892
and interfere with absorption, can also induce the k Rosenblatt, D. S., Hosack, A., Matiaszuk, N. V., Cooper, B. A.,
disease. Also essential are a plasma membrane and Laframboise, R. (1985) Science228, 1319 – 1321
receptorg,h and two blood transport proteins
in the first step (Eq. 16-29, step a), which may be accom-
2. Reduction of Cyanocobalamin and
plished with chromous acetate at pH 5 or by catalytic
Synthesis of Alkyl Cobalamins
hydrogenation. The product is the brown paramag-
netic compound B , a tetragonal low-spin cobalt(II)
Cyanocobalamin can be reduced in two one- 12r
complex. In the second step (Eq. 16-29, step b), an
electron steps (Eq. 16-29).385,388 The cyanide ion is lost
additional electron is added, e.g., from sodium boro-
hydride or from chromous acetate at pH 9.5, to give
CN
e – CN – the gray-green exceedingly reactive B . The latter is
12s
Co(III) + Co(II) + thought to be in equilibrium with cobalt(III) hydride,
a
as shown in Eq. 16-30, step a. The hydride is unstable
Cyanocobalamin B 12r or Cob(II)alamin and breaks down slowly to H 2 and B 12r (Eq. 16-30,
– stepb).389
e
b
H+ H
a b
Co(I) B 12s Co(III) + Slow B 12r
B 12s or Cob(I)alamin (16-29) 1/2H 2 (16-30)

--- Page 873 ---

870 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
Vitamin B reacts rapidly with alkyl iodides (e.g., Irradiation in the presence of air gives a variety of
12s
methyl iodide or a 5'-chloro derivative of adenosine) products.
via nucleophilic displacement to form the alkyl cobalt Hydrolysis of deoxyadenosylcobalamin by acid
forms of vitamin B (Eq. 16-31). These reactions (1 M HCl, 100°, 90 min) yields hydroxycobalamin,
12
provide a convenient way of preparing isotopically adenine, and an unsaturated sugar (Eq. 16-33). The
labeled alkyl cobalamins, including those selectively initial reaction step is thought to be protonation of the
oxygen of the ribose ring.
A related cleavage by alkaline cyanide can be
R
viewed as a nucleophilic displacement of the deoxy-
R CH I
2 CH adenosyl anion by cyanide. The end product is
2
dicyanocobalamin, in which the loosely bound
+
Co(I) Co(III)
nucleotide containing dimethyl benzimidazole is
– replaced by a second cyanide ion. Methyl and other
I (16-31)
simple alkyl cobalamins are stable to alkaline cyanide.
A number of other cleavage reactions of alkyl cobalamins
enriched in 13C for use in NMR studies.390 The bio- are known.392,393
synthesis of 5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin utilizes the
same type of reaction with ATP as a substrate.391 HO OH
AB adenosyltransferase catalyzes nucleophilic
12s
displacement on the 5' carbon of ATP with formation
of the coenzyme and displacement of inorganic tri-
polyphosphatePPP.
H2C O
Adenine
i H+
–
HO
+
Co(III)
3. Three Nonenzymatic Cleavage Reactions
of Vitamin B Coenzymes
12
The 5'-deoxyadenosyl coenzyme is easily decom- Adenine
posed by a variety of agents. Anaerobic irradiation
with visible light yields principally vitamin B and a H O
12r C
cyclic 5',8-deoxyadenosine which is probably formed
through an intermediate radical391a (Eq. 16-32): H C OH
OH
OH OH H C OH
+
Co(III)
H C
CH2
Hydroxocobalamin (16-33)
O
H2C Adenine
OH OH
Co
4. Enzymatic Functions of B Coenzymes
hv 12
Three types of enzymatic reactions depend upon
O N alkyl corrin coenzymes. The first is the reduction of
H2C N
ribonucleotide triphosphates by cobalamin-dependent
ribonucleotide reductase, a process involving intermo-
N
Co N lecularhydrogen transfer (Eq. 16-21). The second type
of reaction encompasses the series of isomerizations
NH2 shown in Table 16-1. These can all be depicted as in
OH OH Eq. 16-34. Some group X, which may be attached by a
C– C, C – O, or C – N bond, is transferred to an adjacent
H carbon atom bearing a hydrogen. At the same time,
O N
H2C N
N C C C C
N
X H H X
NH2 (16-32) (16-34)

--- Page 874 ---

B. Cobalt and Vitamin B 871
12
the hydrogen is transferred to the carbon to which X nucleotide with retention of configuration. A more
was originally attached. The third type of reaction is important finding was a large kinetic isotope effect of
the transfer of methyl groups via methylcobalamin 1.8 when 3'-3H-containing UTP was reduced by the
and some related bacterial metabolic reactions. enzyme.394
Reaction of the reductase with dihydrolipoic acid
Cobalamin-dependent ribonucleotide reductase. in the presence of deoxy-GTP, which apparently serves
Lactic acid bacteria such as Lactobacillus leichmanni and as an allosteric activator, leads to formation, within a
many other bacteria utilize a 5'-deoxyadenosylcobal- few milliseconds, of a radical with a characteristic EPR
amin-containing enzyme to reduce nucleoside triphos- spectrum that can be studied when the reaction mix-
phates according to Eq. 16-21. Thioredoxin or ture is rapidly cooled to 130°K. When GTP (a true
dihydrolipoic acid can serve as the hydrogen donor. substrate) is used instead of dGTP, the radical signal
Early experiments showed that protons from water reaches a maximum in about 20 ms and then decays.
are reversibly incorporated at C-2' of the reduced Of the various oxidation states of cobalt (3+, 2+, and 1+)
TABLE 16-1
Isomerization Reactions Involving Hydrogen Transfer and Dependent upon a Vitamin B Coenzyme
12
Transferred via
B coenzyme
12
X H H X General reaction
C C C C Migrating group is enclosed in a box
H OH
HO H H H Dioldehydratase
H2C C H3C C CH3 C Glycerol dehydratase catalyzes the same
type of reaction
OH OH O
H OH NH
H2N
H H
3
H
H2C C H3C C CH3 C Ethanolamine ammonia-lyase
OH NH2 O
H3C l-β-Lysine mutase
H2N COOH COOH d-α-Lysine mutase and ornithine mutase
H NH2 H2N H H NH2 catalyze the same type of reaction
H3N+ H H* H H3N+ H
–
C C C COO
–OOC CH2 COO– –OOC C Glutamate mutase
l-Glutamate H3C H*
threo-l-β-Methylaspartate
O H H O
C C C COO – Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase
CoA S CH2 COO– CoA S C Isobutyryl-CoA mutase catalyzes
the same type of reaction
H3C H
(R) Methylmalonyl-CoA
CH2 CH2
– OOC
C
CH2
CH2
COO – –OOC
C
C
COO – α-Methyleneglutarate mutase
H3C H

--- Page 875 ---

872 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
only the 2+ state of vitamin B is paramagnetic and dependent enzymes. The related isobutyryl-CoA
12r
gives rise to an EPR signal. The electronic absorption mutase participates in the microbial synthesis of such
spectrum of the coenzyme of ribonucleotide reductase polyether antibiotics as monensin A.397a,b Other mutases
is also changed rapidly by substrate in a way that are involved in anaerobic bacterial fermentations.
suggests formation of B . Thus, it was proposed In these reactions the hydrogen is always trans-
12r
that a homolyticcleavage occurs to form B and a ferred via the B coenzyme. No exchange with the
12r 12
stabilized 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical (Eq. 16-35).395–396a medium takes place. Since X may be an electronegative
However, H3 is not transferred from the 3' position of group such as OH, the reactions could all be treated
the substrate into the deoxyadenosyl part of the coen- formally as hydride ion transfers but it is more likely
zyme.394 The enzyme has many properties in common that they occur via homolytic cleavages. Such cleavage
with the previously discussed iron–tyrosinate ribo- is indicated by the observation of EPR signals for
nucleotide reductases (Fig. 16-21) including limited several of the enzymes in the presence of their sub-
peptide sequence homology.350 Stubbe and coworkers strates.398
suggested that the deoxyadenosyl radical is formed as Abeles and associates showed that when
a radical chain initiator394,396b and that the mechanism dioldehydratase (Table 16-1) catalyzes the conversion
of ribonucleotide reduction is as shown in Eq. 16-25. of 1,2-[1-3H]propanediol to propionaldehyde, tritium
Studies of enzyme-activated inhibitors support this appears in the coenzyme as well as in the final product.
mechanism.364 When3H-containing coenzyme is incubated with
unlabeled propanediol, the product also contains 3H,
R which was shown by chemical degradation to be
CH exclusively on C-5'. Synthetic 5'-deoxyadenosyl coen-
2
zyme containing 3H in the 5' position transferred 3H to
+
Co(III) product. Most important, using a mixture of propan-
ediol and ethylene glycol, a small amount of inter-
5’-Deoxyadenosylcobalamin moleculartransfer was demonstrated; that is, 3H was
transferred into acetaldehyde, the product of dehy-
Dihydrolipoic acid +
nucleoside triphosphate dration of ethylene glycol. Similar results were also
obtained with ethanolamine ammonia-lyase.399
R 5’-Deoxyadenosyl
Another important experiment398 showed that
CH radical
2
18O from [2-18O]propanediol was transferred into the 1
Co(II) + position without exchange with solvent. Furthermore,
(16-35) 18O from (S)-[1-18O]propanediol was retained in the
product while that from the (R) isomer was not. Thus,
it appears that the enzyme stereospecifically dehydrates
The isomerization reactions. At least 10 reac- the final intermediate. From these and other experiments,
tions of the type described by Eq. 16-34 are known397 it was concluded that initially a 5'-deoxyadenosyl
(Table 16-1). They can be subdivided into three radical is formed via Eq. 16-35. This radical then
groups. First, X = OH or NH in Eq. 16-34; isomeriza- abstracts the hydrogen atom marked by a shaded box
2
tion gives a geminal-diol or aminoalcohol that can in Eq. 16-36 to form a substrate radical and 5'-deoxy-
eliminate H O or NH to give an aldehyde. All of adenosine. One proposal, illustrated in Eq. 16-36, is
2 3
these enzymes, which are called hydro-lyases or that the substrate radical immediately recombines with
ammonia-lyases, specifi-
cally require K+ as well as
R
the vitamin B coenzyme. (5’-deoxyadenosyl
Second, X = N 12 H in Eq. HO* OH CH 2 coenzyme) *OH
2
16-34; For this group of HC C C Co CH CH C OH
3 3
aminomutases PLP is H
H H H
required as a second H
coenzyme. Third, X is
HCH R d
attached via a carbon a 2 c H 2 O
atom; the enzymes are (5’-deoxyadenosine)
CH CH CHO
calledmutases. Methyl- *OH 3 2
HO* OH H OH
malonyl-Co mutase is
required for catabolism of C C b C C
propionate in the human H 3 C H H H 3 C
body, and is one of only
two known vitamin B - Co Co
12
(16-36)

--- Page 876 ---

B. Cobalt and Vitamin B 873
12
the Co(II) of the coenzyme to form an organo-cobalt Recently, EPR spectroscopy with 2H- and 13C-labeled
substrate compound (step a of Eq. 16-36). The 5'-deoxy- glutamates as substrates for glutamate mutase permitted
adenosine now contains hydrogen from the substrate; identification of a 4-glutamyl radical as a probable
because of rotation of the methyl group this hydrogen intermediate for that enzyme.402,402a,b
becomes equivalent to the two already present in the On the other hand, for methylmalonyl-CoA
coenzyme. The substrate–cobalamin compound formed mutase Ingraham suggested cleavage of the Co – C bond
in this step then undergoes isomerization, which, in of an organocobalt intermediate to form a carbanion,
the case of dioldehydratase, leads to intramolecular the substrate–cobalamin compound serving as a sort
transfer of the OH group (step b). In step c the hydrogen of“biological Grignard reagent.” The carbanion
atom is transferred back from the 5'-deoxyadenosine would be stabilized by the carbonyl group of the
to its new location in the product and in step d the thioester forming a “homoenolate anion” (Eq. 16-39).
resulting gem-diol is dehydrated to form the aldehyde The latter could break up in either of two ways reform-
product.401a ing a C – Co bond and causing the isomerization.403
Carbocation, carboanion, and free radical inter- Some experimental results also favor an ionic or organo-
mediates have all been proposed for the isomerization cobalt pathway.404
step in the reaction. A carbocation would presumably
be cyclized to an epoxide which could react with the
CoA
B (Eq. 16-37, step b) to complete the isomerization.
12s S
O S CoA
O C
H
H
3C
C
O
C H OH H3C H C
O
C H OH
H2C
C
C
H
OOH
H2C
C
C – H COOH
Co(III) + Co(III)2+
a
+
Co(III) Co(I)
B
12s
–
O S CoA
b
HO
C
H3C
H
C COOH
H C
OH
H2C C
H
Co(III) + Co(III) +
(16-37) (16-39)
At present most evidence favors, for the isomer- The three-dimensional structure of methylmalonyl-
ization reactions, an enzyme-catalyzed rearrangement CoA mutase from Propionibacterium shermanii shows
of the substrate radical produced initially during that the vitamin B is bound in a base-off conformation
12
formation of the 5'-deoxyadenosine (Eq. 16-38).400–401c with the dimethylbenzimidazole group bound to the
protein far from the corrin ring (Fig. 16-23; see also Fig.
16-24).405,405a A histidine of the protein coordinates the
*OH cobalt, as also in methionine synthase. The entrance
HO*
OH
H3C
OH to the deeply buried active site is blocked by the coen-
C C C C
zyme part of the substrate. The buried active site may
H3C H
H
H H (16-38) be favorable for free radical rearrangement reactions.
The structure of substrate complexes shows that the
coenzyme is in the cob(II)alamin (B ) form with the
12r
According to this mechanism the Co(II) of the B 5'-deoxyadenosyl group detached from the cobalt,
12r
formed in Eq. 16-35 has no active role in the isomeriza- rotated, shifted, and weakly bound to the protein.405a
tion and does not form an organocobalt intermediate Side chains from neighboring Y89, R207, and H244 all
as in Eq. 16-36. Its only role is to be available to re- hydrogen bond to the substrate. The R207 guanidinium
combine with the 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical at the end group makes an ion pair with the substrate carboxylate,
of the reaction sequence. Support for this interpreta- and the phenolic and imidazole groups may have
tion has been obtained from study of model reactions catalytic functions.405b,c,d,406 Studies are also in progress
and of organic radicals generated in other ways.400 on crystalline glutamate mutase.406,406a

--- Page 877 ---

874 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
Figure 16-23 Three-dimensional
structure of methylmalonyl-CoA
mutase from Propionobacterium
shermanii. The B coenzyme is
12
deeply buried, as is the active site.
A molecule of bound desulfo-
coenzyme A, a substrate analog,
blocks the active site entrance on
the left side. From Mancia et al.405
Courtesy of Philip R. Evans.
According to all of these mechanisms, 5'-deoxy- daggers mark positions of labeled atoms in specific
adenosine is freed from its bond to cobalt during the experiments).
action of the enzymes. Why then does the deoxy-
adenosine not escape from the coenzyme entirely, H
leading to its inactivation? Substrate-induced inacti-
CH3
2 1
†H CH3
C C C CHO
vation is not ordinarily observed with coenzyme B -
12 *H †H
dependent reactions, but some quasi-substrates do HO OH *H
inactivate their enzymes. Thus, glycolaldehyde con- (S)-1,2-Propanediol (16-40)
verts the coenzyme of dioldehydratase to 5'-deoxy-
adenosine and ethylene glycol does the same with
ethanolamine deaminase. When 5'-deoxyinosine CH3
†H
H
H3C
replaces the 5'-deoxyadenosine of the normal coen-
C C C CHO
zyme in dioldehydratase, 5'-deoxyinosine is released HO *H
OH
quantitatively by the substrate. This suggests that the *H H
dehydratase may normally hold the adenine group of (R)-1,2-Propanediol (16-41)
5'-deoxyadenosine through hydrogen bonding to the
amino group. Because the OH group of inosine tauto- In both cases the reaction proceeds with retention of
merizes to C O, inosine may not be held as tightly. configuration at C-2 and with stereochemical speci-
The deeply buried active site (Fig. 16-23) may also ficity408 for one of the two hydrogens at C-1. The
prevent escape of the deoxyadenosine. reaction catalyzed by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase
Despite the evidence in its favor, there was initially likewise proceeds with retention of configuration at
some reluctance to accept 5'-deoxyadenosine as an C-2 (Table 16-1)409 but the glutamate mutase reaction
intermediate in vitamin B -dependent isomerization is accompanied by inversion (Eq. 16-28).
12
reactions. It was hard to believe that a methyl group
could exchange hydrogen atoms so rapidly. It was Aminomutases. The enzymes L-(cid:2)-lysine mutase
suggested that protonation of the oxygen of the ribose (which is also D-(cid:3)-lysine mutase) and D-ornithine
ring as in Eq. 16-33 might facilitate release of a hydrogen mutase catalyze the transfer of an ω-amino group to
atom. However, substitution of the ring oxygen by an adjacent carbon atom410 (Table 16-1). Two proteins
CH in a synthetic analog did not destroy the coenzy- are needed for the reaction; pyridoxal phosphate is
2
matic activity.407 Another possibility is that the methyl required and is apparently directly involved in the
group has an unusual reactivity if the cobalt is reduced amino group migration. In the β-lysine mutase the
to Co(II). 6-amino group of L-β-lysine replaces the pro-S hydro-
gen at C-5 but with inversion at C-5 to yield (3S, 5S)-
Stereochemistry of the isomerization reactions. 3,5-diaminohexanoic acid.411 A bacterial D-lysine
Dioldehydratase acts on either the (R) or (S) isomers of 5,6-aminomutase interconverts D-lysine with 2,5-
1,2-propanediol (Eqs. 16-40 and 16-41; asterisks and diaminohexanoic acid.411a Another related enzyme

--- Page 878 ---

B. Cobalt and Vitamin B 875
12
isL-leucine 2,3-aminomutase, which catalyzes the properties suggest that lysine 2,3-aminomutase is
reversible interconversion of L-leucine and β-leucine.410,412 related to the pyruvate formate-lyase of E. coli (Eq.
It was reported to be present in plants and also in the 15-37),410 class I ribonucleotide reductases, and other
human body, but the latter could not be confirmed.413 enzymes that act by homolytic mechanisms.
The interconversion of L-α-lysine and L-β-lysine is
catalyzed by a lysine 2,3-aminomutase found in certain Transfer reactions of methyl groups. The
clostridia.414-415a This enzyme also requires pyridoxal generation and utilization of methyl groups is a quan-
phosphate and catalyzes a reaction with the same titatively important aspect of the metabolism of all
stereochemistry as that of β-lysine mutase. However, cells. As we have seen (Fig. 15-18), methyl groups can
it does not contain vitamin B but depends upon be created by the reduction of one-carbon compounds
12
S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) and an iron–sulfur attached to tetrahydrofolic acid. Methyl groups of
cluster. The adenosyl group of AdoMet may function methyltetrahydrofolic acid (N5-CH THF) can then be
3
in the same manner as does the deoxyadenosyl group transferred to the sulfur atom of homocysteine to form
of the adenosylcobalamin coenzyme. In these mutases methionine (Eq. 16-43). The latter is converted to
a 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical may abstract a hydrogen S-adenosylmethionine, the nearly universal methyl
atom from the β position of a Schiff base of PLP with group donor for transmethylation reactions (Eq. 12-3).
the amino acid substrate. The radical isomerizes (Eq. In some bacteria, fungi, and higher plants, the methyl-
16-42) and then accepts a hydrogen atom back from THF-homocysteine transmethylase does not depend
the 5'-deoxyadenosine to complete the reaction. Its upon vitamin B but is a metalloenzyme with zinc at
12
the active center.416 However, human beings share
with certain strains of E. coli and other bacteria the
R CH CH COO– R CH CH COO– need for methylcobalamin.
The structure of the E. coli enzyme (Fig. 16-24)
N
N shows methylcobalamin bound in a base-off confor-
a
HC CH mation, with histidine 759 of the protein replacing
dimethylbenzimidazole in the distal coordination
P O OH P O OH position on the cobalt. This histidine is part of a
sequence Asp-X-His-X-X-Gly that is found not only in
methionine synthase but also in methylmalonyl-CoA
N CH3 b N CH3 mutase, glutamate mutase, and 2-methyleneglutarate
mutase. However, diol dehydratase lacks this sequence
and binds adenosylcobalamin with the dimethylbenz-
R CH CH COO–
imidazole–cobalt bond intact.417
N The coenzyme evidently functions in a cyclic
CH process. The cobalt alternates between the +1 and +3
oxidation states as shown in Eq. 16-43. The first indi-
P O OH cation of such a cyclic process was the report by
Weissbach that 14C-labeled methylcobalamin could
be isolated following treatment of the enzyme with
N CH3 (16-42) such methyl donors as AdoMet and methyl iodide
Figure 16-24 Stereoscopic views
of the active site of methionine
synthase from E. coli. Methylco-
balamin (black) is in the active site
with His 759 of the protein in the
distal position of the coenzyme in a
base-off conformation. The dimethyl-
benzimidole nucleotide has been
omitted for clarity. Notice the
hydrogen-bonded His 759 – D757 –
S810 triad. From Jarret et al.418a
Courtesy of R. G. Matthews.

--- Page 879 ---

876 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
+ + lating agents such as AdoMet. At the conclusion of the
H3N H H3N H
reaction in Eq. 16-44 the cobalt is in the +3 state. To be
HS COO– H3C S COO– remethylated, it must presumably be reduced to Co(II).
A second methyl group can be transferred by the same
Homocysteine
a H+ type of reaction to form (CH
3
)
2
Hg.
CH
3
Hg2+
+
Co(III) Co(I)
CH HO
3 HO
2
H
N N+ Co(III) + Co(III) +
CHHg++ H+
N N 3 (16-44)
H H
O– O b O– O
Methylation of arsenic is an important pollution
THF N5–CH –THF problem because of the widespread use of arsenic
3
compounds in insecticides and because of the presence
of arsenate in the phosphate used in household deter-
d c
Co(II) + gents.421,422 After reduction to arsenite, methylation
–
e
occurs in two steps (Eq. 16-45). Additional reduction
–
Ado-Hcy e AdoMet+ steps result in the formation of dimethylarsine, one
(16-43)
of the principal products of action of methanogenic
bacteria on arsenate. The methyl transfer is shown as
after reduction (e.g., with reduced riboflavin phosphate). occurring through CH +, with an accompanying loss of
3
The sequence parallels that of Eq. 16-31 for the labora- a proton from the substrate. However, a CH radical
3
tory synthesis of methylcobalamin. Nevertheless, the may be transferred with formation of a cobalt(II)
transmethylase demonstrates some complexities. corrinoid.423
Initially, it must be “activated” by AdoMet or methyl
i s o te d p id s e a , a a n ft d e r b , w b h u i t c h is i g t r c a y d c u le a s l l a y c c in o a rd ct i i n v g a t t e o d E . q T . h 1 i 6 s - 4 a 3 p , par- O O – 2e – HO H2O
ently happens by oxidation to a Co(II) form of the As As O – O As O –
OH
enzyme (Eq. 16-43, step c) that must be reductively HO HO Arsenite
methylated with AdoMet and reduced flavodoxin Arsenate
(stepd) to regenerate the active form.418 It is also
+CH3
possible that the methyl group is not transfer
·
red as a H+
formal CH + as pictured in Eq. 16-43 but as a CH
3 3 HO
r
c
a
o
d
b
i
a
c
l
a
a
l
m
g
i
e
n
n
t
e
o
r a
c
t
o
e
b
d
( I
b
I
y
)a
h
la
o
m
m
i
o
n
l
.
y
W
tic
h
c
a
l
t
e
e
a
v
v
e
a
r
g
t
e
h
o
e
f
m
m
e
e
c
t
h
h
a
y
n
l
i
-
sm, +CH3 H+ As
CH3
O–
a chiral methyl group is transferred from 5-methyl- O
T
ur
H
a
F
ti o
to
n .
h
41
o
9
mocysteine with overall retention of config- H3C
As
CH3
H2O
2e – Methylarsonate
Another important group of methyl transfer reac-
O–
O 4e –
tions are those from methyl corrinoids to mercury, tin,
Dimethylarsinate
arsenic, selenium, and tellurium. For example, Eq.
16-44 describes the methylation of Hg2+. These reactions 5 H+ H3C CH3
are of special interest because of the generation of toxic
2 H2O As
methyl and dimethyl mercury and dimethylarsine.
H
Notice that whereas in Eq. 16-43 the methyl group
Dimethylarsine (16-45)
is transferred as CH + by nucleophilic displacement on
3
a carbon atom, the transfer to Hg2+ in Eq. 16-44 is that
of a carbanion, CH –, with no valence change occurring Corrinoid-dependent synthesis of acetyl-CoA.
3
in the cobalt. However, it is also possible that transfer The anaerobic bacterium Clostridium thermoaceticum
occurs as a methyl radical.420 Methyl corrinoids are obtains its energy for growth by reduction of CO with
2
able to undergo this type of reaction nonenzymatically, hydrogen (Eq. 16-46). One of the CO molecules is
2
and the ability to transfer a methyl anion is a property reduced to formate which is converted via 5-methyl-THF
of methyl corrinoids not shared by other transmethy- to the methyl corrinoid 5-methoxybenzimidazolyl-

--- Page 880 ---

C. Nickel 877
cobamide. The methyl group of the latter obtained the Nobel Prize, his first reports were greeted
with skepticism and outright disbelief. The presence
4 H + 2 CO —→ CH COO– + H+ + 2 H O of two atoms of nickel in each molecule of urease435
2 2 3 2
∆G’ (pH 7) = – 94.9 kJ mol–1 (16-46) was not discovered until 1975. The metal ions had
been overlooked previously, despite the fact that the
combines with another CO to form acetyl-CoA. The absorption spectrum of the purified enzyme contains
2
process, which requires the nickel-containing carbon an absorption “tail” extending into the visible region
monoxide dehydrogenase, is discussed in Section C. with a shoulder at 425 nm and weak maxima at 725
and 1060 nm. Urease catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage
of urea to two molecules of ammonia and one of bicar-
C. Nickel bonate and is useful in the analytical determination of
urea.
It was not until the 1970s that nickel was first Jack bean urease is a trimer or hexamer of identi-
recognized as a dietary essential for animals.424– 426 cal 91-kDa subunits while that of the bacterium Kleb-
Nickel-deficient chicks grew poorly, had thickened siella has an (αβ γ ) stoichiometry. Nevertheless, the
2 2 2
legs, and developed dermatitis. Tissues of deficient enzymes are homologous and both contain the same
animals contained swollen mitochondria and swollen binickel catalytic center (Fig. 16-25).435– 437a The three-
perinuclear space suggesting a function for Ni in dimensional structure of the Klebsiellaenzyme revealed
membranes. However, doubts have been raised about that the two nickel ions are bridged by a carbamyl
the conclusions based on these experiments.427 Within group of a carbamylated lysine. Like ribulose bisphos-
tissues the nickel content ranges from 1 to 5 µg / l. phate carboxylase (Fig. 13-10), urease also requires
Some of the metal in serum is present as complexes CO for formation of the active enzyme.438 Formation
2
of low molecular mass and some is bound to serum of the metallocenter also requires four additional
albumin428 and to a specific nickel-containing protein of proteins, including a chaperonin and a nickel-binding
the macroglobulin class, known as nickeloplasmin.429 protein.438,439
Nickel is also present in plants; in some, e.g., Allysum, The mechanism of urease action is probably related
it accumulates to high concentrations.430 It is essential to those of metalloproteases such as carboxypeptidase
for legumes and possibly for all plants.431 Nickel A (Fig. 12-16) and of the zinc-dependent carbonic
uptake proteins have been identified in bacteria and
fungi.432,432a Because of its ubiquitous occurrence it is
difficult to prepare a totally Ni-free diet. The acute
H272
toxicity of orally ingested Ni(II) is low, and homeostatic D360
H
mechanisms exist in the animal body for regulating its O H H N
concentration. However, the volatile nickel carbonyl – H N NH
H O C
Ni(CO) 4 is very toxic426 and Ni from jewelry is a common H134 N H N
cause of dermatitis.428,433
N 2+ O O
In its compounds nickel usually has the +2 oxi-
Ni
dation state but the +3 and +4 states occur rarely in Ni
complexes. The Ni2+ ion contains eight 3d electrons, N NH
N
H136
a configuration that favors square-planar coordination O – O
of four ligands. However, the ion is also able to form a N
H H246
complex with six ligands and an octahedral geometry.
It has been suggested that this “ambivalence” may be HN
of biochemical significance.
Nickel is found in at least four enzymes: urease,
certainhydrogenases,methyl-CoM reductase (in its
cofactor F ) of methanogenic bacteria, and carbon
430 K217*
monoxide dehydrogenase of acetogenic and metha-
nogenic bacteria.434
Figure 16-25 The active site of urease showing the two
1. Urease Ni+ ions held by histidine side chains and bridged by a
carbamylated lysine (K217*). A bound urea molecule is
shown in green. It has been placed in an open coordination
Urease, which was first isolated from the jack bean
position on one nickel and is shown being attacked for
has a special place in biochemical history as the first
hydrolytic cleavage by a hydroxyl group bound to the other
enzyme to be crystallized. This was accomplished by nickel. Based on a structure by Jabri et al.436 and drawing by
J. B. Sumner in 1926, and although Sumner eventually Lippard.437

--- Page 881 ---

878 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
H + side chain.445,446 Fe-hydrogenases are often extremely
active and are utilized to rid organisms of an excess of
H2N NH2 H2N NH2 electrons by evolution of H . Since they may also be
C C 2
– used to acquire electrons by oxidation of H , they are
O 2
O HO – HO often described as bidirectional. Ni-hydrogenases, as
Urea well as some Fe-hydrogenases, are involved primarily
inuptake of H .447 All hydrogenases contain one or
2
NH2 NH3 more Fe – S centers in addition to the H
2
-forming
O – C NH3 catalytic center.441 Some hydrogenases are membrane
bound and are often coupled through unidentified
O H2O CO2 carriers to formate dehydrogenase (Chapter 17). In
Carbamate (16-47)
the strict anaerobes such as clostridia, hydrogenases
are linked to ferredoxins. Hydrogenases are inactivated
anhydrase (Fig. 13-1). In Fig. 16-25 one nickel ion is readily by O , which oxidizes the catalytic centers but
2
shown polarizing the carbonyl group, while the second can sometimes be reactivated by treatment with reduc-
provides a bound hydroxyl ion that serves as the ing agents.448
attacking nucleophile. A probable intermediate The 60-kDa all-iron monomeric hydrogenase I of
product is a carbamate ion (Eq. 16-47). Clostridium pasteurianum (mentioned on p. 861) contains
Urease is an essential enzyme for bacteria and ferredoxin-like Fe S clusters plus additional Fe and
4 4
other organisms that use urea as a primary source of sulfur atoms organized as a special H cluster. The EPR
nitrogen. The peptic ulcer bacterium Helicobacter spectrum of the catalytic center, recognized because the
pyloriuses urease to hydrolyze urea in order to defend spectrum is altered by the binding of carbon monoxide,
against the high acidity of the stomach.439a The enzyme is unusual. Its g values of 2.00, 2.04, and 2.10 are similar
is also present in plant leaves and may play a necessary to those of oxidized high-potential iron proteins.449 The
role in nitrogen metabolism.431 In nitrogen-fixing C. pasteurianum hydrogenase II is a 53-kDa monomer con-
legumes urea derivatives, the ureides, have an impor- taining eight Fe and eight S2– ions. These are organized
tant function (Chapter 25) but urease may not be into one ferredoxin-like Fe S cluster plus a three-Fe
4 4
involved in the catabolism of these compounds.440 cluster and one iron ion in a unique environment.449
In contrast to these iron-only hydrogenases, the
large periplasmic hydrogenase of Desulfovibrio gigas
2. Hydrogenases consists of one 28-kDa subunit and one 60-kDa sub-
unit and contains two Fe S clusters, one Fe S cluster,
4 4 3 4
Many plants, animals, and microorganisms are able and another dimetal center containing a single atom of
to evolve H by reduction of hydrogen ions (Eq. 16-48) Ni.450,451 These are seen clearly in the three-dimensional
2
or to oxidize H by the reverse of this reaction.441,442 structure depicted in Fig. 16-26. The three Fe – S clusters,
2
at 5 - to 6-nm intervals, form a chain from the external
2H+ + 2e–→ H 2 (16-48) surface to the deeply buried nickel–iron center.450–453a
A plausible pathway for transport of protons to the
Hydrogenases have been classified into two main active center can also be seen.450,451 The nickel center
types: Fe-hydrogenases, which contain iron as the also contains an atom of Fe. Four cysteine side chains
only metal,443 and Ni-hydrogenases, which contain participate in forming the Ni–Fe cluster, two of them
both iron and nickel.444 In a few Ni-hydrogenases a provide sulfur atoms that bridge between the metals
selenocysteine residue replaces a conserved cysteine while two others are ligands to Ni (Fig. 16-26).
H2C
S S CH2 Cys 530 a –S S CH2 Cys 530 H 2 b –S S CH2 Cys 530
Fe(II) Ni(III) Fe(II) Ni(II) Fe(II) Ni(II)
–
S CH2 Cys 65 e – S CH2 Cys 65 H+ H S
+
CH2 Cys 65
– H
e
–
d e
2H+ c
H+
H
+
S
S CH2 Cys 530
Fe(II) Ni(II)
H
S CH2 Cys 65
(16-49)

--- Page 882 ---

C. Nickel 879
A
Figure 16-26 (A) Stereo-
scopic view of the structure
of the Desulfovibrio gigas
hydrogenase as an α-carbon
plot. The electron density
map at the high level of
8σ is superimposed and
consists of dark spheres
representing the Fe and Ni
atoms. The iron atoms of
the two Fe S and one Fe S
4 4 3 4
clusters are seen clearly
forming a chain from the
surface of the protein to
the Ni–Fe center. (B) The B
structure of the active site
Ni–Fe pair. The two metals
are bridged by two cysteine
sulfur atoms and an uniden-
tified atom, perhaps O, and
the nickel is also coordinated
by two additional cysteine
sulfurs. Unidentified small
molecules L1, L2, and L3
are also present. From
Volbeda et al.453 Courtesy
of M. Frey.
A hydrogenase from chromatium vinosum has a similar (Fig. 16-27)455,456 similar to those of vitamin B and of
12
structure.453b There are still uncertainties about other siroheme. The tetrapyrrole ring is the most highly
nonprotein ligands such as H O.452–453a reduced in cofactor F , which functions in reduction
2 430
All of the Ni-hydrogenases display an EPR signal of methyl-CoM to methane in methanogens (Fig. 16-28).
that can be assigned to Ni(III).452 However, the active The methyl CoM reductase of Methanobacterium
enzyme from D. gigas contains Ni(II). A proposed thermoautotrophicum is a large 300-kDa protein with
mechanism452 is indicated in Eq. 16-49. Step a of this subunit composition α β γ and containing two mole-
2 2 2
equation is a reductive activation. In step b a molecule cules of bound F . The nickel in F is first thought
430 430
of H is bound as a hydride ion on Ni and a proton on to be reduced, in an activation step, to Ni(I),456a which
2
a nearby sulfur. Protonation of a second sulfur ligand may attack the methyl group of methyl-CoM homolyt-
to Ni is needed to promote the cleavage of H prior to ically to yield a methyl nickel complex and a sulfur
2
the two-step oxidation of the bound H–. One of two Ni- radical.457,458 Alkyl nickel compounds react with
containing hydrogenases of Methanobacterium thermo- protons, and in this case they would yield methane
autotrophicum contains FAD as well as Fe–S clusters.454 and would regenerate the Ni(II) form of the cofactor.
It specifically reduces the 5-deazaflavin cofactor F The CoM radical could be reduced back to free CoM.
420
(Chapter 15). A major function of this deazaflavin is High-resolution crystal structures of the enzyme
reduction of the nickel-containing cofactor F . in two inactive Ni(II) forms458 show the two F mole-
430 430
cules. Each is bound in an identical channel about 3
nm in length and extending from the surface deep into
3. Cofactor F and Methyl-Coenzyme the interior of the protein. The F lies at the bottom
430 430
M Reductase of this channel with its nickel atom coordinated with
the oxygen atom of a glutamine side chain. In one
Cofactor F is a nickel tetrapyrrole with a structure form CoM lies directly above the nickel, with its
430

--- Page 883 ---

880 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
A COOH O B R O
CH3
α
2 3
H
CH3
HN CH3 1 4
H3C
N N
H3C
N N δ Ni β
COOH
H2N C
Ni+ N N
5
O H H3C 8 CH3
N N
7
COOH
HOOC 10
H O
O C
O O R'
COOH
Tunichlorins
Cofactor F430
Figure 16-27 (A) Structure of the nickel-containing prosthetic group F as isolated in the esterified (methylated) form. From
430
Pfaltzet al.459 The “front” face, which reacts with methyl-coenzyme M, is toward the reader.458 (B) Structure of a representative
member of a family of tunichlorins isolated from marine tunicates.460 For tunichlorin R = R’ = H. Related compounds have
R’ = CH and/or R = an alkyl group with 13 – 21 carbon atoms and up to six double bonds.
3
H3C H
COO–
–HO3P
H
O
NH
O
(HTP-SH)
HTP
SH
H3C
S
SO3 – SH
SO3 –
Methyl-CoM a S
CH3
Ni(I) Ni(I)
HTP
S
CH
4
S b
CoM HTP
e S–
H SO3 2–
HTP S
S
CH3
S
HTP
S– Ni(III)
–O3S CH
4
SO3 –
S
Ni(I)
CH3
c
Figure 16-28 Proposed mechanism of action
d Ni(II) of the methane-forming coenzyme M reductase.
Based on the crystal structure.

--- Page 884 ---

C. Nickel 881
thiolate sulfur providing the sixth ligand for the
5. Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenases and
nickel. The long – SH-containing side chain of
Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenase/Acetyl-
heptanoyl threonine phosphate (HTP; also called
CoA Synthase
coenzyme B; Chapter 15, Section E) also lies within
the channel with its amino acid head group blocking
There are several bacterial carbon monoxide
the entrance. In a second crystal form the mixed
dehydrogenases that catalyze the reversible oxidation
disulfide HTP – S – S – CoM, an expected product of
of CO to CO:
the reaction (Fig. 16-28), is present in the channel.458 2
Because of the distance from the – SH group of HTP CO + H O→ CO + H+ + 2 e- (16-50a)
and the nickel atom it is clear that there must be some 2 2
motion of the methyl-CoM and that the methane CO + H O→ CO + H
formed may stay trapped in the active site until the ∆G° = – 2 38.1 kJ / 2 mol 2 (16-50b)
HTP–S–S–CoA product leaves.
A proposed mechanism for the catalytic cycle
Some bacteria use CO as both a source of energy and
based on the X-ray results as well as previous chemical
for synthesis of carbon compounds. The purple photo-
studies and EPR spectroscopy is shown in Fig. 16-28.
synthetic bacterium Rhodospirillum rubrum employs a
The substrates enter in step a. The position of the HTP,
relatively simple monomeric Ni-containing CO dehy-
with its extended side chain, is probably the same as
drogenase containing one atom of Ni and seven or
that seen in the X-ray structures of the Ni(II) complexes
eight iron atoms, apparently arranged in Fe S clusters.
but the conformation of the methyl-CoM is different. 4 4
These bacteria can grow anaerobically with CO as the
The methyl transfer in step b is reminiscent of that of
sole source of both energy and carbon.461 Some aerobic
methionine synthase (Eq. 16-43). Although the distance
bacteria oxidize CO using a molybdenum-containing
from the CoM sulfur and the HTP – SH is too great for
enzyme (Section H). However, the most studied CO
direct proton transfer between the two, as indicated
dehydrogenase is a complex enzyme that also synthe-
for step b, there are two tyrosine hydroxyls that could
sizes, reversibly, acetyl-CoA from CO and a methyl
provide a pathway for proton transfer. The region
corrin. Employed by methanogens, acetogens, and
around the surface of the nickel coenzyme is largely
sulfate-reducing bacteria, it is at the heart of the
hydrophobic and could facilitate formation of the
Wood–Ljundahl pathway of autotrophic metabolism,
thiyl radical in step c. In the structure with the bound
which is discussed further in Chapter 17.
HTP–S–S–CoM heterodisulfide an oxygen atom of the
Both oxidation of CO to CO and reduction of CO
sulfonate group of CoM is bonded tightly to the Ni(II). 2 2
to CO are important activities of CO dehydrogenase /
However, in the active Ni(I) form the nickel is nucleo-
acetyl-CoA synthase. During growth on CO, some
philic and would probably repel the sulfonate, perhaps
CO must be oxidized to CO and then reduced by the
assisting the product release.458 2
pathways of Fig. 15-22 to form a methyl-tetrahydro-
The enzyme contains five posttranslationally
pterin which can be used to form the methyl group
modified amino acids near the active site: N-methyl-
of acetyl-CoA. During growth on any other carbon
histidine, 5-methylarginine, 2-methylglutamine, 2-methyl-
compound CO must be reduced to CO to form the
cysteine,and thioglycine in a thiopeptide bond. The 2
carbonyl group of acetyl-CoA which can serve as a
latter may be the site of radical formation.458a,b
precursor to all other carbon compounds. Native CO
dehydrogenase/acetyl CoA synthase was isolated
from cells of Clostridium thermoaceticum grown in the
4. Tunichlorins
presence of radioactive 63Ni. The protein is a 310-kDa
α β oligomer. Each αβ dimer contains 2 atoms of Ni,
Nickel is found in various marine invertebrates. 2 2
1 of Zn, ~ 12 of Fe and ~ 12 sulfide ions,462– 464 which
In the tunicates (sea squirts and their relatives) it occurs
are organized into three metal clusters referred to as A,
in a fixed ratio with cobalt, suggesting a metabolic
B, and C. Each cluster contains 4 Fe atoms and clusters
role.460 A new class of nickel chelates called tunichlorins
A and C also contain 1 Ni each. Oxidation of CO occurs
have been isolated. An example is shown in Fig. 16-27B. in the β subunits, each of which contains both cluster
The function of tunichlorins is unknown but their
B, an Fe S ferredoxin-type cluster, and cluster C, where
existence suggests the possibility of unidentified 4 4
the oxidation of CO is thought to occur. Cluster C
biochemical roles for nickel.
contains 1 nickel ion as well as an Fe S cluster that
4 4
resembles that of aconitase (Fig. 13-4). Cluster A,
which is in the α subunit, also contains 1 atom of Ni
and 4 Fe ions and is probably the site of synthesis of
acetyl-CoA.
Oxidation of CO may require cooperation of the
nickel ion and the Fe S group within the C cluster.
4 4

--- Page 885 ---

882 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
– O
–H pterin such as tetrahydrofolate or, in methanogens,
OH
a b tetrahydromethanopterin or tetrahydrosarcinapterin
3+
CO M3+ C O M C (Fig. 15-17) to form a methylcorrinoid. At the A center
O
of the CO dehydrogenase a molecule of CO, which
C center may be bound to the Ni, equilibrates with the methyl
c +
H + CO group, and with acetyl-CoA. As depicted in Eq. 16-52,
2
d acetyl-Ni may be an intermediate. Other details shown
M3+ M + here are hypothetical. It is possible that the methyl
group is transferred to the Ni atom in the M cluster
–
2e (to B and X centers) (16-51) before reaction with the CO, which might be bound
to either Ni of cluster C or to Fe. This reaction of two
CO probably binds to one of these metals and is attacked transition-metal-bound ligands parallels a proposed
by a hydroxyl ion (Eq. 16-51, step b) which may be industrial process for synthesis of acetic acid from
donated by the other metal of the pair.465,465a CO and methanol and CO and involving catalysis by rhodium
2
a proton are released rapidly (step c), after which the metal and methyl iodide. It is thought that rhodium-
reduced metal center is reoxidized (step d). One elec- bound CO is inserted into bound Rh – CH to
3
tron is thought to be transferred directly to the Fe S O
4 4
cluster B and the second by an alternative route.465 A form an intermediate R h C C H . The acetyl group is
3
multienzyme complex isolated from the methanogen released as acetyl iodide which is hydrolyzed to acetic
Methanosarcina has an (αβγδε) structure, with the acid. An acetyl-nickel intermediate may be involved
6
subunits having masses of 89, 60, 50, 48, and 20 kDa, in the corresponding biological reaction of Eq. 16-52.
respectively.466 In this complex the CO dehydrogenase/ The stereochemistry of the sequence has been investi-
acetyl-CoA synthase activity appears to reside in the gated using methyl-THF containing a chiral methyl
α ε complex, the γδ complex has a tetrahydropteridine: group. Overall retention of the configuration of the
2 2
cob(I)amide–protein transferase, and the β subunit methyl group in acetyl-CoA was observed.468,469
has an acetyltransferase that binds acetyl-CoA and
transfers the acetyl group to a group on the β sub-
unit.466 D. Copper
Although the Clostridium and Methanosarcina
systems are not identical, similar mechanisms are Copper was recognized as nutritionally essential
presumably involved.467,467a To generate acetyl-CoA by 1924 and has since been found to function in many
a methyl group is first transferred from a tetrahydro- cellular proteins.470– 474 Copper is so broadly distributed
in foods that a deficiency has only
+ rarely been observed in humans.474a
H
However, animals may sometimes
CH —THF
3 receive inadequate amounts because
Corrinoid absorption of Cu2+ is antagonized by
THF Iron-sulfur
Zn2+ and because copper may be tied
protein
CH 3 up by molybdate as an inert complex.
There are copper-deficient desert areas
+
Co(III) Co(I)
of Australia where neither plants nor
animals survive. Copper-deficient
animals have bone defects, hair color
–
2e
is lacking, and hemoglobin synthesis is
impaired. Cytochrome oxidase activity
M(I)+ M(III)3+ Ni(III) C O Ni(III) C O
is low. The protein elastin of arterial
Fe(III) Fe(I) CH
H+ + CO 3 walls is poorly crosslinked and the
arteries are weak. Genetic defects in
Eq. 16-51, C cluster A cluster O
copper metabolism can have similar
reverse Possible
catalytic NNi( i 2II+I) C effects.
cycle Fe(III) CH3
An adult human ingests ~ 2 – 5 mg
HO–
M(III)3+ C O of copper per day, about 30% of which
Ni(III) is absorbed. The total body content of
Fe(III) CoA S – copper is ~ 100 mg (~ 2 x 10–4 mol / kg),
and both uptake and excretion (via the
O
bile) are regulated. Since an excess of
CoA S C CH3 copper is toxic, regulation is important.
Acetyl-CoA (16-52)

--- Page 886 ---

D. Copper 883
Because Cu2+ is the most tightly bound metal ion in proteins function as single-electron carriers within
most chelating centers (Table 6-9), almost all of the bacteria and plants. Best known is plastocyanin,
copper present in living cells is complexed with pro- which is ubiquitous in green plants and functions in
teins. Copper is transported in the blood by a 132- the electron transport chain between the light-absorbing
kDa, 1046-residue sky-blue glycoprotein called photosynthetic centers I and II of chloroplasts (Chapter
ceruloplasmin.471,475– 477 This one protein contains 23). The bacterial azurins502 are thought to carry electrons
3% of the total body copper. between cytochrome c and cytochrome oxidase.
441
Regulation of copper uptake has been studied in Amicyanin accepts electrons from the coenzyme TTQ
most detail in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Uptake of methylamine dehydrogenase of methylotrophic
of Cu2+ is similar to that of Fe3+. The same plasma bacteria and passes them to a cytochrome c (Chapter
membrane reductase system, consisting of proteins 15).168,503,504 A basic blue copper protein phytocyanin
Fre1p and Fre2p (encoded by genes FRE1 and FRE2), of uncertain function occurs in cucumber seeds.505
acts to reduce both Fe3+ and Cu2+.478– 481 These two The 10.5-kDa peptide chain of plastocyanin is
genes are controlled in part by a transcriptional acti- folded into an eight-stranded β barrel (Fig. 2-16),
vator that responds to the internal copper concentra- which contains a single copper atom. In poplar plasto-
tion.410,482,483 Similar regulation is thought to occur in cyanin, the Cu is coordinated by the side chains of
both plants484 and animals. His 37, His 87, Met 92, and Cys 84 in a tetrahedral but
The human hereditary disorders Wilson’s disease distorted toward a trigonal bipyramidal geometry.
andMenkes’ disease have provided further insight Since copper-free apoplastocyanin has essentially the
into copper metabolism.485,486 In Wilson’s disease the same structure, this geometry may be imposed by the
ceruloplasmin content is low and copper gradually protein onto the Cu2+, which usually prefers square-
accumulates to high levels in the liver and brain. In planar or tetrahedral coordination (Chapter 7).506
Menkes syndrome, there is also a low ceruloplasmin Calculations suggest that there is little or no strain and
level and an accumulation of copper in the form of that the “Franck–Condon barrier” to electron transfer
copper metallothionein.487,488 Persons with this disease is low.507,508 The three-dimensional structure and
have abnormalities of hair, arteries, and bones and die copper environment of azurin are similar to those of
in childhood of cerebral degeneration.489,490 Similar plastocyanin.509– 511 Messerschmidt et al.512 suggested
symptoms are seen in some patients with Ehlers–Danlos that the copper site in these proteins is perfectly adapted
syndrome (Box 8-E).491 Genes for the proteins that are to its function because its geometry is a compromise
defective in both Wilson’s and Menkes’ diseases have between the optimal geometries of the Cu(I) and Cu(II)
been cloned and both proteins have been identified as states between which it alternates. Stellacyanin,
P-type ATPase cation transporters (Chapter 8).492– 495c present in the Japanese lac tree and some other plants,
The two proteins must be similar in structure as indi- is a mucoprotein; the 108-residue protein is over 40%
cated by a 55% sequence identity.496 Homologous carbohydrate.513 While its spectrum resembles that
genes involved in copper homeostasis have been of plastocyanins and azurins, stellacyanin contains no
located in both yeast497 and the cyanobacterium methionine and this amino acid cannot be a ligand to
Synechococcus.498 The transporter encoded by this copper.514 Rusticyanin functions in the periplasmic
yeast gene, designated Ccc2, apparently functions to space of some chemolithotropic sulfur bacteria to transfer
export copper from the cytosol into an extracytosolic electrons from Fe2+ to cytochrome c as part of the energy-
compartment. In a similar way the Wilson and Menkes providing reaction for these organisms (Eq. 18-23).515– 517
disease proteins, which reside in the trans-Golgi network, Halocyanin functions in membranes of the archaeo-
are thought to export copper or to provide copper for bacteriumNatronobacterium,518 and aurocyanin func-
incorporation into essential proteins.493,499 The Wilson tions in green photosynthetic bacteria.519
disease protein is also found in a shortened form in The blue color of these “type 1” copper proteins is
mitochondrial membranes.492 Other proteins associated much more intense than are the well known colors of
with intracellular copper metabolism seem to be chap- the hydrated ion Cu(H O) 2+ or of the more strongly
2 4
erones for Cu(I).500– 501a absorbing Cu(NH ) 2+. The blue color of these simple
3 4
The ability of copper ions to undergo reversible complexes arises from a transition of an electron from
changes in oxidation state permits them to function in oned orbital to another within the copper atom. The
a variety of oxidation–reduction processes. Like iron, absorption is somewhat more intense in copper peptide
copper also provides sites for reaction with O , with chelates of the type shown in Eq. 6-85. However, the
2
superoxide radicals, and with nitrite ions. ~ 600 nm absorption bands of the blue proteins are an
order of magnitude more intense, as is illustrated by
the absorption spectrum of azurin (Fig. 23-8). The
1. Electron-Transferring Copper Proteins intense blue is thought to arise as a result of transfer
of electronic charge from the cysteine thiolate to the
A large group of small, intensely blue copper Cu2+ ion.520,521

--- Page 887 ---

884 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
A third type of copper center, first recognized in imidazole proton, together with a second proton from
cytochrome c oxidase (see Fig. 18-10) is called Cu or the medium and an electron from the Cu(I), would
A
purple CuA. Each copper ion is bonded to an imida- react to convert the second O – into H O . The role
2 2 2
zole and two cysteines serve as bridging ligands. The of the Zn2+ may be in part structural but it may also
two copper ions are about 0.24 nm apart, and the two serve to ensure that His 61 is protonated on the correct
Cu2+ ions together can accept a single electron from an nitrogen atom. Arg 141 may assist in binding the O –
2
external donor such as cytochrome c or azurin to give as is shown in the diagram. However, the fact that a
a half-reduced form.521a,b mutant containing leucine in place of the active site
arginine has over 10% of the activity of the native
enzyme shows that the arginine is not absolutely
2. Copper, Zinc-Superoxide Dismutase essential.529 Additional nearby positively charged
arginine and lysine side chains may provide “electro-
Although of similar topology to the blue electron- static guidance” that increases the velocity of reaction
transferring proteins, Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase, of superoxide ions.530,531 Cu, Zn-SOD is one of the
has a different function. This dimeric 153-residue fastest enzymes known.
protein has been demonstrated in the cytoplasm of In addition to the cytosolic SOD there is a longer
virtually all eukaryotic cells522 and in the periplasmic ~ 222-residue extracellular form that binds to the pro-
space of some bacteria523 where it converts superoxide teoglycans found on cell surfaces.522,527 Manganese
·
ions O – to O and H O . The enzyme, which has a SODs are found in mitochondria and in bacteria and
2 2 2 2
major protective role against oxidative damage to cells, iron SODs in plants and bacteria. They all appear
presumably functions in a manner similar to that to be important in protecting cells from superoxide
indicated in Eq. 16-27 for iron or manganese. How- radicals.522,532,533 This importance was dramatically
ever, copper cycles between Cu2+ and Cu+, alternately emphasized when it was found that a defective SOD is
accepting and donating electrons. present in persons (about 1 in 100,000) with a hereditary
The active site of cytosolic superoxide dismutase form of amylotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which
(SOD) contains both Cu2+ and Zn2+. The copper ion is is also called Lou Gehrig’s disease after the baseball
of“type 2”: nonblue and paramagnetic. It is surrounded hero who was stricken with this terrible disease of
by four imidazole groups with an irregular square motor neurons in 1939 at the age of 36.534– 536
planar geometry.524– 527 One of these imidazole groups
(that of His 61) is shared with the Zn2+, which is also
bonded to two additional imidazole groups and a side 3. Nitrite and Nitrous Oxide Reductases
chain carboxylate. The metal ions have evidently
replaced the hydrogen atom that would otherwise be Copper enzymes participate in two important
present on the imidazole of His 61 (see the following reactions catalyzed by denitrifying bacteria. Nitrite
diagram). It has been suggested, as is also indicated reductases from species of Achromobacter537,538 and
in the diagram, that when the bound superoxide Alcaligenes539– 542 are trimeric proteins543 made up of
37-kDa subunits, each of which contains one type 1
(blue) copper and one type 2 (nonblue) copper. The
Arg 141
HN first copper serves as an electron acceptor from a
small blue pseudoazurin.544,544a The second copper,
+ which is in the active site, is thought to bind to nitrite
HN N H
– throught its nitrogen atom and to reduce it to NO.
O
H H
O NO 2 – + 2H+ + e–→ NO + H 2 O (16-53)
His
His
Cu2+ N – N Zn2 + His Crystallographic studies on the 343-residue Alcaligenes
His enzyme reveal two β barrel domains with the type 1
His H + Asp copper embedded in one of them and the type 2 cop-
His 61
per in an interface between the domains. Studies of
EPR541 and ENDOR545 spectra and of various mutant
donates an electron to the Cu(II) to become O (first forms have shown that, as for other copper enzymes,
2
step of Eq. 16-27), a proton becomes attached to the the type 1 copper is an electron-transferring center,
bridging imidazole with breakage of its linkage to accepting electrons from the pseudoazurin and passing
the Cu(I). The structure of a new crystalline form of them to the type 2 copper which binds and reduces
reduced yeast SOD shows that the Cu(I) has moved nitrite.540,545a
0.1 nm away from the bridging imidazole in agreement The immediate product of nitrite reductase is NO,
with this possibility.528 In the second half reaction the which is reduced in two one-electron steps to N O,
2

--- Page 888 ---

D. Copper 885
and then to N . The second of these steps is catalyzed equal amounts of Cu2+ and Cu+ and protonated super-
2
by another copper enzyme, nitrous oxide reductase.546 oxide.
N O + 2H+ + 2e–→ N + H O (16-54) (CuO Cu)2+ + H + Cu2+ + Cu + + HO
2 2 2 2 2
(16-55)
The biological significance of these reactions is con-
sidered further in Chapters 18 and 24. The 132-kDa 5. Copper Oxidases
dimeric N O reductase from Pseudomonas stutzeri
2
contains four copper atoms per subunit.546 One of its A large group of copper-containing proteins acti-
copper centers resembles the Cu centers of cytochrome vate oxygen toward chemical reactions of dehydroge-
A
c oxidase. A second copper center consists of four nation, hydroxylation, or oxygenation. Galactose
copper ions, held by seven histidine side chains in a oxidase(Fig. 16-29), from the mushroom Polyporus, is
roughly tetrahedral array around one sulfide (S2–) ion. a dehydrogenasewhich converts the 6-hydroxymethyl
Rasmussenet al. speculate that this copper-sulfide group of galactose to an aldehyde while O is reduced
2
cluster may be an acceptor of the oxygen atoms of to H O .
2 2
N O in the formation of N .546a There is also a cyto-
2 2
chrome cd 1 type of nitrite reductase.143a R CH2OH R CHO
O2 H2O2 (16-56)
His His
–
OH
Cu
OH – His Galactose oxidase has been used frequently to label
Cu S Cu glycoproteins of external cell membrane surfaces.
His His
Exposed terminal galactosyl or N-acetylgalactosaminyl
Cu
residues are oxidized to the corresponding C-6 aldehydes
His His
and the latter are reduced under mild conditions with
tritiated sodium borohydride.553
4. Hemocyanins The single 639-residue polypeptide chain contains
one type 2 copper ion.554 Neither oxygen nor galactose
While many copper proteins are catalysts for affects the absorption spectrum of the light murky
oxidative reactions of O , hemocyanin reacts with O green enzyme, but the combination of the two does,
2 2
reversibly. This water-soluble O carrier is found in suggesting that both substrates bind to the enzyme
2
the blue blood of many molluscs and arthropods, before a reaction takes place. A side reaction releases
including snails, crabs, spiders, and scorpions. Hemo-
cyanins are large oligomers ranging in molecular mass Y495
from 450 to 13,000 kDa. Molluscan hemocyanins are
cylindrical oligomers which have a striking appearance
under the electron microscope. Simpler hemocyanins,
found in arthropods, are hexamers of 660-residue 75-kDa
subunits. Each subunit of the hemocyanin from the
H496 H661
spiny lobster is folded into three distinct domains, one
of which contains a pair of Cu(I) atoms which bind
–
O
the O . Each copper ion is held by three imidazole
2
groups without any bridging groups between them, H N
NH
the Cu–Cu distance being 0.36 – 0.46 nm.547 Octopus N N
hemocyanin has a different fold and forms oligomers
Cu2+
–
of ten subunits. However, the active sites are very O O O Y272
similar.548 The O is thought to bind between the two
2 HC
3
copper atoms. An allosteric mechanism may involve
Acetate
changes in the distance between the copper atoms.549
S
The oxygenated compound is distinctly blue with a C228
molar extinction coefficient 5 – 10 times greater than
that of cupric complexes. This fact suggests that the
Cu(I) has been oxidized to Cu(II) and that the O has
2
been reduced to the peroxide dianion O 2– in the com- Figure 16-29 Drawing of the active site of galactose oxi-
2 dase showing both the Cu(II) atom and the neighboring free
plex.550– 552 Further support for this idea comes from
radical on tyrosine 272, which has been modified by addition
the observation that treatment of oxygenated hemocy-
of the thiol of cysteine 228 and oxidation. See Halfen et al.557
anin with glacial acetic acid leads to the formation of Based on a crystal structure of Ito et al.558

--- Page 889 ---

886 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
superoxide ion and leaves the enzyme in the inactive from a cysteine residue. This structure, which is also
Cu(II) state. EPR spectroscopic observations on the the site of the organic free radical, is shown in Fig. 16-29.
enzyme were puzzling. The active enzyme shows A possible mechanism of action is portrayed in Fig.
no EPR signal but a one-electron reduction gives an 16-30. The substrate binds in step a and its – OH group
inactive form with an EPR signal that arises from is deprotonated, perhaps by transfer of H+ to the phe-
Cu(II). Experimental studies eventually pointed to the nolate oxygen of tyrosine 495 (Fig. 16-29) in step bof
presence of a second reducible center which contains Fig. 16-30. In step c a free radical hydrogen transfer
an organic free radical. In the active form this radical occurs to form a ketyl radical which is immediately
isantiferromagnetically coupled (spin-coupled) oxidized by Cu(II) in step d. In steps c and f the oxi-
giving an “EPR-silent” enzyme able to accept two dant O is converted to H O and the aldehyde product
2 2
electrons.555–557 is also released. A fungal glyoxal oxidase has similar
Another surprise was the discovery, from the X-ray characteristics.560 The galactose oxidase proenzyme is
structure,558–559 that a tyrosine side chain at the active self-processing. The Tyr-Cys cofactor arises as a result
site has been modified by addition of a thiolate group of copper-catalyzed oxidative modification via a tyrosine
free radical.560a
Several copper-containing amine oxidases561,561a
convert amines to aldehydes and H O . They also
2 2
HO contain one of the organic quinone cofactors discussed
CH R O in Chapter 15. The dimeric plasma amine oxidase
2 2
H contains a molecule of the coenzyme TPQ and one
Cu(II)2+ Cu(II)2+ O
Cu2+ per 90-kDa subunit.562–563a Whether the O binds
a 2
R only to the single atom Cu(I) or also interacts directly
O
O2
H
with a cofactor radical in step d of Eq. 15-53 is uncer-
H
O tain.562 Lysyloxidase, which is responsible for con-
version of ε-amino groups of side chains of lysine into
O
S Y272 aldehyde groups in collagen and elastin (Chapter 8)
C R
S Y272 contains coenzyme LTQ as well as Cu.564 The enzyme
H is specifically inhibited by β-aminopropionitrile (Box
HO 8-G) and its activity is decreased in genetic diseases of
2 2 f b
H+to Y495 copper metabolism. The glycerol oxidase of Asper-
gillusis a large 400 kDa protein containing one heme
H+from Y495
and two atoms of Cu.565 It converts glycerol + O into
Cu(II)2+ O Cu(II)2+ – O
glyceraldehyde and H O . Also containing copp
2
er is
2 2
O2 – R O2
H
R urate oxidase, whose action is indicated in Fig. 25-18.
H Tyrosinase catalyzes hydroxylation followed by
H
O O dehydrogenation (Eq. 16-57). First identified in mush-
H rooms, the enzyme has a widespread distribution in
S S Y272 +
H3N H
c
e –
OOC OH
Cu(I)
+ O Cu(II)2+ O – Tyrosine
R R
O2
H
d O2 H + 3N H OH
H
O O
H H – OOC OH
S Y272 S Y272 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine (dopa)
+ O
H3N H
Figure 16-30 Possible reaction cycle for catalysis of the
6–OH of D-galactose or other suitable alcohol substrate by –
OOC O
galactose oxidase. See Wachter et al.566 and Whittaker et
al.567
Dopaquinone (16-57)

--- Page 890 ---

E. Manganese 887
nature. It is present in large amounts in plant tissues is thought to procede via superoxide radical inter-
and is responsible for the darkening of cut fruits. In mediates. When substrate is added to the enzyme,
animals tyrosinase participates in the synthesis of the blue color fades and it can be shown that the copper
dihydroxyphenylalanine (dopa) and in the formation is reduced to the +1 state. The reduced enzyme then
of the black melanin pigment of skin and hair. Either reacts with O , converting it into two molecules of H O.
2 2
a lack of or inhibition of this enzyme in the melanin- Similar to ascorbate oxidase in structure and properties
producing melanocytes causes albinism (Chapter 25). are laccase, found in the latex of the Japanese lac tree
The 46-kDa monomeric tyrosinase of Neurospora and in the mushroom Polyporus, and the previously
contains a pair of spin-coupled Cu(II) ions.568,569 The discussedceruloplasmin.477 Laccase is a catalyst
structure of this copper pair (type 3 copper) has many for oxidation of phenolic compounds by a free radical
properties in common with the copper pair in hemo- mechanism involving the trinuclear copper center.577
cyanin.569a For example, in the absence of other sub- Studied by Gabriel Bertrand in the 1890s, it was one
strates, tyrosinase binds O to form “oxytyrosinase,” of the first oxidative enzymes investigated.578
2
a compound with properties resembling those of In addition to its previously mentioned role in
oxyhemocyanin and containing a bound peroxide copper transport, ceruloplasmin is an amine oxidase,
dianion.569 a superoxide dismutase, and a ferrooxidase able to
Tyrosinase is both an oxidase and a hydroxylase. catalyze the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+. Ceruloplasmin
Some other copper enzymes have only a hydroxylase contains three consecutive homologous 350-residue
function. One of the best understood of these is the sequences which may have originated from an ancestral
peptidylglycine (cid:3)-hydroxylating monoxygenase, copper oxidase gene. Like ascorbate oxidase, this blue
which catalyzes the first step of the reaction of Eq. 10- protein contains copper of the three different types.
11. The enzyme is a colorless two-copper protein but Blood clotting factors V and VIII (Fig. 12-17), and the
the copper atoms are 1.1 nm apart and do not form a iron uptake protein Fet3 (Section A,1) are also closely
binuclear center.570 Ascorbate is an essential cosubstrate, related.
with two molecules being oxidized to the semidehydro-
ascorbate radical as both coppers are reduced to Cu(I).
A ternary complex of reduced enzyme, peptide, and 6. Cytochrome c Oxidase
O is formed and reacts to give the hydroxylated
2
product.570 A related two-copper enzyme is dopamine The most studied of all copper-containing oxidases
(cid:2)-monooxygenase, which utilizes O and ascorbate is cytochrome c oxidase of mitochondria. This multi-
2
to hydroxylate dopamine to noradrenaline (Chapter subunit membrane-embedded enzyme accepts four
25).571,572 These and other types of hydroxylases are electrons from cytochrome c and uses them to reduce
compared in Chapter 18. O to 2 H O. It is also a proton pump. Its structure and
2 2
Theblue multicopper oxidases couple the oxi- functions are considered in Chapter 18. However, it is
dation of substrates to the four-electron reduction appropriate to mention here that the essential catalytic
of molecular oxygen to H O.573 In this respect they centers consist of two molecules of heme a (a and a )
2 3
resemble cytochrome c oxidase, which also contains and three Cu+ ions. In the fully oxidized enzyme two
copper. However, they do not contain iron. The best metal centers, one Cu2+ (of the two-copper center Cu )
A
known member of this group is the plant enzyme and one Fe3+ (heme a), can be detected by EPR spectro-
ascorbate oxidase, which dehydrogenates ascorbic scopy. The other Cu2+ (Cu ) and heme a exist as an
B 3
acid to dehydroascorbic acid (See Box 18-D). It is a EPR-silent exchange-coupled pair just as do the two
dimeric blue copper with identical 70-kDa subunits. copper ions of hemocyanin and of other type 3 binuclear
The three-dimensional structure revealed one type 1 copper centers.
copper ion held in a typical blue copper environment
as in plastocyanin or azurin and also a three-copper
center. In this center a pair of copper ions, each held E. Manganese
by three imidazole groups, and bridged by a µ-oxo
group as in hemerythrin (Fig. 16-20), lie 0.51 nm apart Tissues usually contain less than one part per
and 0.41– 0.44 nm away from the third copper, which million of manganese on a dry weight basis, less than
is held by two other imidazoles.574 The type 1 copper 0.01 mM in fresh tissues. This compares with a total
shows typical intense 600-nm absorption and charac- content in animal tissues of the more abundant Mg2+
teristic EPR signal, while the pair with the oxo bridge of 10 mM. A somewhat higher Mn content (3.5 ppm)
are antiferromagnetically coupled and EPR silent but is found in bone. Nevertheless, manganese is nutri-
with strong near ultraviolet light absorption (type 3 tionally essential579,580 and its deficiency leads to
copper). The additional metal ion in the trinuclear well-defined symptoms. These include ovarian and
center is a type 2 copper which lacks characteristic testicular degeneration, shortening and bowing of
spectroscopic features.575,576 Reduction of O to 2 H O legs, and other skeletal abnormalities such as the
2 2

--- Page 891 ---

888 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
“slipped tendon disease” of chicks. In Mn deficiency Manganese may function in the regulation of some
the organic matrix of bones and cartilage develops enzymes. For example, glutamine synthetase (Fig. 24-7)
poorly. The galactosamine, hexuronic acids, and in one form requires Mg2+ for activity but upon adeny-
chondroitin sulfates content of cartilage is decreased. lylation binds Mn2+ tightly.591 Nucleases and DNA
Manganese is also essential for plant growth and polymerases often show altered specificity when Mn2+
plays a unique and essential role in the photosynthetic substitutes for Mg2+. However, the significance of
reaction centers of chloroplasts. Two magnetically these differences in vivo is uncertain. Manganese is
coupled pairs of manganese ions bound in a protein mutagenic in living organisms, apparently because it
act as the O evolving center in photosynthetic system diminishes the fidelity of DNA replication.592
2
II. This function is considered in Chapter 23. An ABC A striking accumulation of Mn2+ often occurs
transporter for managanese uptake has been identified within bacterial spores (Chapter 32). Bacillus subtilus
in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis.581 absolutely requires Mn2+ for initiation of sporulation.
Manganese lies in the center of the first transition During logarithmic growth the bacteria can concentrate
series of elements. The stable Mn2+ (manganous ion) Mn2+ from 1 µM in the external medium to 0.2 mM
contains five 3d electrons in a high-spin configuration. internally; during sporulation the concentrations
The less stable Mn3+(manganic ion) appears to be of become much higher.593
importance in some enzymes and is essential to the
photosynthetic evolution of oxygen. Many enzymes
specifically require or prefer Mn2+. These include F. Chromium
galactosyl and N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases582
needed for synthesis of mucopolysaccharides (Chapter Animals deficient in chromium grow poorly
20), lactose synthetase (Eq. 20-15), and a muconate- and have a reduced life span.594– 596 They also have
lactonizing enzyme (Eq. 13-23).583 decreased “glucose tolerance,” i.e., glucose injected
Arginase, essential to the production of urea in into the blood stream is removed only half as fast as
the human body (Fig. 24-11), specifically requires it is normally.597,598 This is similar to the effect of a
Mn2+ which exists as a spin-coupled dimetal center deficiency of insulin. Fractionation of yeast led to the
with a bridging water or – OH ion. The Mn2+ may act isolation of a chromium-containing glucose tolerance
much as does the Ni2+ions of urease (Fig. 16-25).584,585 factor which appeared to be a complex of Cr3+, nico-
Pyruvate carboxylase (Eq. 14-3) contains four atoms tinic acid, and amino acids.597 The chromium in this
of tightly bound Mn2+, one for each biotin molecule material is apparently well absorbed by the body but
present. This manganese is essential for the transcar- is probably not an essential cofactor.596 Nevertheless,
boxylation step in the action of this enzyme. Either dietary supplementation with chromium appears to
Mn2+ or Mg2+ is also needed in the initial step of carboxy- improve glucose utilization, apparently by enhancing
lation of biotin (Eq. 14-5). Another Mn2+-containing the action of insulin.596 Ingestion of glucose not only
protein is the lectin concanavalin A (Chapter 4). The increases insulin levels in blood but also causes
joining of O-linked oligosaccharides to secreted glyco- increased urinary loss of chromium,599 perhaps as
proteins also seems to require manganese.586 a result of insulin-induced mobilization of stored
Manganese is a component of a “pseudocatalase” chromium.596 It has been suggested that a specific
ofLactobacillus,204 of lignin-degrading peroxidases,257,258 chromium-binding oligopeptide isolated from
and of the wine-red superoxide dismutases found in mammalian liver596,600 may be released in response
bacteria and in the mitochondria of eukaryotes.376,587 to insulin and may activate a membrane phospho-
The dimeric dismutase from E. coli has a structure tyrosine phosphatase.596
nearly identical to that of bacterial iron SOD (Fig. 16-22). Chromium concentrations in animal tissues are
The manganese ions are presumed to alternate between usually less than 2 µM but tend to be much higher in
the +3 and +2 states during catalysis (Eq. 16-27). the caudate nucleus of the brain. High concentrations
“Knockout” mice with inactivated Mn SOD genes of Cr3+ have also been found in RNA–protein com-
live no more than three weeks, indicating that this plexes.601 While several oxidation states, including +2,
enzyme is essential to life. However, mice lacking +3, and +6, are known for chromium, only Cr(III) is
CuZn SOD appear normal in most circumstances.588 found to a significant extent in tissues. The Cr(VI)
Some dioxygenases contain manganese.589 Many complex ions, chromate and dichromate, are toxic and
enzymes that require Mg2+ can utilize Mn2+ in its chronic exposure to chromate-containing dust can lead
place, a fact that has been exploited in study of the to lung cancer. Ascorbate is a principal biological
active sites of enzymes.590 The highly paramagnetic reductant of chromate and can create mutagenic Cr(V)
Mn2+ is the most useful ion for EPR studies (Box 8-C) compounds that include a Cr(V)–ascorbate–peroxo
and for investigations of paramagnetic relaxation of complex.602 However, Cr(III) compounds administered
NMR signals. Manganese can also replace Zn2+ in orally are not significantly toxic. Evidently, the Cr(VI)
some enzymes and may alter catalytic properties. compounds can cross cell membranes and be reduced

--- Page 892 ---

G. Vanadium 889
to Cr(III), which forms stable complexes with many hydrogen vanadate, HVO 2–, in trigonal bipyrimidal
4
constituents of cells including DNA.603 The use of coordination with the three oxygens in equatorial
such“exchange-inert” Cr(III) complexes of ATP in positions and a histidine in one axial position. In the
enzymology was considered in Chapter 12. crystal structure an azide (N –) ion occupies the other
3
Most forms of Cr(III) are not absorbed and uti- axial position, but it is presumably the site of interaction
lized by the body. For this reason, and because of the with peroxide.619 The structure is similar to that of
increased use of sucrose and other refined foods, a acid phosphatases inhibited by vanadate.620,621 Many
marginal human chromium deficiency may be wide- nitrogen-fixing bacteria contain genes for a vanadium-
spread.604,605 This may result not only in poor utiliza- dependent nitrogenase that is formed only if molyb-
tion of glucose but also in other effects on lipid and denum is not available.622 The nitrogenases are
protein metabolism.597 However, questions have discussed in Chapter 24.
been raised about the use of chromium picolinate as Much of current interest in vanadium stems from
a dietary supplement. High concentrations have been the discovery that vanadate (HVO 2– at pH 7) is a
4
reported to cause chromosome damage606 and there powerful inhibitor of ATPases such as the sodium
may be danger of excessive accumulation of chromium pump protein (Na+ + K+)ATPase (Chapter 8), of phos-
in the body.607 phatases,623 and of kinases.624 This can be readily
understood from comparison of the structure of phos-
phate and vanadate ions.
G. Vanadium
O O
Vanadium is a dietary essential for goats and
presumably also for human beings,427 who typically P V
HO – HO –
consume ~ 2 mg / day. However, because vanadium O O
OH OH
compounds have powerful pharmacological effects it
Phosphate Vanadate
has been difficult to establish the nutritional require-
ment for animals.427,604,607a The adult body contains
only about 0.1 mg of vanadium. Typical tissue concen- Other enzymes such as the cyclic AMP-dependent
trations are 0.1– 0.7 µM608,609 and serum concentration protein kinase are stimulated by vanadium.624 Vanadate
may be 10 nM or less. Vanadium can assume oxidation seems to inhibit most strongly those enzymes that
states ranging from +2 to +5, the vanadate ion VO 3– form a phosphoenzyme intermediate. This inhibition
4
being the predominant form of V(V) in basic solution may be diminished within cells because vanadate is
and in dilute solutions at pH 7. However, at millimolar readily reduced by glutathione and other intracellular
concentrations, V O 3–, V O 4–, and other polynuclear reductants. The resulting vanadyl ion is a much
3 9 4 12
forms predominate.610– 612 In plasma most exists as weaker inhibitor and also stimulates several meta-
metavanadate, VO –, but within cells it is reducted to bolic processes.608
2
the vanadyl cation VO2+ which is an especially stable Also of great interest is an insulin-like action of
double-bonded unit in compounds of V(IV).609 Only vanadium607a,625 and evidence that vanadium may be
at very low pH is V(III) stable. essential to proper cardiac function.626 A role in lipid
The first suggestion of a possible biochemical metabolism was suggested by the observation that in
function for vanadium came from the discovery that high doses vanadium inhibits cholesterol synthesis
vanadocytes, the green blood cells of tunicates (sea and lowers the phospholipid and cholesterol content
squirts), contain ~ 1.0 M V(III) and 1.5 – 2 M H SO .613 of blood. Vanadium is reported to inhibit development
2 4
It was proposed that a V-containing protein is an of caries by stimulating mineralization of teeth. Unlike
oxygen carrier. However, the V3+ appears not to be tungsten, vanadium does not compete with molybde-
associated with proteins612 and it does not carry O . num in the animal body.627 The sometimes dramatic
2
It may be there to poison predators.614 The vanadium- effects of vanadate as an inhibitor, activator, and meta-
accumulating species also synthesize several complex, bolic regulator are shared also by molybdate and
yellow catechol-type chelating agents (somewhat tungstate.628,629 Even greater effects are observed
similar to enterobactin; Fig. 16-1) which presumably with vanadate, molybdate, or tungstate plus H O .630
2 2
complex V(V) and perhaps also reduce it to V(III).615 The resulting pervanadate,permolybdate, and
Vanadium is also accumulated by other marine organ- pertungstate are often assumed to be monoperoxo
isms and by the mushroom Amanita muscaria. compounds, e.g., vanodyl hydroperoxide. However,
Vanadoproteins are found in most marine algae there is some uncertainty.631
and seaweed and in some lichens.616 Among these are
haloperoxidases,252,253,617–618b enzymes that are quite
different from the corresponding heme peroxidases
discussed in Section A,6. The vanadium is bound as

--- Page 893 ---

890 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
xanthine oxidase family (or molybdenum hydroxyl-
H. Molybdenum
ase family).632,641,643 Also included in the family are
aldehyde oxidoreductases from the sulfate-reducing
Long recognized as an essential element for the
Desulfovibrio gigas633 and from the tomato.644
growth of plants, molybdenum has never been directly
Two other families of molybdoenzymes are the
demonstrated as a necessary animal nutrient. Never-
sulfite oxidase family646a,b and the dimethylsulfoxide
theless, it is found in several enzymes of the human
reductase family.632,641 Nitrogenase (Chapter 24)
body, as well as in 30 or more additional enzymes of
constitutes a fourth family. Sulfite oxidase (Eq. 16-60)
bacteria and plants.632 Aldehyde oxidases,633 xanthine
is an essential human liver enzyme (see also Chapter
oxidase of liver and the related xanthine dehydro-
24).645,646
genase, catalyze the reactions of Eqs. 16-58 and 16-59
and contain molybdenum that is essential for catalytic
SO 2– + H O→ SO 2– + 2 e– + 2 H+ (16-60)
activity. Xanthine oxidase also contains two Fe S 3 2 4
2 2
clusters and bound FAD. The enzymes can also
Theassimilatory nitrate reductase (Eq. 16-61) of
fungi and green plants (Chapter 24) also belongs to
H2O 2H + the sulfite oxidase family.
O O
R C R C NO 2 + 2 e– + 2 H+→ NO – + H O (16-61)
H – OH 3 2 2
2e (16-58)
DMSO reductase reduces dimethylsulfoxide to
dimethylsulfide (Eq. 16-62) as part of the biological
oxidize xanthine further (Eq. 16-59, step b) by a repeti-
sulfur cycle.647–648d
tion of the same type of oxidation process at positions
8 and 9 to form uric acid. The much studied xanthine
(H C) S=O + 2 H+ + 2 e–→ (CH ) S (16-62)
dehydrogenase has been isolated from milk,634,635 liver, 3 2 3 2
fungi,636 and some bacteria.637 In the dehydrogenase
A number of other reductases and dehydrogenases,
NAD+ is the electron acceptor that oxidizes the bound
includingdissimilatory nitrate reductases of E. coli
FADH formed in Eq. 16-59. Xanthine dehydrogenase,
2 and of denitrifying bacteria (Chapter 18), belong to the
in the absence of thiol compounds, is converted spon-
DMSO reductase family. Other members are reductases
taneously into xanthine oxidase, probably as a result of
for biotin S-oxide,649 trimethylamine N-oxide,and
a conformational change and formation of a disulfide
polysulfides as well as formate dehydrogenases (Eq.
bridge within the protein. Treatment with thiol com-
16-63), formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase (Fig. 15-22,
pounds such as dithiothreitol reconverts the enzyme
to the dehydrogenase. Evidently in the oxidase form
HCOO– + 2 e– + 3 H+→ CO + 2 H O (16-63)
the NAD+binding site has moved away from the FAD, 2 2
permitting oxidation of FADH by O with formation
2 2 stepb), and arsenite oxidase.632 Several other molyb-
of hydrogen peroxide.635,638
doenzymes, such as pyridoxal oxidase, had not been
classified by 1996.632
O O
N
H2O 2H+
N
HN a HN 9 1. Molybdenum Ions and Coenzyme Forms
8
N H N 2e – (to FAD) O H N H N serie M s, o o l n y e b d o e f n th u e m f e is w a h m ea e v ta y l e o l f e t m h e e n s t e s c k o n n o d w tr n a n to s i b ti e on
Hypoxanthine H2O Xanthine essential to life. Its most stable oxidation state, Mo(VI),
has 4d orbitals available for coordination with anionic
b
O ligands. Coordination numbers of 4 and 6 are preferred,
H but molybdenum can accommodate up to eight ligands.
HN N 2H + + 2e – (to FAD) Most of the complexes are formed from the oxycation
O Mo(VI)O 2+. If two molecules of water are coordinated
2
with this ion, the protons are so acidic that they disso-
N
N
H (16-59) ciate completely to give Mo(VI)O 2–, the molybdate ion.
4
Other oxidation states vary from Mo(III) to Mo(V).
In these lower oxidation states, the tendency for protons
A purine hydroxylase from fungi,639 bacterial
to dissociate from coordinated ligands is less, e.g.,
quinoline and isoquinoline oxidoreductases,640,641
Mo(III)(H O) 3+ does not lose protons even in a very
and a selenium-containing nicotinic acid hydroxylase 2 6
basic medium. Molybdenum tends to form dimeric
from Clostridium barberei642 are members of the

--- Page 894 ---

H. Molybdenum 891
A O S – Mo B
H H S–
N
HN
7 H
H2N N N O
H H
O
O
P
–
O
O
O
P
HO O –
O
O
HO
C
N
N O
O
H
Molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide
Figure 16-31 (A) Structure of molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide complexed with an atom of molybdenum. (B) Stereo-
scopic ribbon drawing of the structure of one subunit of the xanthine oxidase-related aldehyde oxidoreductase from Desulfo-
vibrio gigas. Each 907-residue subunit of the homodimeric protein contains two FeS clusters visible at the top and the molybdenum–
2 2
molybdopterin coenzyme buried in the center. (C) Alpha-carbon plot of portions of the protein surrounding the molybdenum–
molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide and (at the top) the two plant-ferredoxin-like Fe S clusters. Each of these is held by a
2 2
separate structural domain of the protein. Two additional domains bind the molybdopterin coenzyme and there is also an
intermediate connecting domain. In xanthine oxidase the latter presumably has the FAD binding site which is lacking in the
D. gigas enzyme. From Romãoet al.633 Courtesy of R. Huber.
or polymeric oxygen-bridged ions. However, within (Fig. 16-31), is found in the D. gigas aldehyde oxido-
the enzymes it exists as the unique molybdenum reductase. Related coenzyme forms include nucleotides
coenzymes. TheMo-containing enzymes usually also of adenine, guanine (see chapter banner, p. 837), and
contain additional bound cofactors, including Fe– S hypoxanthine.651a,651b The structure of molybdopterin
clusters and flavin coenzymes or heme. is related to that of urothione (Fig. 15-17), a normal
The recognition that the Mo in the molybdoproteins urinary constituent. The relationship to urothione was
exists in organic cofactor forms came from studies of strengthened by the fact that several children with
mutants of Aspergillus andNeurospora.650 In 1964, severe neurological and other symptoms were found
Pateman and associates discovered mutants that lacked to lack both sulfite oxidase and xanthine dehydrogenase
both nitrate reductase and xanthine dehydrogenase. as well as the molybdenum cofactor and urinary
Later, it was shown that acid-treated molybdoenzymes urothione.646,646a,646b
released a material that would restore activity to the Study by X-ray absorption spectroscopy of the
inactived nitrate reductase from the mutant organisms. extendedX-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS)
This new coenzyme, a phosphate ester of molybdo- has provided estimates of both the nature and the
pterin (Fig. 15-17), was characterized by Rajagopalan number of the nearest neighboring atoms around the
and coworkers.650,651 A more complex form of the Mo. The EXAFS spectra of xanthine dehydrogenase
coenzyme,molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide and of nitrate reductase from Chlorellaconfirmed the

--- Page 895 ---

892 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
presence of both the Mo(VI)O unit with Mo – O dis-
2 2. Enzymatic Mechanisms
tances of 0.17 nm and two or three sulfur atoms at
distances of 0.24 nm.652,653 The two sulfur atoms were
Although several of the reactions catalyzed by
presumed to come from the molybdopterin. A pecu-
molybdoenzymes are classified as dehydrogenases,
liarity of the xanthine oxidase family is the presence
all of them except nitrogenase involve H O as either a
on the molybdenum of a “cyanolyzable” sulfur.654 2
reactant or a product. The EXAFS spectra suggest that
This is a sulfide attached to the molybdenum, which is
the Mo(VI)O unit is converted to Mo(IV)O during
present as Mo(VI)OS rather than Mo(VI)O . Reaction 2
2 reaction with a substrate Sub (Eq. 16-65, step a). Reac-
with cyanide produces thiocyanate (Eq. 16-64).
tion of the Mo(IV)O with water (step b) completes the
catalysis.
2+ – – 2+
CN SCN O
O S
a
Mo(VI) Mo(IV) [Mo(VI)O]2+ + Sub → [Mo(IV)O]2+ + Sub–O
2
(16-64)
b
[Mo(IV)O]2+ + HO→ 2H+ + 2e– + [Mo(VI)]2+O
The active site structures of the three classes of SumSub + H 2 O→ Sub–O + 2H+ + 2e– (1 2 6-65)
molybdenum-containing enzymes are compared in 2
Fig. 16-32. In the DMSO reductase family there are
two identical molybdopterin dinucleotide coenzymes
Stepa of all of these reactions can be regarded as an
complexed with one molybdenum. However, only
oxo-transfer.653
one of these appears to be functionally linked to the
To complete the reaction, two electrons must be
Fe S center.
2 2 passed from Mo(IV) to a suitable acceptor, usually an
Nitrogenase, which catalyzes the reduction of N
2 Fe– S cluster or a bound heme group. FAD is also often
to two molecules of NH , has a different molybdenum
3 present. Xanthine oxidase634,635,643,657,657a contains two
–iron cofactor (FeMo-co). It can be obtained by acid
Fe S clusters and a FAD for each of the two atoms of
denaturation of the very oxygen-labile iron–molybde- 2 2
Mo in the dimer. Since this enzyme acts like a typical
num protein of nitrogenase followed by extraction
flavin oxidase that generates H O from O , it may
with dimethylformamide.655,656 The coenzyme is a 2 2 2
be that electrons pass from Mo to the Fe – S center and
complex Fe – S – Mo cluster also containing homo-
then to the flavin. Since the EPR signal of the para-
citrate with a composition MoFe S –homocitrate
7 9 magnetic Mo(V), with its characteristic six-line hyper-
(see Fig. 24-3). Nitrogenase and this coenzyme are
fine structure, is seen during the action of xanthine
considered further in Chapter 24.
oxidase and other molybdenum-containing enzymes,
single-electron transfers are probably involved.
In bacteria such as E. coli a dissimilatory nitrate
Molybdo- reductase allows nitrate to serve as an oxidant in place
pterin of O . An oxygen atom is removed from the nitrate
S S 2
S O
to form nitrite as two electrons are accepted from a
VI VI membrane-bound cytochrome b. The nitrate reductase
S Mo S Mo
O O consists of a 139-kDa Mo-containing catalytic subunit,
OH 2 OH S Cys a 58-kDa electron-transferring subunit that contains
Xanthine oxidase Sulfite oxidase family both Fe 3 S 4 and Fe 4 S 4 centers, and a 26-kDa heme-
(molybdenum hydroxylase) containing membrane anchor subunit.658– 660 The
family assimilatory nitrate reductase of fungi, green algae,
and higher plants contains both a b-type cytochrome
(X = S, Se) X O Ser (S Cys, Se Cys) and FAD and a molybdenum coenzyme in a large
VI oligomeric complex.661– 663a
S Mo S
Formate dehydrogenases from many bacteria
contain molybdopterin and also often selenium (Table
Molybdopterin S S Molybdopterin 15-4).664,665 A membrane-bound Mo-containing formate
dinucleotide dinucleotide
dehydrogenase is produced by E. coli grown anaerobi-
cally in the presence of nitrate. Under these circum-
DMSO reductase family
stances it is coupled to nitrate reductase via an electron-
transport chain in the membranes which permits oxi-
dation of formate by nitrate (Eq. 18-26). This enzyme
Figure 16-32 Structures surrounding molybdenum in three
families of molybdoenzymes. See Hille.632 is also a multisubunit protein.665,666 Two other Mo- and
Se- containing formate dehydrogenases are produced

--- Page 896 ---

I. Tungsten 893
byE. coli.667,668 The three-dimensional structure is
3. Nutritional Need for Mo
known for one of them, formate dehydrogenase H,
a component of the anaerobic formate hydrogen lyase
The first hint of an essential role of molybdenum
complex (Eq. 17-25).669,670 The structure shows Mo
in metabolism came from the discovery that animals
held by the sulfur atoms of two molybdopterin mole-
raised on a diet deficient in molybdenum had decreased
cules, as in DMSO reductase. The Se atom of SeCys
liver xanthine oxidase activity. There is no evidence
140 is also coordinated with the Mo atom, and the
that xanthine oxidase is essential for all life, but a
imidazole of His 141 is in close proximity. When
human genetic deficiency of sulfite oxidase or of its
13C-labeled formate was oxidized in 18O-enriched
molybdopterin coenzyme can be lethal.646,646a,b The
water no 18O was found in the released product, CO .671
2 conversion of molybdate into the molybdopterin
This suggested that formate may be bound to Mo and
cofactor in E. coli depends upon at least five genes.677
dehydrogenated, with Mo(VI) being reduced to Mo(IV).
InDrosophila the addition of the cyanolyzable sulfur
The formate hydrogen might be transferred as H+ to
(Eq. 16-64) is the final step in formation of xanthine
the His 140 side chain. Mo(IV) could then be reoxidized
dehydrogenase.678 It is of interest that sulfur (S0) can
by electron transfer in two one-electron steps.670 How-
be transferred from rhodanese (see Eq. 24-45), or from
ever, recent X-ray absorption spectra suggest the presence
a related mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase679 into
in the enzyme of a selenosulfide ligand to Mo.672
the desulfo form of xanthine oxidase to generate an
Mechanistic uncertainties remain!
active enzyme.680
A flavin-dependent formate dehydrogenase sys-
Uptake of molybdate by cells of E. coli is accom-
tem found in Methanobacterium passes electrons from
plished by an ABC-type transport system.681 In some
dehydrogenation of formate to FAD and then to the
bacteria, e.g., the nitrogen-fixing Azotobacter,molybde-
deazaflavin coenzyme F .673 In contrast to these Mo-
420 num can be stored in protein-bound forms.682
containing enzymes, the formate dehydrogenase from
Pseudomonas oxalaticus, which oxidizes formate with
NAD+ (Eq. 16-66), contains neither Mo or Se.674
I. Tungsten
HCOO– + NAD+—→ CO + NADH (16-66)
2 For many years tungsten was considered only as
a potential antagonist for molybdenum. However, in
It is a large 315-kDa oligomer containing 2 FMN and
1970 growth stimulation by tungsten compounds was
~ 20 Fe / S. Formate dehydrogenases of green plants
observed for some acetogens, some methanogens, and
and yeasts are smaller 70 - to 80-kDa proteins lacking
a few hyperthermophilic bacteria. Since then over a
bound prosthetic groups.674 A key enzyme in the
dozen tungstoenzymes have been isolated.683,683a
metabolism of carbon monoxide-oxidizing bacteria
These can be classified into three categories: aldehyde
is CO oxidase, another membrane-bound molybdo-
oxidoreductases, formaldehyde oxidoreductases, and
enzyme.675– 676c It also contains selenium, which is
the single enzyme acetylene hydratase. In most cases
attached to a cysteine side chain as S-selanylcysteine.
the tungstoenzymes resemble the corresponding
A proposed reaction requence676a is shown in Eq. 16-67.
molybdoenzymes and in most instances organisms
containing a tungsten-requiring enzyme also contain
the corresponding molybdenum enzyme. However,
S O H a few hyperthermophilic archaea appear to require W
+VI 0 – and are unable to use Mo.
Mo O Se S
The aldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductase from the
C
S O Cys hyperthermophilePyrococcus furiosus was the first
O S-selanylcysteine molybdopterin-dependent enzyme for which a three-
anion
dimensional structure became available.683,684 The
O tungstoenzyme resembles that of the related molybdo-
H
Se – S enzyme (Fig. 16-31). A similar ferredoxin-dependent
Mo O
C Cys enzyme reduces glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.685
O Another member of the tungstoenzyme aldehyde
O
oxidoreductase family is carboxylic acid reductase,
H+ an enzyme found in certain acetogenic clostridia. It is
able to use reduced ferredoxin to convert unactivated
O
O carboxylic acids into aldehydes, even though Eo’ for
–
Mo Se S the acetaldehyde / acetate couple is – 0.58 V.686
C
Cys Tungsten- and sometimes Se-containing formate
O
O (16-67) dehydrogenases together with N-formylmethanofuran
dehydrogenases (Fig. 15-22, step b) form a second family.

--- Page 897 ---

894 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
Again, these appear to resemble the corresponding
Mo-dependent enzymes. The unique acetylene
hydratase from the acetylene-utilizing Pelobacter
acetylenicus catalyzes the hydration of acetylene to
acetaldehyde.687
H– C ≡ C – H + H O→ H C– CHO (16-68)
2 3
InThermotoga maritima, the most thermophilic organism
known, tungsten promotes synthesis of an Fe-contain-
ing hydrogenase as well as some other enzymes but
seems to have a regulatory rather than a structural
role.688
References
1. Ochiai, E. I. (1977) Bioinorganic Chemistry. An 13. Newton, S. M. C., Allen, J. S., Cao, Z., Qi, Z., 33. Radisky, D., and Kaplan, J. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.
Introduction, Allyn and Bacon, Boston Jiang, X., Sprencel, C., Igo, J. D., Foster, S. B., 274, 4481–4484
2. Fraústo da Silva, J. J. R., and Williams, R. J. P. Payne, M. A., and Klebba, P. E. (1997) Proc. 34. Stearman, R., Yuan, D. S., Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y.,
(1991)The Biological Chemistry of the Elements: Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 4560–4565 Klausner, R. D., and Dancis, A. (1996) Science
The Inorganic Chemistry of Life, Clarendon 14. Persmark, M., Expert, D., and Neilands, J. B. 271, 1552–1557
Press, Oxford (1989)J. Biol. Chem.264, 3187–3193 35. Hassett, R. F., Romeo, A. M., and Kosman, D.
3. Lippard, S. J., and Berg, J. M. (1994) Principles 15. Khalil-Rizvi, S., Toth, S. I., van der Helm, D., J. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 7628–7636
of Bioinorganic Chemistry, Univ. Science Books, Vidavsky, I., and Gross, M. L. (1997) 36. Mukhopadhyay, C., Attieh, Z. K., and Fox, P.
Mill Valley, California Biochemistry36, 4163–4171 L. (1998) Science279, 714–717
4. Holm, R. H., Kennepohl, P., and Solomon, E. I. 16. Wong, G. B., Kappel, M. J., Raymond, K. N., 37. Li, L., and Kaplan, J. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
(1996)Chem. Rev.96, 2239 – 2314 Matzanke, B., and Winkelmann, G. (1983) J. 28485–28493
5. Neilands, J. B., ed. (1974) Microbial Iron Am. Chem. Soc.105, 810–815 37a. Lange, H., Kispal, G., and Lill, R. (1999) J. Biol.
Metabolism, Academic Press, New York 17. Shanzer, A., Libman, J., Lifson, S., and Felder, Chem.274, 18989–18996
6. Jacobs, A., and Woodwood, M., eds. (1974) C. E. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc.108, 7609–7619 37b. Urbanowski, J. L., and Piper, R. C. (1999) J.
Iron in Biochemistry and Medicine, Academic 18. Reid, R. T., Live, D. H., Faulkner, D. J., and Biol. Chem.274, 38061–38070
Press, New York Butler, A. (1993) Nature (London)366, 455–458 38. Octave, J.-N., Schneider, Y.-J., Trouet, A., and
7. Neilands, J. B. (1973) in Inorganic Biochemistry, 19. Llinás, M., Wilson, D. M., and Neilands, J. B. Crichton, R. R. (1983) Trends Biochem. Sci.8,
Vol. 1 (Eichhorn, G. L., ed), pp. 167–202, (1973)Biochemistry12, 3836–3843 217–222
Elsevier, Amsterdam 20. Eng-Wilmot, D. L., and van der Helm, D. 39. Conrad, M. E., Umbreit, J. N., Moore, E. G.,
8. Bergeron, R. J. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, (1980)J. Am. Chem. Soc.102, 7719–7725 Peterson, R. D. A., and Jones, M. B. (1990) J.
133–136 21. Cox, C. D., Rinehart, K. L., Jr., Moore, M. L., Biol. Chem.265, 5273–5279
9. Neilands, J. B. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 26723– and Cook, J. C., Jr. (1981) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 40. Ponka, P., Schulman, H. M., Woodworth, R. C.,
26726 U.S.A.78, 4256–4260 and Richter, G. W., eds. (1990) Iron Transport
10. Sakaitani, M., Rusnak, F., Quinn, N. R., Tu, C., 22. Neilands, J. B. (1952) J. Am. Chem. Soc.74, and Storage, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida
Frigo, T. B., Berchtold, G. A., and Walsh, C. T. 4846–4847 41. Yu, J., and Wessling-Resnick, M. (1998) J. Biol.
(1990)Biochemistry29, 6789–6798 23. Braun, V. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 75–78 Chem.273, 6909–6915
11. Harris, W. R., Carrano, C. J., Cooper, S. R., 24. Letendre, E. D. (1985) Trends Biochem. Sci.10, 42. Gunshin, H., Mackenzie, B., Berger, U. V.,
Sofen, S. R., Avdeef, A. E., McArdle, J. V., and 166–168 Gunshin, Y., Romero, M. F., Boron, W. F.,
Raymond, K. N. (1979) J. Am. Chem. Soc.101, 25. Köster, W., and Braun, V. (1990) J. Biol. Chem. Nussberger, S., Gollan, J. L., and Hediger, M.
6097–6104 265, 21407–21410 A. (1997) Nature (London)388, 482–488
11a. Ferguson, A. D., Hofmann, E., Coulton, J. W., 26. Jiang, X., Payne, M. A., Cao, Z., Foster, S. B., 43. Toth, I., Rogers, J. T., McPhee, J. A., Elliott, S.
Diederichs, K., and Welte, W. (1998) Science Feix, J. B., Newton, S. M. C., and Klebba, P. E. M., Abramson, S. L., and Bridges, K. R. (1995)
282, 2215–2220 (1997)Science276, 1261–1264 J. Biol. Chem.270, 2846–2852
11b. Braun, V., and Killmann, H. (1999) Trends 27. Coy, M., and Neilands, J. B. (1991) Biochemistry 44. Finch, C. A., and Huebers, H. (1982) N. Engl.
Biochem. Sci.24, 104–109 30, 8201–8210 J. Med.306, 1520–1528
11c. Stintzi, A., Barnes, C., Xu, J., and Raymond, 28. Kammler, M., Schoin, C., and Hantke, D. 45. Scrimshaw, N. S. (1991) Sci. Am.265(Oct), 46–52
K. N. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, (1993)J. Bacteriol.175, 6212–6219 46. Kaplan, J., and Kushner, J. P. (2000) Nature
10691–10696 29. Dix, D. R., Bridgham, J. T., Broderius, M. A., (London)403, 711,713
11d. Cohen, S. M., Meyer, M., and Raymond, K. N. Byersdorfer, C. A., and Eide, D. J. (1994) J. 46a. Kühn, L. C. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci.24,
(1998)J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 6277–6286 Biol. Chem.269, 26092–26099 164–166
11e. Adrait, A., Jacquamet, L., Le Pape, L., 30. Kaplan, J., and O’Halloran, T. V. (1996) Science 46b. Attieh, Z. K., Mukhopadhyay, C. K., Seshadri,
Gonzalez de Peredo, A., Aberdam, D., 271, 1510–1512 V., Tripoulas, N. A., and Fox, P. L. (1999) J. Biol.
Hazemann, J.-L., Latour, J.-M., and Michaud- 31. Dix, D., Bridgham, J., Broderius, M., and Eide, Chem.274, 1116–1123
Soret, I. (1999) Biochemistry38, 6248–6260 D. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 11770–11777 47. Gordeuk, V., Thuma, P., Brittenham, G.,
12. Neilands, J. B., Erickson, T. J., and Rastetter, 32. de Silva, D., Davis-Kaplan, S., Fergestad, J., McLaren, C., Parry, D., Backenstose, A.,
W. H. (1981) J. Biol. Chem.256, 3831–3832 and Kaplan, J. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 14208– Biemba, G., Msiska, R., Holmes, L., McKinley,
14213 E., Vargas, L., Gilkeson, R., and Poltera, A. A.
(1992)N. Engl. J. Med.327, 1518–1521

--- Page 898 ---

895
References
48. Faller, B., and Nick, H. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 70. Bauminger, E. R., Treffry, A., Quail, M. A., 97. Takano, T., Kallei, O. B., Swanson, R., and
116, 3860–3865 Zhao, Z., Nowik, I., and Harrison, P. M. (1999) Dickerson, R. E. (1973) J. Biol. Chem.248,
49. Baker, E. N., Rumball, S. V., and Anderson, B. Biochemistry38, 7791–7802 5234–5255
F. (1987) Trends Biochem. Sci.12, 350–353 71. Yang, X., Chen-Barrett, Y., Arosio, P., and 97a. Sebban-Kreuzer, C., Blackledge, M., Dolla, A.,
50. Welch, S. (1992) Transferrin: The Iron Carrier, Chasteen, N. D. (1998) Biochemistry37, 9743– Marion, D., and Guerlesquin, F. (1998)
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 9750 Biochemistry37, 8331–8340
51. Baker, H. M., Anderson, B. F., Brodie, A. M., 72. Pereira, A. S., Small, W., Krebs, C., Tavares, P., 97b. Dolla, A., Arnoux, P., Protasevich, I.,
Shongwe, M. S., Smith, C. A., and Baker, E. N. Edmondson, D. E., Theil, E. C., and Huynh, B. Lobachov, V., Brugna, M., Giudici-Orticoni,
(1996)Biochemistry35, 9007–9013 H. (1998) Biochemistry37, 9871–9876 M. T., Haser, R., Czjzek, M., Makarov, A., and
51a. Sharma, A. K., Paramasivam, M., Srinivasan, 72a. Hwang, J., Krebs, C., Huynh, B. H., Bruschi, M. (1999) Biochemistry38, 33–41
A., Yadav, M. P., and Singh, T. P. (1998) J. Mol. Edmondson, D. E., Theil, E. C., and Penner- 98. Margoliash, E., and Frohwirt, N. (1959)
Biol.289, 303–317 Hahn, J. E. (2000) Science287, 122–125 Biochem. J.71, 570–572
51b. Peterson, N. A., Anderson, B. F., Jameson, G. 73. Treffry, A., Zhao, Z., Quail, M. A., Guest, J. R., 99. Margoliash, E., and Bosshard, H. A. (1983)
B., Tweedie, J. W., and Baker, E. N. (2000) and Harrison, P. M. (1997) Biochemistry36, Trends Biochem. Sci.8, 316–320
Biochemistry39, 6625–6633 432–441 100. Poerio, E., Parr, G. R., and Taniuchi, H. (1986)
51c. Bou Abdallah, F., and El Hage Chahine, J.-M. 74. Bourne, P. E., Harrison, P. M., Rice, D. W., J. Biol. Chem.261, 10976–10989
(2000)J. Mol. Biol.303, 255 – 266 Smith, J. M. A., and Stansfield, R. F. D. (1982) 101. Salemme, F. R., Kraut, J., and Kamen, M. D.
52. Kurokawa, H., Mikami, B., and Hirose, M. inThe Biochemistry and Physiology of Iron (1973)J. Biol. Chem.248, 7701–7716
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.254, 196–207 (Saltman, P., and Hegenauer, J., eds), pp. 102. Almassy, R. J., and Dickerson, R. E. (1978)
52a. Mizutani, K., Yamashita, H., Mikami, B., and 427–, Elsevier North Holland, Amsterdam Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.75, 2674–2678
Hirose, M. (2000) Biochemistry39, 3258–3265 75. Bridges, K. R., and Hoffman, K. E. (1986) J. 102a.Benini, S., González, A., Rypniewski, W. R.,
53. Moore, S. A., Anderson, B. F., Groom, C. R., Biol. Chem.261, 14273–14277 Wilson, K. S., Van Beeumen, J. J., and Ciurli, S.
Haridas, M., and Baker, E. N. (1997) J. Mol. 76. Medlock, A. E., and Dailey, H. A. (2000) (2000)Biochemistry39, 13115–13126
Biol.274, 222–236 Biochemistry39, 7461–7467 103. Sogabe, S., and Miki, K. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.
54. Bailey, S., Evans, R. W., Garratt, R. C., Gorinsky, 76a. Franco, R., Ma, J.-G., Lu, Y., Ferreira, G. C., 252, 235–247
B., Hasnain, S., Horsburgh, C., Jhoti, H., and Shelnutt, J. A. (2000) Biochemistry39, 104. Simões, P., Matias, P. M., Morais, J., Wilson,
Lindley, P. F., Mydin, A., Sarra, R., and Watson, 2517–2529 K., Dauter, Z., Carrondo, M. A., (1998)
J. L. (1988) Biochemistry27, 5804–5812 76b. Lecerof, D., Fodje, M., Hansson, A., Hansson, Inorganic Chimica Acta273, 213–224
54a. He, Q.-Y., Mason, A. B., Tam, B. M., M., and Al-Karadaghi, S. (2000) J. Mol. Biol. 105. Sczekan, S. R., and Joshi, J. G. (1987) J. Biol.
MacGillivray, R. T. A., and Woodworth, R. C. 297, 221–232 Chem.262, 13780–13788
(1999)Biochemistry38, 9704–9711 77. Eaton, S. S., and Eaton, G. R. (1977) J. Am. Chem. 106. Weber, P. C. (1982) Biochemistry21, 5116–5119
55. Randell, E. W., Parkes, J. G., Olivieri, N. F., Soc.99, 1601–1604 107. La Mar, G. N., Jackson, J. T., Dugad, L. B.,
and Templeton, D. M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 78. Crossley, M. J., Harding, M. M., and Sternhell, Cusanovich, M. A., and Bartsch, R. G. (1990) J.
16046–16053 S. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc.108, 3608–3613 Biol. Chem.265, 16173–16180
56. Grossmann, J. G., Mason, A. B., Woodworth, 78a. Braun, J., Schwesinger, R., Williams, P. G., 108. Ren, Z., Meyer, T., and McRee, D. E. (1993) J.
R. C., Neu, M., Lindley, P. F., and Hasnain, S. Morimoto, H., Wemmer, D. E., and Limbach, Mol. Biol.234, 433–445
S. (1993) J. Mol. Biol.231, 554–558 H.-H. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 11101–11110 109. Weber, P. C., Salemme, F. R., Mathews, F. S.,
57. Zak, O., Tam, B., MacGillivray, R. T. A., and 78b. Treibs, A. (1979) Trends Biochem. Sci.4, 71–72 and Bethge, P. H. (1981) J. Biol. Chem.256,
Aisen, P. (1997) Biochemistry36, 11036–11043 79. Wu, W., Chang, C. K., Varotsis, C., Babcock, 7702–7704
58. Zak, O., Aisen, P., Crawley, J. B., Joannou, C. G. T., Puustinen, A., and Wikström, M. (1992) 110. Hamada, K., Bethge, P. H., and Mathews, F. S.
L., Patel, K. J., Rafiq, M., and Evans, R. W. J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 1182–1187 (1995)J. Mol. Biol.247, 947–962
(1995)Biochemistry34, 14428–14434 80. Sone, N., Ogura, T., Noguchi, S., and 111. Huang, D., Everly, R. M., Cheng, R. H.,
59. Mecklenburg, S. L., Donohoe, R. J., and Olah, Kitagawa, T. (1994) Biochemistry33, 849–855 Heymann, J. B., Schägger, H., Sled, V.,
G. A. (1997) J. Mol. Biol.270, 739–750 81. Fenna, R., Zeng, J., and Davey, C. (1995) Arch. Ohnishi, T., Baker, T. S., and Cramer, W. A.
60. Fleming, M. D., Romano, M. A., Su, M. A., Biochem. Biophys.316, 653–656 (1994)Biochemistry33, 4401–4409
Garrick, L. M., Garrick, M. D., and Andrews, 82. Taylor, K. L., Strobel, F., Yue, K. T., Ram, P., 112. Prince, R. C., and George, G. N. (1995) Trends
N. C. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, Pohl, J., Woods, A. S., and Kinkade, J. M., Jr. Biochem. Sci.20, 217–218
1148–1153 (1995)Arch. Biochem. Biophys.316, 635–642 113. Higuchi, Y., Bando, S., Kusunoki, M.,
61. Theil, E. C. (1987) Ann. Rev. Biochem.56, 289– 83. Callahan, P. M., and Babcock, G. T. (1983) Matsurura, Y., Yasuska, N., Kakuda, M.,
315 Biochemistry22, 452–461 Yamanaka, T., Yagi, T., and Inokuchi, H.
62. Crichton, R. R. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 84. Petke, J. D., and Maggiora, G. M. (1984) J. Am. (1981)J. Biochem.89, 1659–1662
283–286 Chem. Soc.106, 3129–3133 114. Bruschi, M., Woudstra, M., Guigliarelli, B.,
63. Trikha, J., Theil, E. C., and Allewell, N. M. 85. Anraku, Y., and Gennis, R. B. (1987) Trends Asso, M., Lojou, E., Retillot, Y., and Abergel,
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.248, 949–967 Biochem. Sci.12, 262–266 C. (1997) Biochemistry36, 10601–10608
64. Hempstead, P. D., Yewdall, S. J., Fernie, A. R., 86. Margoliash, E., and Schejter, H. (1984) Trends 115. Czjzek, M., Payan, F., Guerlesquin, F.,
Lawson, D. M., Artymiuk, P. J., Rice, D. W., Biochem. Sci.9, 364–367 Bruschi, M., and Haser, R. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.
Ford, G. C., and Harrison, P. M. (1997) J. Mol. 87. Sotiriou, C., and Chang, C. K. (1988) J. Am. 243, 653–667
Biol.268, 424–448 Chem. Soc.110, 2264–2270 116. Liu, M.-C., and Peck, H. D., Jr. (1981) J. Biol.
65. Crichton, R. R., Soruco, J.-A., Roland, F., 88. Timkovich, R., Cork, M. S., and Taylor, P. V. Chem.256, 13159–13164
Michaux, M.-A., Gallois, B., Précigoux, G., (1984)J. Biol. Chem.259, 15089–15093 117. Banci, L., Bertini, I., Bruschi, M.,
Mahy, J.-P., and Mansuy, D. (1997) Biochemistry 89. Kaufman, J., Spicer, L. D., and Siegel, L. M. Sompornpisut, P., and Turano, P. (1996) Proc.
36, 15049–15054 (1993)Biochemistry32, 2853–2867 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 14396–14400
66. Watt, G. D., Frankel, R. B., Papaefthymiou, G. 90. Matthews, J. C., Timkovich, R., Liu, M.-Y., and 118. Jenney, F. E., Jr., Prince, R. C., and Daldal, F.
C., Spartalian, K., and Stiefel, E. I. (1986) Le Gall, J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 5248–5251 (1994)Biochemistry33, 2496–2502
Biochemistry25, 4330–4336 91. Chang, C. K., Timkovich, R., and Wu, W. 119. Menin, L., Schoepp, B., Garcia, D., Parot, P.,
67. Garg, R. P., Vargo, C. J., Cui, X., and Kurtz, D. (1986)Biochemistry25, 8447–8453 and Verméglio, A. (1997) Biochemistry36,
M., Jr. (1996) Biochemistry35, 6297–6301 92. Mylrajan, M., Andersson, L. A., Loehr, T. M., 12175–12182
67a. Romäo, C. V., Regalla, M., Xavier, A. V., Wu, W., and Chang, C. K. (1991) J. Am. Chem. 120. Menin, L., Schoepp, B., Parot, P., and
Teixeira, M., Liu, M.-Y., and Le Gall, J. (2000) Soc.113, 5000–5005 Verméglio, A. (1997) Biochemistry36, 12183–
Biochemistry39, 6841–6849 93. Meyer, T. E., and Kamen, M. D. (1982) Adv. 12188
68. Dickey, L. F., Sreedharan, S., Theil, E. C., Prot. Chem.35, 105–212 121. Adir, N., Axelrod, H. L., Beroza, P., Isaacson,
Didsbury, J. R., Wang, H.-H., and Kaufman, R. 94. Margoliash, E., and Schejter, A. (1984) Trends R. A., Rongey, S. H., Okamura, M. Y., and
E. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 7901–7907 Biochem. Sci.9, 364–367 Feher, G. (1996) Biochemistry35, 2535–2547
69. Sayers, D. E., Theil, E. C., and Rennick, F. J. 95. Dickerson, R. E., and Timkovich, R. (1975) in 122. Kerfeld, C. A., Anwar, H. P., Interrante, R.,
(1983)J. Biol. Chem.258, 14076–14079 The Enzymes, 3rd ed., Vol. 11 (Boyer, P. D., ed), Merchant, S., and Yeates, T. O. (1995) J. Mol.
69a. Johnson, J. L., Cannon, M., Watt, R. K., Frankel, pp. 397–547, Academic Press, New York Biol.250, 627–647
R. B., and Watt, G. D. (1999) Biochemistry38, 96. Dickerson, R. E. (1972) Sci. Am.226(Apr), 123. Gao, F., Qin, H., Simpson, M. C., Shelnutt, J.
6706–6713 58–72 A., Knaff, D. B., and Ondrias, M. R. (1996)
Biochemistry35, 12812–12819

--- Page 899 ---

896 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
References
124. Okkels, J. S., Kjaer, B., Hansson, Ö., Svendsen, 154. Mayo, S. L., Ellis, W. R., Jr., Crutchley, R. J., 184. McMahon, M. T., deDios, A. C., Godbout, N.,
I., Møller, B. L., and Scheller, H. V. (1992) J. and Gray, H. B. (1986) Science233, 948–952 Salzmann, R., Laws, D. D., Le, H., Havlin, R.
Biol. Chem.267, 21139–21145 155. Wuttke, D. S., Bjerrum, M. J., Winkler, J. R., H., and Oldfield, E. (1998) J. Am.
125. Link, T. A., Hatzfeld, O. M., Unalkat, P., and Gray, H. B. (1992) Science256, 1007–1009 Chem. Soc.120, 4784–4797
Shergill, J. K., Cammack, R., and Mason, J. R. 156. Banci, L., Bertini, I., De la Rosa, M. A., 185. Collman, J. P., Gagne, R. R., Reed, C. A.,
(1996)Biochemistry35, 7546–7552 Koulougliotis, D., Navarro, J. A., and Walter, Halbert, T. R., Lang, G., and Robinson, W. T.
126. Xia, D., Yu, C.-A., Kim, H., Xia, J.-Z., O. (1998) Biochemistry37, 4831–4843 (1975)J. Am. Chem. Soc.97, 1427–1439
Kachurin, A. M., Zhang, L., Yu, L., and 157. Moreira, I., Sun, J., Cho, M. O.-K., Wishart, J. 186. Hoard, J. L. (1971) Science174, 1295–1302
Deisenhofer, J. (1997) Science277, 60–66 F., and Isied, S. S. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, 187. Fermi, G., Perutz, M. F., and Shulman, R. G.
127. von Jagow, G., and Sebald, W. (1980) Ann. 8396–8397 (1987)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.84, 6167–6168
Rev. Biochem.49, 281–314 158. Ahmed, A. J., and Millett, F. (1981) J. Biol. 188. Klotz, I. M., Klippenstein, G. L., and
128. Kiel, J. L. (1995) Type-B Cytochromes: Sensors Chem.256, 1611–1615 Hendrickson, W. A. (1976) Science192, 335–344
and Switches, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida 159. Koppenol, W. H., and Margoliash, E. (1982) J. 189. Dou, T., Admiraal, S. J., Ikeda-Saito, M.,
129. Mathews, F. S., Levine, M., and Argos, P. Biol. Chem.257, 4426–4437 Krzywda, S., Wilkinson, A. J., Li, T., Olson, J.
(1972)J. Mol. Biol.64, 449–464 160. Hahm, S., Miller, M. A., Geren, L., Kraut, J., S., Prince, R. C., Pickering, I. J., and George,
129a.Kostanjevecki, V., Leys, D., Van Driessche, G., Durham, B., and Millett, F. (1994) Biochemistry G. N. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 15993–16001
Meyer, T. E., Cusanovich, M. A., Fischer, U., 33, 1473–1480 190. Shiro, Y., Iizuka, T., Marubayashi, K., Ogura,
Guisez, Y., and Van Beeumen, J. (1999) J. Biol. 161. Willie, A., Stayton, P. S., Sligar, S. G., Durham, T., Kitagawa, T., Balasubramanian, S., and
Chem.274, 35614–35620 B., and Millett, F. (1992) Biochemistry31, 7237– Boxer, S. G. (1994) Biochemistry33, 14986–14992
130. Vergères, G., Ramsden, J., and Waskell, L. 7242 191. Kaminaka, S., Takizawa, H., Handa, T.,
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 3414–3422 162. Qin, L., and Kostic, N. M. (1994) Biochemistry Kihara, H., and Kitagawa, T. (1992)
131. Nagi, M., Cook, L., Prasad, M. R., and Cinti, 33, 12592–12599 Biochemistry31, 6997–7002
D. L. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 14823–14828 163. Liang, N., Mauk, A. G., Pielak, G. J., Johnson, 192. Zhang, J.-H., and Kurtz, D. M., Jr. (1991)
132. Nishida, H., Inaka, K., Yamanaka, M., Kaida, J. A., Smith, M., and Hoffman, B. M. (1988) Biochemistry30, 9121–9125
S., Kobayashi, K., and Miki, K. (1995) Science240, 311–314 193. Lukat, G. S., Kurtz, D. M. J., Shiemke, A. K.,
Biochemistry34, 2763–2767 164. Pelletier, H., and Kraut, J. (1992) Science258, Loehr, T. M., and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1984)
133. Lindqvist, Y., Brändén, C.-I., Mathews, F. S., 1748–1755 Biochemistry23, 6416–6422
and Lederer, F. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, 3198– 165. Miller, M. A., Vitello, L., and Erman, J. E. 194. Stenkamp, R. E., Sieker, L. C., Jensen, L. H.,
3207 (1995)Biochemistry34, 12048–12058 McCallum, J. D., and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1985)
134. Guiard, B., and Lederer, F. (1979) J. Mol. Biol. 166. Mei, H., Wang, K., Peffer, N., Weatherly, G., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 713–716
135, 639–650 Cohen, D. S., Miller, M., Pielak, G., Durham, 194a.Dunford, H. B. (2000) Heme Peroxidases, Wiley-
135. Garrett, R. M., and Rajagopalan, K. V. (1996) B., and Millett, F. (1999) Biochemistry38, VCH, New York
J. Biol. Chem.271, 7387–7391 6846–6854 194b.Maté, M. J., Zamocky, M., Nykyri, L. M.,
136. Tegoni, M., Begotti, S., and Cambillau, C. 167. Falzon, L., and Davidson, V. L. (1996) Herzog, C., Alzari, P. M., Betzel, C., Koller, F.,
(1995)Biochemistry34, 9840–9850 Biochemistry35, 12111–12118 and Fita, I. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.268, 135–149
137. Weber, P. C., Salemme, F. R., Mathews, F. C., 168. Merli, A., Brodersen, D. E., Morini, B., Chen, 195. Shaffer, J. B., Sutton, R. B., and Bewley, G. C.
and Bethge, P. H. (1981) J. Biol. Chem.257, Z.-w, Durley, R. C. E., Mathews, F. S., (1987)J. Biol. Chem.262, 12908–12911
7702–7704 Davidson, V. L., and Rossi, G. L. (1996) J. Biol. 196. Eaton, J. W., and Ma, M. (1995) in The
138. Yu, L., Wei, Y.-Y., Usui, S., and Yu, C.-A. (1992) Chem.271, 9177–9180 Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited
J. Biol. Chem.267, 24508–24515 169. Mutz, M. W., McLendon, G. L., Wishart, J. F., Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 2 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet,
139. Knaff, D. B. (1990) Trends Biochem. Sci.15, Gaillard, E. R., and Corin, A. F. (1996) Proc. A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 2371–
289–291 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 9521–9526 2383, McGraw-Hill, New York
140. Jalukar, V., Kelley, P. M., and Njus, D. (1991) 169a.Castleman, A. W., Jr., Zhong, Q., and Hurley, 197. Bravo, J., Fita, I., Ferrer, J. C., Ens, W., Hillar,
J. Biol. Chem.266, 6878–6882 S. M. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, A., Switala, J., and Loewen, P. C. (1997)
141. Kita, K., Konishi, K., and Anraku, Y. (1984) 4219–4220 Protein Sci.6, 1016–1023
J. Biol. Chem.259, 3368–3374 170. Daizadeh, I., Medvedev, E. S., and 198. Fita, I., and Rossmann, M. G. (1985) J. Mol.
142. Nakamura, K., Yamaki, M., Sarada, M., Stuchebrukhov, A. A. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Biol.185, 21–37
Nakayama, S., Vibat, C. R. T., Gennis, R. B., Sci. U.S.A.94, 3703–3708 198a.Putnam, C. D., Arvai, A. S., Bourne, Y., and
Nakayashiki, T., Inokuchi, H., Kojima, S., and 171. Langen, R., Chang, I.-J., Germanas, J. P., Tainer, J. A. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.296, 295–309
Kita, K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 521–527 Richards, J. H., Winkler, J. R., and Gray, H. B. 199. Vainshtein, B. K., Melik-Adamyan, W. R.,
143. Yang, X., Yu, L., and Yu, C.-A. (1997) J. Biol. (1995)Science268, 1733–1735 Barynin, V. V., Vagin, A. A., and Grebenko, A.
Chem.272, 9683–9689 172. Bishop, G. R., and Davidson, V. L. (1997) I. (1981) Nature (London)293, 411–412
143a.Ranghino, G., Scorza, E., Sjögren, T., Williams, Biochemistry36, 13586–13592 200. Fita, I., and Rossmann, M. G. (1985) Proc. Natl.
P. A., Ricci, M., and Hajdu, J. (2000) Biochemistry 173. Ivkovic-Jensen, M. M., and Kostic, N. M. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.82, 1604–1608
39, 10958–10966 (1997)Biochemistry36, 8135–8144 201. Kirkman, H. N., Rolfo, M., Ferraris, A. M.,
144. Gray, H. B., and Winkler, J. R. (1996) Ann. Rev. 174. Ingraham, L. L. (1966) Comprehensive and Gaetani, G. F. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274,
Biochem.65, 537–561 Biochemistry14, 424–446 13908–13914
145. Farver, O., and Pecht, I. (1991) FASEB J.5, 175. Pauling, L. (1948) The Nature of the Chemical 202. Gouet, P., Jouve, H.-M., and Dideberg, O.
2554–2559 Bond, 2nd ed., Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca, (1995)J. Mol. Biol.249, 933–954
146. Komar-Panicucci, S., Sherman, F., and New York 203. Jacob, G. S., and Orme-Johnson, W. H. (1979)
McLendon, G. (1996) Biochemistry35, 4878– 176. Smulevich, G., Mantini, A. R., Paoli, M., Biochemistry18, 2975–2980
4885 Coletta, M., and Geraci, G. (1995) Biochemistry 204. Kono, Y., and Fridovich, I. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.
147. Page, C. C., Moser, C. C., Chen, X., and Dutton, 34, 7507–7516 258, 6015–6019
P. L. (1999) Nature (London)402, 47–52 177. Van Dyke, B. R., Saltman, P., and Armstrong, 205. Khangulov, S., Sivaraja, M., Barynin, V. V.,
148. DeVault, D. (1984) Quantum-Mechanical F. A. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 3490–3492 and Dismukes, G. C. (1993) Biochemistry32,
Tunnelling in Biological Systems, Cambridge 178. Sugawara, Y., Matsuoka, A., Kaino, A., and 4912–4924
Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK Shikama, K. (1995) Biophys. J.69, 583–592 206. Holzbaur, I. E., English, A. M., and Ismail, A.
149. Closs, G. L., and Miller, J. R. (1988) Science 179. Geibel, J., Chang, C. K., and Traylor, T. G. A. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 3354–3359
240, 440–447 (1975)J. Am. Chem. Soc.97, 5924–5926 207. Ryan, O., Smyth, M. R., and Fágáin, C. O.
150. Evenson, J. W., and Karplus, M. (1993) Science 180. Gerothanassis, I. P., and Momenteau, M. (1994)Essays in Biochemistry28, 129–146
262, 1247–1249 (1987)J. Am. Chem. Soc.109, 6944–6947 208. Newmyer, S. L., and Ortiz de Montellano, P.
151. Moser, C. C., Keske, J. M., Warncke, K., Farid, 181. Phillips, S. E. V., and Schoenborn, B. P. (1981) R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 19430–19438
R. S., and Dutton, P. L. (1992) Nature (London) Nature (London)292, 81–84 208a.Rodríguez-López, J. N., Gilabert, M. A.,
355, 796–802 182. Perutz, M. F. (1989) Trends Biochem. Sci.14, Tudela, J., Thorneley, R. N. F., and García-
152. Williams, R. J. P. (1992) Nature (London)355, 42–44 Cánovas, F. (2000) Biochemistry39, 13201–
770–771 183. Brzozowski, A., Derewenda, Z., Dodson, E., 13209
153. Pappa, H. S., and Poulos, T. L. (1995) Dodson, G., Grabowski, M., Liddington, R.,
Biochemistry34, 6573–6580 Skarzynski, T., and Vallely, D. (1984) Nature
(London)307, 74–76

--- Page 900 ---

897
References
209. Rodriguez-Lopez, J. N., Hernández-Ruiz, J., 235. Dawson, J. H. (1988) Science240, 433–439 266a.Mulholland, S. E., Gibney, B. R., Rabanal, F.,
Garcia-Cánovas, F., Thorneley, R. N. F., 236. Libby, R. D., Thomas, J. A., Kaiser, L. W., and and Dutton, P. L. (1999) Biochemistry38,
Acosta, M., and Arnano, M. B. (1997) J. Biol. Hager, L. P. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257, 5030–5037 10442–10448
Chem.272, 5469–5476 237. Hosten, C. M., Sullivan, A. M., Palaniappan, 267. Duée, E. D., Fanchon, E., Vicat, J., Sieker, L.
210. Abelskov, A. K., Smith, A. T., Rasmussen, C. V., Fitzgerald, M. M., and Terner, J. (1994) J. C., Meyer, J., and Moulis, J.-M. (1994) J. Mol.
B., Dunford, H. B., and Welinder, K. G. (1997) Biol. Chem.269, 13966–13978 Biol.243, 683–695
Biochemistry36, 9453–9463 238. Sono, M., Eble, K. S., Dawson, J. H., and 268. Dauter, Z., Wilson, K. S., Sieker, L. C., Meyer,
211. Fukuyama, K., Sato, K., Itakura, H., Hager, L. P. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 15530– J., and Moulis, J.-M. (1997) Biochemistry36,
Takahashi, S., and Hosoya, T. (1997) J. Biol. 15535 16065–16073
Chem.272, 5752–5756 239. Sono, M., Dawson, J. H., and Hager, L. P. 269. Jensen, L. H. (1974) Ann. Rev. Biochem.43,
212. Nissum, M., Neri, F., Mandelman, D., Poulos, (1984)J. Biol. Chem.259, 13209–13216 461–474
T. L., and Smulevich, G. (1998) Biochemistry 240. Dawson, J. H., and Sono, M. (1987) Chem. Rev. 270. Séry, A., Housset, D., Serre, L., Bonicel, J.,
37, 8080–8087 87, 1255–1276 Hatchikian, C., Frey, M., and Roth, M. (1994)
213. Patterson, W. R., and Poulos, T. L. (1995) 241. Geigert, J., Neidleman, S. L., and Dalietos, D. Biochemistry33, 15408–15417
Biochemistry34, 4331–4341 J. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 2273–2277 270a.Kyritsis, P., Kümmerle, R., Huber, J. G.,
214. Patterson, W. R., Poulos, T. L., and Goodin, D. 242. Mueller, T. J., and Morrison, M. (1974) J. Biol. Gaillard, J., Guigliarelli, B., Popescu, C.,
B. (1995) Biochemistry34, 4342–4345 Chem.259, 7568–7573 Münck, E., and Moulis, J.-M. (1999)
215. Finzel, B. C., Poulos, T. L., and Kraut, J. (1984) 243. Andersson, E., Hellman, L., Gullberg, U., and Biochemistry38, 6335–6345
J. Biol. Chem.259, 13027–13036 Olsson, I. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 4747–4753 271. Brereton, P. S., Verhagen, M. F. J. M., Zhou, Z.
216. Bonagura, C. A., Sundaramoorthy, M., Pappa, 244. van Dalen, C. J., Winterbourn, C. C., H., and Adams, M. W. W. (1998) Biochemistry
H. S., Patterson, W. R., and Poulos, T. L. (1996) Senthilmohan, R., and Kettle, A. J. (2000) J. 37, 7351–7362
Biochemistry35, 6107–6115 Biol. Chem.275, 11638–11644 272. Bruschi, M. H., Guerlesquin, F. A., Bovier-
217. Wang, J., Larsen, R. W., Moench, S. J., 245. Nauseef, W. M., Brigham, S., and Cogley, M. Lapience, G. E., Bonicel, J. J., and Couchoud,
Satterlee, J. D., Rousseau, D. L., and Ondrias, (1994)J. Biol. Chem.269, 1212–1216 P. M. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 8292–8296
M. R. (1996) Biochemistry35, 453–463 246. Davey, C. A., and Fenna, R. E. (1996) 273. Bruice, T. C., Maskiewicz, R., and Job, R.
218. Sinclair, R., Copeland, B., Yamazaki, I., and Biochemistry35, 10967–10973 (1975)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.72, 231–234
Powers, L. (1995) Biochemistry34, 13176–13182 247. Thomas, E. L., Bozeman, P. M., Jefferson, M. 274. Dauter, Z., Wilson, K. S., Sieker, L. C., Moulis,
218a.Doyle, W. A., Blodig, W., Veitch, N. C., M., and King, C. C. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, J.-M., and Meyer,J. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
Piontek, K., and Smith, A. T. (1998) 2906–2913 U.S.A.93, 8836–8840
Biochemistry37, 15097–15105 248. Kanofsky, J. R. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 5991– 275. Xiao, Z., Lavery, M. J., Ayhan, M., Scrofani, S.
218b.Choinowski, T., Blodig, W., Winterhalter, K. 5993 D. B., Wilce, M. C. J., Guss, J. M., Tregloan, P.
H., and Piontek, K. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.286, 249. Khan, A. U., Gebauer, P., and Hager, L. P. A., George, G. N., and Wedd, A. G. (1998) J.
809–827 (1983)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.80, 5195–5197 Am. Chem. Soc.120, 4135–4150
219. Yamaguchi, Y., Zhang, D.-E., Sun, Z., Albee, E. 250. McCormick, M. L., Roeder, T. L., Railsback, 276. Fukuyama, K., Hase, T., Matsumoto, S.,
A., Nagata, S., Tenen, D. G., and Ackerman, S. M. A., and Britigan, B. E. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. Tsukihara, T., Katsube, Y., Tanaka, N.,
J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 19410–19419 269, 27914–27919 Kakudo, M., Wada, K., and Matsubara, H.
220. Andersson, L. A., Bylkas, S. A., and Wilson, A. 251. Manthey, J. A., and Hager, L. P. (1981) J. Biol. (1980)Nature (London)286, 522–524
E. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 3406–3412 Chem.256, 11232–11238 277. Kok, M., Oldenhuis, R., van der Linden, M. P.
221. Rae, T. D., and Goff, H. M. (1996) J. Am. Chem. 252. Colpas, G. J., Hamstra, B. J., Kampf, J. W., and G., Meulenberg, C. H. C., Kingma, J., and
Soc.118, 2103–2104 Pecoraro, V. L. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, Witholt, B. (1989) J. Biol. Chem.264, 5442–5451
222. Kooter, I. M., Moguilevsky, N., Bollen, A., van 3469–3478 278. Archer, M., Huber, R., Tavares, P., Moura, I.,
der Veen, L. A., Otto, C., Dekker, H. L., and 253. Messerschmidt, A., and Wever, R. (1996) Proc. Moura, J. J. G., Carrondo, M. A., Sieker, L. C.,
Wever, R. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 26794– Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 392–396 LeGall, J., and Romao, M. J. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.
26802 254. Mande, S. S., Parsonage, D., Claiborne, A., and 251, 690–702
222a.Fiedler, T. J., Davey, C. A., and Fenna, R. E. Hol, W. G. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 6985–6992 279. Hurley, J. K., Weber-Main, A. M., Stankovich,
(2000)J. Biol. Chem.275, 11964–11971 255. Crane, E. J., III, Parsonage, D., Poole, L. B., M. T., Benning, M. M., Thoden, J. B., Vanhooke,
223. Nagano, S., Tanaka, M., Ishimori, K., and Claiborne, A. (1995) Biochemistry34, J. L., Holden, H. M., Chae, Y. K., Xia, B., Cheng,
Watanabe, Y., and Morishima, I. (1996) 14114–14124 H., Markley, J. L., Martinez-Júlvez, M., Gómez-
Biochemistry35, 14251–14258 255a.Claiborne, A., Yeh, J. I., Mallett, T. C., Luba, Moreno, C., Schmeits, J. L., and Tollin, G.
224. Tanaka, M., Ishimori, K., and Morishima, I. J., Crane, E. J., III, Charrier, V., and Parsonage, (1997)Biochemistry36, 11100–11117
(1998)Biochemistry37, 2629–2638 D. (1999) Biochemistry38, 15407–15416 279a.Müller, J. J., Müller, A., Rottmann, M.,
225. Low, D. W., Gray, H. B., and Duus, J. ø. (1997) 256. Miki, K., Renganathan, V., and Gold, M. H. Bernhardt, R., and Heinemann, U. (1999)
J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 1–5 (1986)Biochemistry25, 4790–4796 J. Mol. Biol.294, 501–513
226. Makino, R., Uno, T., Nishimura, Y., Iuzuka, T., 257. Sundaramoorthy, M., Kishi, K., Gold, M. H., 280. Hurley, J. K., Weber-Main, A. M., Hodges, A.
Tsuboi, M., and Ishimura, Y. (1986) J. Biol. and Poulos, T. L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, E., Stankovich, M. T., Benning, M. M., Holden,
Chem.261, 8376–8382 32759–32767 H. M., Cheng, H., Xia, B., Markley, J. L.,
227. Hashimoto, S., Tatsuno, Y., and Kitagawa, T. 258. Mauk, M. R., Kishi, K., Gold, M. H., and Genzor, C., Gomez-Moreno, C., Hafezi, R., and
(1986)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.83, 2417– Mauk, A. G. (1998) Biochemistry37, 6767–6771 Tollin, G. (1997) Biochemistry36, 15109–15117
2421 259. Beinert, H. (1990) FASEB J.4, 2483–2491 280a.Morales, R., Chron, M.-H., Hudry-Clergeon,
228. Nakajima, R., and Yamazaki, I. (1987) J. Biol. 260. Beinert, H., Holm, R. H., and Münck, E. (1997) G., Pétillot, Y., Norager, S., Medina, M., and
Chem.262, 2576–2581 Science277, 653–659 Frey, M. (1999) Biochemistry38, 15764–15773
229. Morishima, I., Takamuki, Y., and Shiro, Y. 261. Carter, C. W., Jr., Kraut, J., Freer, S. T., Xuong, 281. Ta, D. T., and Vickery, L. E. (1992) J. Biol. Chem.
(1984)J. Am. Chem. Soc.106, 7666–7672 N., Alden, R. A., and Bartsch, R. G. (1974) J. 267, 11120–11125
230. Loew, G., and Dupuis, M. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Biol. Chem.249, 4212–4225 282. Xia, B., Cheng, H., Skjeldal, L., Coghlan, V.
Soc.118, 10584–10587 262. Breiter, D. R., Meyer, T. E., Rayment, I., and M., Vickery, L. E., and Markley, J. L. (1995)
230a.Filizola, M., and Loew, G. H. (2000) J. Am. Holden, H. M. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, Biochemistry34, 180–187
Chem. Soc.122, 18–25 18660–18667 282a.Uhlmann, H., and Bernhardt, R. (1995) J. Biol.
230b.Roach, M. P., Ozaki, S.-i, and Watanabe, Y. 263. Agarwal, A., Li, D., and Cowan, J. A. (1996) J. Chem.270, 29959–29966
(2000)Biochemistry39, 1446–1454 Am. Chem. Soc.118, 927–928 282b.Ziegler, G. A., and Schulz, G. E. (2000)
231. Olson, L. P., and Bruice, T. C. (1995) 264. Banci, L., Bertini, I., Ciurli, S., Ferretti, S., Biochemistry39, 10986–10995
Biochemistry34, 7335–7347 Luchinat, C., and Piccioli, M. (1993) Biochemistry 283. Meyer, J., Fujinaga, J., Gaillard, J., and Lutz,
232. Nakamura, M., Yamazaki, I., Kotani, T., and 32, 9387–9397 M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 13642–13650
Ohtaki, S. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 13546–13552 265. Benning, M. M., Meyer, T. E., Rayment, I., and 284. Pochapsky, T. C., and Ye, X. M. (1991)
233. Kobayashi, S., Nakano, M., Kimura, T., and Holden, H. M. (1994) Biochemistry33, 2476– Biochemistry30, 3850–3856
Schaap, A. P. (1987) Biochemistry26, 5019–5022 2483 285. Stout, C. D. (1988) J. Biol. Chem.263, 9256–9260
234. Ortiz de Montellano, P. R., Choe, Y. S., 266. Soriano, A., Li, D., Bian, S., Agarwal, A., and 286. Duff, J. L. C., Breton, J. L. J., Butt, J. N.,
DePillis, G., and Catalano, C. E. (1987) J. Biol. Cowan, J. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 12479– Armstrong, F. A., and Thomson, A. J. (1996) J.
Chem.262, 11641–11646 12486 Am. Chem. Soc.118, 8593–8603

--- Page 901 ---

898 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
References
287. Schipke, C. G., Goodin, D. B., McRee, D. E., 315. Covès, J., Zeghouf, M., Macherel, D., 343. Bender, C. J., Rosenzweig, A. C., Lippard,
and Stout, C. D. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 8228– Guigliarelli, B., Asso, M., and Fontecave, M. S. J., and Peisach, J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269,
8239 (1997)Biochemistry36, 5921–5928 15993–15998
288. George, G. N., and George, S. J. (1988) Trends 316. Crane, B. R., Siegel, L. M., and Getzoff, E. D. 344. Nesheim, J. C., and Lipscomb, J. D. (1996)
Biochem. Sci.13, 369–370 (1997)Biochemistry36, 12101–12119 Biochemistry35, 10240–10247
289. Kent, T. A., Emptage, M. H., Merkle, H., 316a.Peters, J. W., Lanzilotta, W. N., Lemon, B. J., 345. Shu, L., Nesheim, J. C., Kauffmann, K.,
Kennedy, M. C., Beinert, H., and Münck, E. and Seefeldt, L. C. (1998) Science282, 1853– Münck, E., Lipscomb, J. D., and Que, L., Jr.
(1985)J. Biol. Chem.260, 6871–6881 1858 (1997)Science275, 515–518
290. Tong, J., and Feinberg, B. A. (1994) J. Biol. 316b.Popescu, C. V., and Münck, E. (1999) J. Am. 346. Pikus, J. D., Studts, J. M., McClay, K., Steffan,
Chem.269, 24920–24927 Chem. Soc.121, 7877–7884 R. J., and Fox, B. G. (1997) Biochemistry36,
291. Lane, R. W., Ibers, J. A., Frankel, R. B., and 316c.Nicolet, Y., Lemon, B. J., Fontecilla-Camps, J. 9283–9289
Holm, R. H. (1975) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. C., and Peters, J. W. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci. 347. Herold, S., and Lippard, S. J. (1997) J. Am.
72, 2868–2872 25, 138–143 Chem. Soc.119, 145–156
291a.Camba, R., and Armstrong, F. A. (2000) 317. Grabowski, R., Hofmeister, A. E. M., and Buckel, 348. Jordan, A., and Reichard, P. (1998) Ann. Rev.
Biochemistry39, 10587–10598 W. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci.18, 297–300 Biochem.67, 71–98
292. Gardner, P. R., and Fridovich, I. (1991) J. Biol. 318. Hofmeister, A. E. M., Grabowski, R., Linder, 349. Stubbe, J. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 5329–5332
Chem.266, 19328–19333 D., and Buckel, W. (1993) Eur. J. Biochem.215, 350. Reichard, P. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci.22,
293. Kennedy, M. C., Antholine, W. E., and Beinert, 341–349 81–85
H. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 20340–20347 319. Hofmeister, A. E. M., Berger, S., and Buckel, 351. Stubbe, J. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
294. Duin, E. C., Lafferty, M. E., Crouse, B. R., W. (1992) Eur. J. Biochem.205, 743–749 95, 2723–2724
Allen, R. M., Sanyal, I., Flint, D. H., and 320. Flint, D. H., and Emptage, M. H. (1988) J. Biol. 351a.Eriksson, M., Jordan, A., and Eklund, H.
Johnson, M. K. (1997) Biochemistry36, 11811– Chem.263, 3558–3564 (1998)Biochemistry37, 13359–13369
11820 321. Flint, D. H., Tuminello, J. F., and Miller, T. J. 352. Sahlin, M., Petersson, L., Gräslund, A.,
295. Magliozzo, R. S., McIntosh, B. A., and Sweeney, (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 16053–16067 Ehrenberg, A., Sjöberg, B.-M., and Thelander,
W. V. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257, 3506–3509 322. Hofmeister, A. E. M., and Buckel, W. (1992) L. (1987) Biochemistry26, 5541–5548
296. Prince, R. C., and Adams, M. W. W. (1987) J. Eur. J. Biochem.206, 547–552 353. Uhlin, U., and Eklund, H. (1994) Nature
Biol. Chem.262, 5125–5128 323. Müh, U., Cinkaya, I., Albracht, S. P. J., and (London)370, 533–539
297. Orme-Johnson, W. H. (1972) Ann. Rev. Buckel, W. (1996) Biochemistry35, 11710–11718 354. Uhlin, U., and Eklund, H. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.
Biochem.42, 159–204 324. Scherf, U., Söhling, B., Gottschalk, G., Linder, 262, 358–369
298. Orme-Johnson, W. H., Hansen, R. E., Beinert, D., and Buckel, W. (1994) Arch. Microbiol.161, 354a.Parkin, S. E., Chen, S., Ley, B. A., Mangravite,
H., Tsibris, J. C. M., Bartholomaus, R. C., and 239–245 L., Edmondson, D. E., Huynh, B. H., and
Gunsalus, I. C. (1968) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 325. Klees, A.-G., Linder, D., and Buckel, W. (1992) Bollinger, J. M., Jr. (1998) Biochemistry37,
U.S.A.60, 368–372 Arch. Microbiol.158, 294–301 1124–1130
299. Scrofani, S. D. B., Brereton, P. S., Hamer, A. 326. Vollmer, S. J., Switzer, R. L., and Debrunner, P. 354b.Rova, U., Adrait, A., Pötsch, S., Gräslund, A.,
M., Lavery, M. J., McDowall, S. G., Vincent, G. G. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 14284–14293 and Thelander, L. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274,
A., Brownlee, R. T. C., Hoogenraad, N. J., Sadek, 327. Ramsay, R. R., Dreyer, J.-L., Schloss, J. V., 23746–23751
M., and Wedd, A. G. (1994) Biochemistry33, Jackson, R. H., Coles, C. J., Beinert, H., 354c.Andersson, M. E., Högbom, M., Rinaldo-
14486–14495 Cleland, W. W., and Singer, T. P. (1981) Matthis, A., Andersson, K. K., Sjöberg, B.-M.,
300. Holz, R. C., Small, F. J., and Ensign, S. A. Biochemistry20, 7476–7482 and Nordlund, P. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121,
(1997)J. Biol. Chem.36, 14690–14696 328. Gaudu, P., and Weiss, B. (1996) Proc. R. Soc. 2346–2352
301. Mouesca, J.-M., Chen, J. L., Noodleman, L., (London)93, 10094–10098 355. Fieschi, F., Torrents, E., Toulokhonova, L.,
Bashford, D., and Case, D. A. (1994) J. Am. 329. Ding, H., Hidalgo, E., and Demple, B. (1996) Jordan, A., Hellman, U., Barbe, J., Gibert, I.,
Chem. Soc.116, 11898–11914 J. Biol. Chem.271, 33173–33175 Karlsson, M., and Sjöberg, B.-M. (1998)
302. Swartz, P. D., Beck, B. W., and Ichiye, T. (1996) 330. Hentze, M. W. (1996) Trends Biochem. Sci.21, J. Biol. Chem.273, 4329–4337
Biophys. J.71, 2958–2969 282–283 356. Ling, J., Sahlin, M., Sjöberg, B.-M., Loehr, T.
303. Kemper, M. A., Stout, C. D., Lloyd, S. E. J., 331. Feig, A. L., Masschelein, A., Bakac, A., and M., and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
Prasad, G. S., Fawcett, S., Armstrong, F. A., Lippard, S. J. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 269, 5595–5601
Shen, B., and Burgess, B. K. (1997) J. Biol. 334–342 357. Silva, K. E., Elgren, T. E., Que, L., Jr., and
Chem.272, 15620–15627 332. Pulver, S. C., Froland, W. A., Lipscomb, J. D., Stankovich, M. T. (1995) Biochemistry34,
304. Bominaar, E. L., Hu, Z., Münck, E., Girerd, J.- and Solomon, E. I. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 14093–14103
J., and Borshch, S. A. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 387–395 358. Sturgeon, B. E., Burdi, D., Chen, S., Huynh,
117, 6976–6989 333. Lindqvist, Y., Huang, W., Schneider, G., and B.-H., Edmondson, D. E., Stubbe, J., and
305. Scott, M. P., and Biggins, J. (1997) Protein Sci. Shanklin, J. (1996) EMBO J.15, 4081–4092 Hoffman, B. M. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118,
6, 340–346 334. Que, L., Jr. (1991) Science253, 273–274 7551–7557
306. Coldren, C. D., Hellinga, H. W., and 335. Doi, K., Gupta, R., and Aisen, P. (1987) J. Biol. 359. Kauppi, B., Nielsen, B. B., Ramaswamy, S.,
Caradonna, J. P. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Chem.262, 6982–6985 Larson, I. K., Thelander, M., Thelander, L., and
U.S.A.94, 6635–6640 336. Hayman, A. R., and Cox, T. M. (1994) J. Biol. Eklund, H. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.262, 706–720
307. Rieske, J. S., MacLennan, D. H., and Coleman, Chem.269, 1294–1300 360. Katterle, B., Sahlin, M., Schmidt, P. P., Pötsch,
R. (1964) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.15, 336a.Lindqvist, Y., Johansson, E., Kaija, H., Vihko, S., Logan, D. T., Gräslund, A., and Sjöberg, B.-
338–344 P., and Schneider, G. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.291, M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 10414–10421
308. Beckmann, J. D., Ljungdahl, P. O., Lopez, J. L., 135–147 361. Sealy, R. C., Harman, L., West, P. R., and
and Trumpower, B. L. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, 336b.Uppenberg, J., Lindqvist, F., Svensson, C., Ek- Mason, R. P. (1985) J. Am. Chem. Soc.107,
8901–8909 Rylander, B., and Andersson, G. (1999) J. Mol. 3401–3406
309. Brasseur, G., Sled, V., Liebl, U., Ohnishi, T., Biol.290, 201–211 362. Sjöberg, B.-M., Karlsson, M., and Jörnvall, H.
and Daldal, F. (1997) Biochemistry36, 11685– 337. Wang, D. L., Holz, R. C., David, S. S., Que, L., (1987)J. Biol. Chem.262, 9736–9743
11696 Jr., and Stankovich, M. T. (1991) Biochemistry 363. Ekberg, M., Sahlin, M., Eriksson, M., and
310. Mosser, G., Breyton, C., Olofsson, A., Popot, 30, 8187–8194 Sjöberg, B.-M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 20655–
J.-L., and Rigaud, J.-L. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 338. Cohen, S. S. (1984) Trends Biochem. Sci.9, 334– 20659
272, 20263 – 20268 336 364. Ong, S. P., McFarlan, S. C., and Hogenkamp,
311. Liebl, U., Sled, V., Brasseur, G., Ohnishi, T., 339. Merkx, M., and Averill, B. A. (1998) H. P. C. (1993) Biochemistry32, 11397–11404
and Daldal, F. (1997) Biochemistry36, 11675– Biochemistry37, 8490–8497 365. Gerfen, G. J., Licht, S., Willems, J.-P., Hoffman,
11684 340. Klabunde, T., Sträter, N., Fröhlich, R., Witzel, B. M., and Stubbe, J. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
312. Crane, B. R., Siegel, L. M., and Getzoff, E. D. H., and Krebs, B. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.259, 737– 118, 8192–8197
(1995)Science270, 59–67 748 366. Reichard, P. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.268, 8383–8386
313. Wilkerson, J. O., Janick, P. A., and Siegel, L. 341. Sträter, N., Klabunde, T., Tucker, P., Witzel, H., 367. Sun, X., Eliasson, R., Pontis, E., Andersson, J.,
M. (1983) Biochemistry22, 5048–5054 and Krebs, B. (1995) Science268, 1489–1492 Buist, G., Sjöberg, B.-M., and Reichard, P.
314. Crane, B. R., Siegel, L. M., and Getzoff, E. D. 342. Baumbach, G. A., Ketcham, C. M., (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 2443–2446
(1997)Biochemistry36, 12120–12137 Richardson, D. E., Bazer, F. W., and Roberts,
R. M. (1986) J. Biol. Chem.261, 12869–12878

--- Page 902 ---

899
References
368. Sun, X., Ollagnier, S., Schmidt, P. P., Atta, M., 392. Hogenkamp, H. P. C. (1982) in B12, Vol. I 411. Kunz, F., Retéy, J., Arigoni, D., Tsai, L., and
Mulliez, E., Lepape, L., Eliasson, R., Gräslund, (Dolphin, D., ed), pp. 295–323, Wiley, New York Stadtman, T. C. (1978) Helv. Chim. Acta61,
A., Fontecave, M., Reichard, P., and Sjöberg, 393. Hay, B. P., and Finke, R. G. (1986) J. Am. Chem. 1139–1145
B.-M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 6827–6831 Soc.108, 4820–4829 411a.Chang, C. H., and Frey, P. A. (2000) J. Biol.
369. Ollagnier, S., Mulliez, E., Schmidt, P. P., 394. Ashley, G. W., Harris, G., and Stubbe, J. (1986) Chem.275, 106–114
Eliasson, R., Gaillard, J., Deronzier, C., J. Biol. Chem.261, 3958–3964 412. Poston, J. M. (1977) Science195, 301–302
Bergman, T., Gräslund, A., Reichard, P., and 395. Sando, G. N., Blakely, R. L., Hogenkamp, H. P. 413. Stabler, S. P., Lindenbaum, J., and Allen, R. H.
Fontecave, M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 24216– C., and Hoffman, P. J. (1975) J. Biol. Chem.250, (1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 5581–5588
24223 8774–8779 414. Ballinger, M. D., Frey, P. A., Reed, G. H., and
369a.Logan, D. T., Andersson, J., Sjöberg, B.-M., 396. Thelander, L., and Reichard, P. (1979) Ann. LoBrutto, R. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10086–
and Nordlund, P. (1999) Science283, 1499– Rev. Biochem.48, 133–158 10093
1504 396a.Brown, K. L., and Li, J. (1998) J. Am. Chem. 415. Wu, W., Lieder, K. W., Reed, G. H., and Frey,
370. Young, P., Andersson, J., Sahlin, M., and Soc.120, 9466–9474 P. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 10532–10537
Sjöberg, B.-M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 20770– 396b.Licht, S. S., Lawrence, C. C., and Stubbe, J. 415a.Wu, W., Booker, S., Lieder, K. W., Bandarian,
20775 (1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 7463–7468 V., Reed, G. H., and Frey, P. A. (2000)
371. van der Donk, W. A., Stubbe, J., Gerfen, G. J., 397. Pratt, J. M. (1982) in B12, Vol. I (Dolphin, D., ed), Biochemistry39, 9561–9570
Bellew, B. F., and Griffin, R. G. (1995) J. Am. pp. 325–392, Wiley, New York 416. Zhou, Z. S., Peariso, K., Penner-Hahn, J. E.,
Chem. Soc.117, 8908–8916 397a.Zerbe-Burkhardt, K., Ratnatilleke, A., and Matthews, R. G. (1999) Biochemistry38,
371a.Lawrence, C. C., Bennati, M., Obias, H. V., Philippon, N., Birch, A., Leiser, A., Vrijbloed, 15915–15926
Bar, G., Griffin, R. G., and Stubbe, J. (1999) J. W., Hess, D., Hunziker, P., and Robinson, J. 417. Yamanishi, M., Yamada, S., Muguruma, H.,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.96, 8979–8984 A. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 6508–6517 Murakami, Y., Tobimatsu, T., Ishida, A.,
372. Covès, J., Le Hir de Fallois, L., Le Pape, L., 397b.Ratnatilleke, A., Vrijbloed, J. W., and Yamauchi, J., and Toraya, T. (1998) Biochemistry
Décout, J.-L., and Fontecave, M. (1996) Robinson, J. A. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 37, 4799–4803
Biochemistry35, 8595–8602 31679–31685 418. Hall, D. A., Jordan-Starck, T. C., Loo, R. O.,
373. Lenz, R., and Giese, B. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 398. Retéy, J., Umani-Ronchi, A., Seibl, J., and Ludwig, M. L., and Matthews, R. G. (2000)
119, 2784–2794 Arigoni, D. (1966) Experientia22, 502–503 Biochemistry39, 10711–10719
374. Trant, N. L., Meshnick, S. R., Kitchener, K., 399. Sato, K., Orr, J. C., Babior, B. M., and Abeles, 418a.Jarrett, J. T., Amaratunga, M., Drennan, C. L.,
Eaton, J. W., and Cerami, A. (1983) J. Biol. R. H. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.251, 3734–3737 Scholten, J. D., Sands, R. H., Ludwig, M. L.,
Chem.258, 125–130 400. Wollowitz, S., and Halpern, J. (1984) J. Am. and Matthews, R. G. (1996) Biochemistry35,
375. Cooper, J. B., McIntyre, K., Badasso, M. O., Chem. Soc.106, 8319–8321 2464–2475
Wood, S. P., Zhang, Y., Garbe, T. R., and 401. Graves, S. W., Krouwer, J. S., and Babior, B. M. 419. Zydowsky, T. M., Courtney, L. F., Frasca, V.,
Young, D. (1995) J. Mol. Biol.246, 531–544 (1980)J. Biol. Chem.255, 7444–7448 Kobayashi, K., Shimizu, H., Yuen, L.,
376. Lah, M. S., Dixon, M. M., Pattridge, K. A., 401a.Smith, D. M., Golding, B. T., and Radom, L. Matthews, R. G., Benkovic, S. J., and Floss, H.
Stallings, W. C., Fee, J. A., and Ludwig, M. L. (1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 5700–5704 G. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc.108, 3152–3153
(1995)Biochemistry34, 1646–1660 401b.Ke, S.-C., and Warncke, K. (1999) J. Am. 420. Wood, J. M. (1982) in B12, Vol. II (Dolphin, D.,
377. Stallings, W. C., Pattridge, K. A., Strong, R. K., Chem. Soc.121, 9922–9927 ed), pp. 151–164, Wiley, New York
and Ludwig, M. L. (1985) J. Biol. Chem.260, 401c.Warncke, K., Schmidt, J. C., and Ke, S.-C. 421. Wood, J. M. (1974) Science183, 1049–1052
16424–16432 (1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 10522–10528 422. McBride, B. C., and Wolfe, R. S. (1971)
378. Sorkin, D. L., Duong, D. K., and Miller, A.-F. 402. Bothe, H., Darley, D. J., Albracht, S. P. J., Biochemistry10, 4312–4317
(1997)Biochemistry36, 8202–8208 Gerfen, G. J., Golding, B. T., and Buckel, W. 423. Parker, D. J., Wood, H. G., Ghambeer, R. K.,
378a.Ursby, T., Adinolfi, B. S., Al-Karadaghi, S., De (1998)Biochemistry37, 4105–4113 and Ljungdahl, L. G. (1972) Biochemistry11,
Vendittis, E., and Bocchini, V. (1999) J. Mol. 402a.Chih, H.-W., and Marsh, E. N. G. (1999) 3074–3080
Biol.286, 189–205 Biochemistry38, 13684–13691 424. Thauer, R. K., Diekert, G., and Schonheit, P.
379. Carlioz, A., Ludwig, M. L., Stallings, W. C., 402b.Roymoulik, I., Chen, H.-P., and Marsh, E. N. (1980)Trends Biochem. Sci.5, 304–306
Fee, J. A., Steinman, H. M., and Touati, D. G. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 11619–11622 425. Nielson, F. H. (1974) in Trace Element
(1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 1555–1562 403. Lowe, J. N., and Ingraham, L. L. (1971) J. Am. Metabolism in Animals-2 (Hoekstra, W. G.,
380. Barker, H. A. (1972) in The Enzymes, 3rd ed., Chem. Soc.93, 3801–3802 Suttie, J. W., Ganther, H. E., and Mertz, W.,
Vol. 6 (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 509–537, 404. He, M., and Dowd, P. (1998) J. Am. Chem. Soc. eds), pp. 381–395, Univ. Park Press,
Academic Press, New York 120, 1133–1137 Baltimore, Maryland
381. Barker, H. A. (1976) in Relections on 405. Mancia, F., Keep, N. H., Nakagawa, A., 426. Schnegg, A., and Kirchgessner, M. (1976) Int.
Biochemistry (Kornberg, A., ed), pp. 95–, Leadlay, P. F., McSweeney, S., Rasmussen, B., J. Vitamins Nutr. Res.46, 96–99
Pergamon Press, New York Bösecke, P., Diat, O., and Evans, P. R. (1996) 427. Nielsen, F. H. (1991) FASEB J.5, 2661–2667
382. Lenhert, P. G., and Hodgkin, D. C. (1961) Structure4, 339–350 428. Patel, S. U., Sadler, P. J., Tucker, A., and Viles,
Nature (London)192, 937–938 405a.Mancia, F., Smith, G. A., and Evans, P. R. J. H. (1993) J. Am. Chem. Soc.115, 9285–9286
383. Lenhert, P. G., and Hodgkin, D. C. (1961) (1999)Biochemistry38, 7999–8005 429. Nomoto, S., McNeely, M. D., and Sunderman,
Nature (London)192, 937–938 405b.Thomä, N. H., Meier, T. W., Evans, P. R., and F. W., Jr. (1971) Biochemistry10, 1647–1651
384. Zagalak, B., and Friedrich, W., eds. (1979) Leadlay, P. F. (1998) Biochemistry37, 14386– 430. Severne, B. C. (1974) Nature (London)248,
Vitamin B12, de Gruyter, Berlin 14393 807–808
385. Dolphin, D., ed. (1982) B12, Wiley, New York 405c.Smith, D. M., Golding, B. T., and Radom, L. 431. Eskew, D. L., Welch, R. M., and Cary, E. E.
(2 vols.) (1999)J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 9388–9399 (1983)Science222, 621–623
386. Brown, K. L. (1987) J. Am. Chem. Soc.109, 405d.Maiti, N., Widjaja, L., and Banerjee, R. (1999) 432. Eitinger, T., and Friedrich, B. (1991) J. Biol.
2277–2284 J. Biol. Chem.274, 32733–32737 Chem.266, 3222–3227
387. Anton, D. L., Hogenkamp, H. P. C., Walker, T. 406. Reitzer, R., Gruber, K., Jogl, G., Wagner, V. 432a.Eitinger, T., Degen, O., Böhnke, U., and
E., and Matwiyoff, N. A. (1982) Biochemistry G., Bothe, H., Buckel, W., and Kratky, C. Müller, M. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 18029–
21, 2372–2378 (1999)Structure7, 891–902 18033
388. Wagner, F. (1966) Ann. Rev. Biochem.35, 405– 406a.Champloy, F., Jogl, G., Reitzer, R., Buckel, W., 433. Frieden, E., ed. (1984) Biochemistry of the
428 Bothe, H., Beatrix, B., Broeker, G., Michalowicz, Essential Ultratrace Elements, Plenum, New York
389. Schrauzer, G. N., Deutsch, E., and Windgassen, A., Meyer-Klaucke, W., and Kratky, C. (1999) 434. Walsh, C. T., and Orme-Johnson, W. H. (1987)
R. J. (1968) J. Am. Chem. Soc.90, 2441–2442 J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 11780–11789 Biochemistry26, 4901–4906
390. Needham, T. E., Matwiyoff, N. A., Walker, T. 407. Stadtman, T. C. (1971) Science171, 859–867 435. Todd, M. J., and Hausinger, R. P. (1987) J. Biol.
E., and Hogenkamp, H. P. C. (1973) J. Am. 408. Zagalak, B., Frey, P. A., Karabatsos, G. L., and Chem.262, 5963–5967
Chem. Soc.95, 5019–5024 Abeles, R. H. (1966) J. Biol. Chem.241, 3028– 436. Jabri, E., Carr, M. B., Hausinger, R. P., and
391. Parry, R. J., Ostrander, J. M., and Arzu, I. Y. 3035 Karplus, P. A. (1995) Science268, 998–1003
(1985)J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 2190–2191 409. Sprecher, M., Clark, M. J., and Sprinson, D. B. 437. Lippard, S. J. (1995) Science268, 996–997
391a.Walker, L. A., II, Shiang, J. J., Anderson, N. A., (1966)J. Biol. Chem.241, 872–877 437a.Barrios, A. M., and Lippard, S. J. (1999) J. Am.
Pullen, S. H., and Sension, R. J. (1998) J. Am. 410. Baker, J. R., and Stadtman, T. C. (1982) in B12, Chem. Soc.121, 11751–11757
Chem. Soc.120, 7286–7292 Vol. II (Dolphin, D., ed), pp. 203–232, Wiley, 438. Park, I.-S., and Hausinger, R. P. (1995) Science
New York 267, 1156–1158

--- Page 903 ---

900 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
References
439. Lee, M. H., Pankratz, H. S., Wang, S., Scott, R. 459. Pfaltz, A., Jaun, B., Fässler, A., Eschenmoser, 485. Danks, D. M. (1995) in The Metabolic and
A., Finnegan, M. G., Johnson, M. K., Ippolito, A., Jaenchen, R., Gilles, H. H., Diekert, G., Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 7th ed.,
J. A., Christianson, D. W., and Hausinger, R. P. and Thauer, R. K. (1982) Helv. Chim. Acta65, Vol. 2 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S.,
(1993)Protein Sci.2, 1042–1052 828–865 and Valle, D., eds), pp. 2211–2235, McGraw-
439a.Doolittle, R. F. (1997) Nature (London)388, 460. Sings, H. L., Bible, K. C., and Rinehart, K. L. Hill, New York
515–516 (1996)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 10560– 486. Lutsenko, S., and Cooper, M. J. (1998) Proc.
440. Winkler, R. G., Blevins, D. G., Polacco, J. C., 10565 Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 6004–6009
and Randall, D. D. (1988) Trends Biochem. Sci. 461. Ensign, S. A. (1995) Biochemistry34, 5372–5381 487. Nielson, K. B., and Winge, D. R. (1984) J. Biol.
13, 97–100 462. Xia, J., Sinclair, J. F., Baldwin, T. O., and Lindahl, Chem.259, 4941–4946
441. Mayhew, S. G., and O’Connor, M. E. (1982) P. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 1965–1971 488. Hamer, D. H., Thiele, D. J., and Lemontt, J. E.
Trends Biochem. Sci.7, 18–21 463. Seravalli, J., Kumar, M., Lu, W.-P., and Ragsdale, (1985)Science228, 685–690
442. Elsden, S. R. (1981) Trends Biochem. Sci.6, 252–253 S. W. (1997) Biochemistry36, 11241–11251 489. Holtzman, N. A. (1976) Fed. Proc.35, 2276–2280
443. Fu, W., Drozdzewski, P. M., Morgan, T. V., 464. Xia, J., Hu, Z., Popescu, C. V., Lindahl, P. A., 490. Riordan, J. R., and Jolicoeur-Paquet, L. (1982)
Mortenson, L. E., Juszczak, A., Adams, M. W. and Münck, E. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, J. Biol. Chem.257, 4639–4645
W., He, S.-H., Peck, H. D., Jr., DerVartanian, 8301–8312 491. Peltonen, L., Kuivaniemi, H., Palotie, A.,
D. V., LeGall, J., and Johnson, M. K. (1993) 465. Anderson, M. E., and Lindahl, P. A. (1996) Horn, N., Kaitila, I., and Kivirikko, K. I. (1983)
Biochemistry32, 4813–4819 Biochemistry35, 8371–8380 Biochemistry22, 6156–6163
444. Bagley, K. A., Van Garderen, C. J., Chen, M., 465a.Fraser, D. M., and Lindahl, P. A. (1999) 492. Hung, I. H., Suzuki, M., Yamaguchi, Y., Yuan,
Duin, E. C., Albracht, S. P. J., and Woodruff, Biochemistry38, 15706–15711 D. S., Klausner, R. D., and Gitlin, J. D. (1997)
W. H. (1994) Biochemistry33, 9229–9236 466. Grahame, D. A., and DeMoll, E. (1996) J. Biol. J. Biol. Chem.272, 21461–21466
445. He, S. H., Teixeira, M., LeGall, J., Patil, D. S., Chem.271, 8352–8358 493. Payne, A. S., and Gitlin, J. D. (1998) J. Biol.
Moura, I., Moura, J. J. G., DerVartanian, D. V., 467. Menon, S., and Ragsdale, S. W. (1998) Chem.273, 3765–3770
Huynh, B. H., and Peck, H. D., Jr. (1989) J. Biochemistry37, 5689–5698 494. Zhou, B., and Gitschier, J. (1997) Proc. Natl.
Biol. Chem.264, 2678–2682 467a.Murakami, E., and Ragsdale, S. W. (2000) J. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 7481–7486
446. Sorgenfrei, O., Duin, E. C., Klein, A., and Biol. Chem.275, 4699–4707 495. Lutsenko, S., Petrukhin, K., Cooper, M. J.,
Albracht, S. P. J. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 468. Lebertz, H., Simon, H., Courtney, L. F., Gilliam, C. T., and Kaplan, J. H. (1997) J. Biol.
23799–23806 Benkovic, S. J., Zydowsky, L. D., Lee, K., and Chem.272, 18939–18944
447. Arp, D. J., and Burris, R. H. (1981) Biochemistry Floss, H. G. (1987) J. Am. Chem. Soc.109, 495a.La Fontaine, S., Firth, S. D., Camakaris, J.,
20, 2234–2240 3173–3174 Englezou, A., Theophilos, M. B., Petris, M. J.,
448. Seefeldt, L. C., and Arp, D. J. (1989) 469. Raybuck, S. A., Bastian, N. R., Zydowsky, L. Howie, M., Lockhart, P. J., Greenough, M.,
Biochemistry28, 1588–1596 D., Kobayashi, K., Floss, H. G., Orme- Brooks, H., Reddel, R. R., and Mercer, J. F. B.
449. Telser, J., Benecky, M. J., Adams, M. W. W., Johnson, W. H., and Walsh, C. T. (1987) (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 31375–31380
Mortensen, L. E., and Hoffman, B. M. (1986) J. Am. Chem. Soc.109, 3171–3173 495b.Forbes, J. R., Hsi, G., and Cox, D. W. (1999) J.
J. Biol. Chem.261, 13536–13541 470. Howell, J. M., and Gawthorne, J. M., eds. (1987) Biol. Chem.274, 12408–12413
450. Volbeda, A., Charon, M.-H., Piras, C., Hatch- Copper in Animals and Man, Vols. I and II, CRC 495c.Cobine, P. A., George, G. N., Winzor, D. J.,
ikian, E. C., Frey, M., and Fontecilla-Camps, J. Press, Boca, Raton, Florida Harrison, M. D., Mogahaddas, S., and Dameron,
C. (1995) Nature (London)373, 580–587 471. Frieden, E. (1968) Sci. Am.218(May), 103–114 C. T. (2000) Biochemistry39, 6857–6863
451. Cammack, R. (1995) Nature (London)373, 472. Spiro, T. G., ed. (1981) Copper Proteins, Wiley, 496. Yamaguchi, Y., Heiny, M. E., Suzuki, M., and
556–557 New York Gitlin, J. D. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
452. Dole, F., Fournel, A., Magro, V., Hatchikian, E. 473. Sigel, H., ed. (1981) Metal Ions in Biological 93, 14030–14035
C., Bertrand, P., and Guigliarelli, B. (1997) Systems, Vol. 13, (Copper Proteins) Dekker, 497. Yuan, D. S., Stearman, R., Dancis, A., Dunn,
Biochemistry36, 7847–7854 New York T., Beeler, T., and Klausner, R. D. (1995) Proc.
453. Volbeda, A., Garcin, E., Piras, C., de Lacey, A. 474. Linder, M. C. (1991) Biochemistry of Copper, Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.92, 2632–2636
L., Fernandez, V. M., Hatchikian, E. C., Frey, Plenum, New York 498. Phung, L. T., Ajlani, G., and Haselkorn, R. (1994)
M., and Fontecilla-Camps, J. C. (1996) 474a.Turnland, J. R. (1999) in Modern Nutrition in Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.91, 9651–9654
J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 12989–12996 Health and Disease, 9th ed. (Shils, M. E., 499. Klomp, L. W. J., Lin, S.-J., Yuan, D. S.,
453b.Davidson, G., Choudhury, S. B., Gu, Z., Bose, Olson, J. A., Shike, M., and Ross, A. C., eds), Klausner, R. D., Culotta, V. C., and Gitlin, J. D.
K., Roseboom, W., Albracht, S. P. J., and pp. 241–252, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 9221–9226
Maroney, M. J. (2000) Biochemistry39, 7468– Maryland 500. Rae, T. D., Schmidt, P. J., Pufahl, R. A.,
7479 475. Calabrese, L., Carbonaro, M., and Musci, G. Culotta, V. C., and O’Halloran, T. V. (1999)
453a.Amara, P., Volbeda, A., Fontecilla-Camps, J. (1988)J. Biol. Chem.263, 6480–6483 Science284, 805–808
C., and Field, M. J. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 476. Yang, F., Friedrichs, W. E., Cupples, R. L., 500a.O’Halloran, T. V., and Culotta, V. C. (2000) J.
121, 4468–4477 Bonifacio, M. J., Sanford, J. A., Horton, W. A., Biol. Chem.275, 25057–25060
454. Tau, S. L., Fox, J. A., Kojima, N., Walsh, C. T., and Bowman, B. H. (1990) J. Biol. Chem.265, 501. Valentine, J. S., and Gralla, E. B. (1997) Science
and Orme-Johnson, W. H. (1984) J. Am. Chem. 10780–10785 278, 817–818
Soc.106, 3064–3066 477. Mukhopadhyay, C. K., Mazumder, B., 501a.Harrison, M. D., Jones, C. E., Solioz, M., and
455. Won, H., Olson, K. D., Wolfe, R. S., and Lindley, P. F., and Fox, P. L. (1997) Proc. Natl. Dameron, C. T. (2000) Trends Biochem. Sci.25,
Summers, M. F. (1990) J. Am. Chem. Soc.112, Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 11546–11551 29–32
2178–2184 478. Hassett, R., and Kosman, D. J. (1995) J. Biol. 502. Hoitnik, C. W. G., Driscoll, P. C., Hill, H. A.
456. Telser, J., Fann, Y.-C., Renner, M. W., Fajer, J., Chem.270, 128–134 O., and Canters, G. W. (1994) Biochemistry33,
Wang, S., Zhang, H., Scott, R. A., and 479. Georgatsou, E., Mavrogiannis, L. A., and 3560–3571
Hoffman, B. M. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119, Fragiadakis, G. S. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 503. Romero, A., Nar, H., Huber, R.,
733–743 13786–13792 Messerschmidt, A., Kalverda, A. P., Canters,
456a.Telser, J., Horng, Y.-C., Becker, D. F., 480. Glerum, D. M., Shtanko, A., and Tzagoloff, A. G. W., Durley, R., and Mathews, F. S. (1994) J.
Hoffman, B. M., and Ragsdale, S. W. (2000) (1996)J. Biol. Chem.271, 20531–20535 Mol. Biol.236, 1196–1211
J. Am. Chem. Soc.122, 182–183 481. Askwith, C., and Kaplan, J. (1998) Trends 504. Kalverda, A. P., Wymenga, S. S., Lomman, A.,
457. Varadarajan, R., and Richards, F. M. (1992) Biochem. Sci.23, 135–138 van de Ven, F. J. M., Hilbers, C. W., and
Biochemistry31, 12315–12327 482. Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y., Serpe, M., Haile, D., Yang, Canters, G. W. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.240, 358–371
458. Ermler, U., Grabarse, W., Shima, S., W., Kosman, D. J., Klausner, R. D., and Dancis, 505. Guss, J. M., Merritt, E. A., Phizackerley, R. P.,
Goubeaud, M., and Thauer, R. K. (1997) A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, 17711–17718 and Freeman, H. C. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.262,
Science278, 1457–1462 483. Zhu, Z., Labbé, S., Pena, M. M. O., and Thiele, 686–705
458a.Selmer, T., Kahnt, J., Goubeaud, M., Shima, D. J. (1998) J. Biol. Chem.273, 1277–1280 506. Garrett, T. P. J., Clingeleffer, D. J., Guss, J. M.,
S., Grabarse, W., Ermler, U., and Thauer, R. 484. Kampfenkel, K., Kushnir, S., Babiychuk, E., Rogers, S. J., and Freeman, H. C. (1984) J. Biol.
K. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 3755–3760 Inzé, D., and Van Montagu, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.259, 2822–2825
458b.Grabarse, W., Mahlert, F., Shima, S., Thauer, Chem.270, 28479–28486 507. Ryde, U., Olsson, M. H. M., Pierloot, K., and
R. K., and Ermler, U. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.303, Roos, B. O. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.261, 586–596
329–344 508. Guckert, J. A., Lowery, M. D., and Solomon, E.
I. (1995) J. Am. Chem. Soc.117, 2817–2844

--- Page 904 ---

901
References
509. Groeneveld, C. M., and Canters, G. W. (1988) 533. Hiraishi, H., Terano, A., Razandi, M., 555. Clark, K., Penner-Hahn, J. E., Whittaker, M.,
J. Biol. Chem.263, 167–173 Sugimoto, T., Harada, T., and Ivey, K. J. (1992) and Whittaker, J. W. (1994) Biochemistry33,
510. Karlsson, B. G., Tsai, L.-C., Nar, H., Sanders- J. Biol. Chem.267, 14812–14817 12553–12557
Loehr, J., Bonander, N., Langer, V., and Sjölin, 534. Deng, H.-X., Hentati, A., Tainer, J. A., Iqbal, 556. Wachter, R. M., and Branchaud, B. P. (1996)
L. (1997) Biochemistry36, 4089–4095 Z., Cayabyab, A., Hung, W.-Y., Getzoff, E. D., Biochemistry35, 14425–14435
511. van de Kamp, M., Canters, G. W., Wijmenga, Hu, P., Herzfeldt, B., Roos, R. P., Warner, C., 557. Halfen, J. A., Jazdzewski, B. A., Mahapatra, S.,
S. S., Lommen, A., Hilbers, C. W., Nar, H., Deng, G., Soriano, E., Smyth, C., Parge, H. E., Berreau, L. M., Wilkinson, E. C., Que, L., Jr.,
Messerschmidt, A., and Huber, R. (1992) Ahmed, A., Roses, A. D., Hallewell, R. A., and Tolman, W. B. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.
Biochemistry31, 10194–10207 Pericak-Vance, M. A., and Siddique, T. (1993) 119, 8217–8227
512. Messerschmidt, A., Prade, L., Kroes, S. J., Science261, 1047–1051 558. Ito, N., Phillips, S. E. V., Yadav, K. D. S., and
Sanders-Loehr, J., Huber, R., and Canters, G. 535. McNamara, J. O., and Fridovich, I. (1993) Knowles, P. F. (1994) J. Mol. Biol.238, 794–814
W. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, Nature (London)362, 20–21 559. Baron, A. J., Stevens, C., Wilmot, C.,
3443–3448 536. Wiedau-Pazos, M., Goto, J. J., Rabizadeh, S., Seneviratne, K. D., Blakeley, V., Dooley, D. M.,
513. Farver, O., Licht, A., and Pecht, I. (1987) Gralla, E. B., Roe, J. A., Lee, M. K., Valentine, Phillips, S. E. V., Knowles, P. F., and McPherson,
Biochemistry26, 7317–7321 J. S., and Bredesen, D. E. (1996) Science271, M. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 25095–25105
514. Vila, A. J., and Fernández, C. O. (1996) J. Am. 515–518 560. Whittaker, M. M., Kersten, P. J., Nakamura,
Chem. Soc.118, 7291–7298 537. Adman, E. T., Godden, J. W., and Turley, S. N., Sanders-Loehr, J., Schweizer, E. S., and
515. Casimiro, D. R., Toy-Palmer, A., Blake, R. C., (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 27458–27474 Whittaker, J. W. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 681–
II, and Dyson, H. J. (1995) Biochemistry34, 538. Suzuki, S., Kohzuma, T., Deligeer, Yamaguchi, 687
6640–6648 K., Nakamura, N., Shidara, S., Kobayashi, K., 560a.Rogers, M. S., Baron, A. J., McPherson, M. J.,
516. Grossmann, J. G., Engledew, W. J., Harvey, I., and Tagawa, S. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc.116, Knowles, P. F., and Dooley, D. M. (2000) J.
Strange, R. W., and Hasnain, S. S. (1995) 11145–11146 Am. Chem. Soc.122, 990–991
Biochemistry34, 8406–8414 539. Murphy, M. E. P., Turley, S., and Adman, E. T. 561. Dooley, D. M., Scott, R. A., Knowles, P. F.,
517. Botuyan, M. V., Toy-Palmer, A., Chung, J., (1997)J. Biol. Chem.272, 28455–28460 Colangelo, C. M., McGuirl, M. A., and Brown,
Blake, R. C., II, Beroza, P., Case, D. A., and 540. Kukimoto, M., Nishiyama, M., Murphy, M. E. D. E. (1998) J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 2599–2605
Dyson, H. J. (1996) J. Mol. Biol.263, 752–767 P., Turley, S., Adman, E. T., Horinouchi, S., and 561a.Itoh, S., Taniguchi, M., Takada, N., Nagatomo,
518. Hildebrandt, P., Matysik, J., Schrader, B., Beppu, T. (1994) Biochemistry33, 5246–5252 S., Kitagawa, T., and Fukuzumi, S. (2000) J.
Scharf, B., and Engelhard, M. (1994) 540a.Strange, R. W., Murphy, L. M., Dodd, F. E., Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 12087–12097
Biochemistry33, 11426–11431 Abraham, Z. H. L., Eady, R. R., Smith, B. E., 562. Scott, R. A., and Dooley, D. M. (1985) J. Am.
519. McManus, J. D., Brune, D. C., Han, J., and Hasnain, S. S. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.287, Chem. Soc.107, 4348–4350
Sanders-Loehr, J., Meyer, T. E., Cusanovich, 1001–1009 563. Suzuki, S., Sakurai, T., and Nakahara, A. (1986)
M. A., Tollin, G., and Blankenship, R. E. (1992) 541. Howes, B. D., Abraham, Z. H. L., Lowe, D. J., Biochemistry25, 338–341
J. Biol. Chem.267, 6531–6540 Brüser, T., Eady, R. R., and Smith, B. E. (1994) 563a.Dove, J. E., Schwartz, B., Williams, N. K., and
520. Penfield, K. W., Gerwith, A. A., and Solomon, Biochemistry33, 3171–3177 Klinman, J. P. (2000) Biochemistry39, 3690–
E. I. (1985) J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 4519–4529 542. Murphy, M. E. P., Turley, S., Kukimoto, M., 3698
521. Blair, D. F., Campbell, G. W., Schoonover, J. R., Nishiyama, M., Horinouchi, S., Sasaki, H., 564. Williamson, P. R., and Kagan, H. M. (1987) J.
Chan, S. I., Gray, H. B., Malmstrom, B. G., Pecht, Tanokura, M., and Adman, E. T. (1995) Biol. Chem.262, 8196–8201
I., Swanson, B. I., Woodruff, W. H., Cho, W. K., Biochemistry34, 12107–12117 565. Uwajima, T., Shimizu, Y., and Terada, O.
English, A. M., Fry, H. A., Lum, V., and Norton, 543. Grossmann, J. G., Abraham, Z. H. L., Adman, (1984)J. Biol. Chem.259, 2748–2753
K. A. (1985) J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 5755–5766 E. T., Neu, M., Eady, R. R., Smith, B. E., and 566. Wachter, R. M., Montague-Smith, M. P., and
521a.Robinson, H., Ang, M. C., Gao, Y.-G., Hay, Hasnain, S. S. (1993) Biochemistry32, 7360–7366 Branchaud, B. P. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc.119,
M. T., Lu, Y., and Wang, A. H.-J. (1999) 544. Peters Libeu, C. A., Kukimoto, M., 7743–7749
Biochemistry38, 5677–5683 Nishiyama, M., Horinouchi, S., and Adman, 567. Whittaker, M. M., Ballou, D. P., and Whittaker,
521b.Holz, R. C., Bennett, B., Chen, G., and Ming, E. T. (1997) Biochemistry36, 13160–13179 J. W. (1998) Biochemistry37, 8426–8436
L.-J. (1998) J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 6329–6335 544a.Inoue, T., Nishio, N., Suzuki, S., Kataoka, K., 568. Toussaint, O., and Lerch, K. (1987) Biochemis-
522. Fridovich, I. (1995) Ann. Rev. Biochem.64, 97– Kohzuma, T., and Kai, Y. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. try26, 8567–8571
112 274, 17845–17852 569. Wilcox, D. E., Porras, A. G., Hwang, Y. T.,
523. Beck, B. L., Tabatabai, L. B., and Mayfield, J. 545. Veselov, A., Olesen, K., Sienkiewicz, A., Lerch, K., Winkler, M. E., and Solomon, E. I.
E. (1990) Biochemistry29, 372–376 Shapleigh, J. P., and Scholes, C. P. (1998) (1985)J. Am. Chem. Soc.107, 4015–4027
524. Tainer, J. A., Getzoff, E. D., Richardson, J. S., Biochemistry37, 6095–6105 569a.Decker, H., and Tuczek, F. (2000) Trends
and Richardson, D. C. (1983) Nature (London) 546. Neese, F., Zumft, W. G., Antholine, W. E., and Biochem. Sci.25, 392–397
306, 284–287 Kroneck, P. M. H. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118, 570. Prigge, S. T., Kolhekar, A. S., Eipper, B. A.,
525. Pesce, A., Capasso, C., Battistoni, A., Folcarelli, 8692–8699 Mains, R. E., and Amzel, L. M. (1997) Science
S., Rotilio, G., Desideri, A., and Bolognesi, M. 546a.Rasmussen, T., Berks, B. C., Sanders-Loehr, 278, 1300–1305
(1997)J. Mol. Biol.274, 408–420 J., Dooley, D. M., Zumft, W. G., and Thomson, 571. Menniti, F. S., Knoth, J., Peterson, D. S., and
526. Rypniewski, W. R., Mangani, S., Bruni, B., A. J. (2000) Biochemistry39, 12753–12756 Diliberto, E. J., Jr. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262,
Orioli, P. L., Casati, M., and Wilson, K. S. 547. Gaykema, W. P. J., Hol, W. G. J., Vereijken, J. 7651–7657
(1995)J. Mol. Biol.251, 282–296 M., Soeter, N. M., Bak, H. J., and Beintema, J. 572. Tian, G., Berry, J. A., and Klinman, J. P. (1994)
527. Stenlund, P., Andersson, D., and Tibell, L. A. J. (1984) Nature (London)309, 23–29 Biochemistry33, 226–234
E. (1997) Protein Sci.6, 2350–2358 548. Cuff, M. E., Miller, K. I., van Holde, K. E., and 573. Meyer, T. E., Marchesini, A., Cusanovich, M.
528. Ogihara, N. L., Parge, H. E., Hart, P. J., Weiss, Hendrickson, W. A. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.278, A., and Tollin, G. (1991) Biochemistry30, 4619–
M. S., Goto, J. J., Crane, B. R., Tsang, J., Slater, 855–870 4623
K., Roe, J. A., Valentine, J. S., Eisenberg, D., 549. Hazes, B., Magnus, K. A., Bonaventura, C., 574. Messerschmidt, A., Luecke, H., and Huber, R.
and Tainer, J. A. (1996) Biochemistry35, 2316– Bonaventura, J., Dauter, Z., Kalk, K. H., and (1993)J. Mol. Biol.230, 997–1014
2321 Hol, W. G. J. (1993) Protein Sci.2, 597–619 575. Woolery, G. L., Powers, L., Peisach, J., and
529. Beyer, W. F., Jr., Fridovich, I., Mullenbach, G. 550. Solomon, E. I., and Lowery, M. D. (1993) Spiro, T. G. (1984) Biochemistry23, 3428–3434
T., and Hallewell, R. (1987) J. Biol. Chem.262, Science259, 1575–1581 576. Farver, O., Wherland, S., and Pecht, I. (1994) J.
11182–11187 551. Kitajima, N., Fujisawa, K., Fujimoto, C., Biol. Chem.269, 22933–22936
530. Banci, L., Bertini, I., Bauer, D., Hallewell, R. Moro-oka, Y., Hashimoto, S., Kitagawa, T., 577. Palmer, A. E., Randall, D. W., Xu, F., and
A., and Viezzoli, M. S. (1993) Biochemistry32, Toriumi, K., Tatsumi, K., and Nakamura, A. Solomon, E. I. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121,
4384–4388 (1992)J. Am. Chem. Soc.114, 1277–1291 7138–7149
531. Getzoff, E. D., Cabelli, D. E., Fisher, C. L., 552. Tian, G., and Klinman, J. P. (1993) J. Am. Chem. 578. Lehn, J.-M., Malmström, B. G., Selin, E., and
Parge, H. E., Viezzoli, M. S., Banci, L., and Soc.115, 8891–8897 Öblad, M. (1986) Trends Biochem. Sci.11, 228–
Hallewell, R. A. (1992) Nature (London)358, 553. Gahmberg, C. G. (1976) J. Biol. Chem.251, 230
347–351 510–515 579. Keen, C. L., Lonnerdal, B., and Hurley, L. S.
532. Afanas’ev, I. B. (1989,1991) Superoxide Ion: 554. Driscoll, J. J., and Kosman, D. J. (1987) (1984) in Biochemistry of the Essential Ultratrace
Chemistry and Biological Implications, Vol. 2, Biochemistry26, 3429–3436 Elements (Frieden, E., ed), pp. 89–132,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida Plenum, New York

--- Page 905 ---

902 Chapter 16. Transition Metals in Catalysis and Electron Transport
References
580. Schramm, V. L., and Wedler, F. C., eds. (1986) 612. Tullius, T. D., Gillum, W. O., Carlson, R. M. 642. Gladyshev, V. N., Khangulov, S. V., and
Manganese in Metabolism and Enzyme Function, K., and Hodgson, K. O. (1980) J. Am. Chem. Stadtman, T. C. (1996) Biochemistry35, 212–223
Academic Press, Orlando, Florida Soc.102, 5670–5676 643. Huber, R., Hof, P., Duarte, R. O., Moura, J. J.
581. Bartsevich, V. V., and Pakrasi, H. B. (1996) J. 613. Ryan, D. E., Grant, K. B., Nakanishi, K., G., Moura, I., Liu, M.-Y., LeGall, J., Hille, R.,
Biol. Chem.271, 26057– 26061 Frank, P., and Hodgson, K. O. (1996) Archer, M., and Romao, M. J. (1996) Proc. Natl.
582. Baker, A. P., Griggs, L. J., Munro, J. R., and Biochemistry35, 8651–8661 Acad. Sci. U.S.A.93, 8846–8851
Finkelstein, J. A. (1973) J. Biol. Chem.248, 614. Orgel, L. E. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, X (Aug.) 644. Ori, N., Eshed, Y., Pinto, P., Paran, I., Zamir,
800–883 615. Ryan, D. E., Grant, K. B., and Nakanishi, K. D., and Fluhr, R. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272,
583. Goldman, A., Ollis, D. L., and Steitz, T. A. (1996)Biochemistry35, 8640–8650 1019–1025
(1987)J. Mol. Biol.194, 147–153 616. Chasteen, N. D., ed. (1990) Vanadium in 645. Garrett, R. M., Johnson, J. L., Graf, T. N.,
584. Kanyo, Z. F., Scolnick, L. R., Ash, D. E., and Biological Systems, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Feigenbaum, A., and Rajagopalan, K. V. (1998)
Christianson, D. W. (1996) Nature (London) Dordrecht, Germany Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.95, 6394–6398
383, 554–557 617. Winter, G. E. M., and Butler, A. (1996) 646. Johnson, J. L., and Wadman, S. K. (1995) in
585. Khangulov, S. V., Sossong, T. M., Jr., Ash, D. Biochemistry35, 11805–11811 The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited
E., and Dismukes, G. C. (1998) Biochemistry 618. Wever, R., and Krenn, B. E. (1990) in Vanadium Disease, 7th ed., Vol. 2 (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet,
37, 8539–8550 in Biological Systems (Chasteen, N. D., ed), pp. A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D., eds), pp. 2271–
586. Zhou, G. W., Guo, J., Huang, W., Fletterick, R. 81– 97, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2283, McGraw-Hill, New York
J., and Scanlan, T. S. (1994) Science265, 1059– Germany 646a.Raitsimring, A. M., Pacheco, A., and Enemark,
1064 618a.Isupov, M. N., Dalby, A. R., Brindley, A. A., J. H. (1998) J. Am. Chem. Soc.120, 11263–11278
587. Hirose, K., Longo, D. L., Oppenheim, J. J., and Izumi, Y., Tanabe, T., Murshudov, G. N., and 646b.Brody, M. S., and Hille, R. (1999) Biochemistry
Matsushima, K. (1993) FASEB J.7, 361–368 Littlechild, J. A. (2000) J. Mol. Biol.299, 38, 6668–6677
588. MacMillan-Crow, L. A., Crow, J. P., and 1035–1049 647. Schindelin, H., Kisker, C., Hilton, J., Rajagopalan,
Thompson, J. A. (1998) Biochemistry37, 1613– 618b.Weyand, M., Hecht, H.-J., Kiess, M., Liaud, K. V., and Rees, D. C. (1996) Science272, 1615–
1622 M.-F., Vilter, H., and Schomburg, D. (1999) 1621
589. Boldt, Y. R., Whiting, A. K., Wagner, M. L., J. Mol. Biol.293, 595–611 648. Schneider, F., Löwe, J., Huber, R., Schindelin,
Sadowsky, M. J., Que, L., Jr., and Wackett, L. 619. Haupts, U., Tittor, J., Bamberg, E., and H., Kisker, C., and Knäblein, J. (1996) J. Mol.
P. (1997) Biochemistry36, 2147–2153 Oesterhelt, D. (1997) Biochemistry36, 2–7 Biol.263, 53–69
590. Mildvan, A. S. (1974) Ann. Rev. Biochem.43, 620. Lindquist, Y., Schneider, G., and Vihko, P. 648a.Stewart, L. J., Bailey, S., Bennett, B., Charnock,
357–399 (1994)Eur. J. Biochem.221, 139–142 J. M., Garner, C. D., and McAlpine, A. S.
591. Villafranca, J. J., and Wedler, F. C. (1974) 621. Hemrika, W., Renirie, R., Dekker, H. L., (2000)J. Mol. Biol.299, 593–600
Biochemistry13, 3286–3291 Barnett, P., and Wever, R. (1997) Proc. Natl. 648b.Rothery, R. A., Trieber, C. A., and Weiner, J.
592. Goodman, M. F., Keener, S., Guidotti, S., and Acad. Sci. U.S.A.94, 2145–2149 H. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.274, 13002–13009
Branscomb, E. W. (1983) J. Biol. Chem.258, 622. Chatterjee, R., Allen, R. M., Ludden, P. W., 648c.Temple, C. A., George, G. N., Hilton, J. C.,
3469–3475 and Shah, V. K. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.272, George, M. J., Prince, R. C., Barber, M. J., and
593. Deuel, T. F., and Prusiner, S. (1974) J. Biol. 21604–21608 Rajagopalan, K. V. (2000) Biochemistry39,
Chem.249, 257–264 623. Zhang, M., Zhou, M., Van Etten, R. L., and 4046–4052
594. Schwartz, K., and Mertz, W. (1959) Arch. Stauffacher, C. V. (1997) Biochemistry36, 15–23 648d.Li, H.-K., Temple, C., Rajagopalan, K. V., and
Biochem. Biophys.85, 292 – 295 624. Elberg, G., Li, J., and Shechter, Y. (1994) J. Biol. Schindelin, H. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Soc.122,
595. Mertz, W. (1993) J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol.123, Chem.269, 9521–9527 7673–7680
626–633 625. Li, J., Elberg, G., Crans, D. C., and Shechter, Y. 649. Pollock, V. V., and Barber, M. J. (1997) J. Biol.
596. Davis, C. M., Sumrall, K. H., and Vincent, J. B. (1996)Biochemistry35, 8314–8318 Chem.272, 3355–3362
(1996)Biochemistry35, 12963–12969 626. Heyliger, C. E., Tahiliani, A. G., and McNeill, 650. Rajagopalan, K. V. (1984) in Biochemistry of the
597. Saner, G. (1980) Chromium in Nutrition and J. H. (1985) Science227, 1474–1476 Essential Ultratrace Elements (Freiden, E., ed),
Disease, Liss, New York 627. Johnson, J. L., Rajagopalan, K. V., and Cohen, Plenum, New York
598. Frieden, E. (1972) Sci. Am.227(Jul), 52–60 H. J. (1974) J. Biol. Chem.249, 859–866 651. Kramer, S. P., Johnson, J. L., Ribeiro, A. A.,
599. Anderson, R. A., Bryden, N. A., and Canary, J. 628. Barberà, A., Rodríguez-Gil, J. E., and Guinovart, Millington, D. S., and Rajagopalan, K. V.
J. (1991) Am. J. Clin. Nutr.51, 864–868 J. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.269, 20047–20053 (1987)J. Biol. Chem.262, 16357–16363
600. Davis, C. M., and Vincent, J. B. (1997) Arch. 629. Huyer, G., Liu, S., Kelly, J., Moffat, J., Payette, 651a.Rajagopalan, K. V., and Johnson, J. L. (1992)
Biochem. Biophys.339, 335 – 343 P., Kennedy, B., Tsaprailis, G., Gresser, M. J., J. Biol. Chem.267, 10199–10202
601. O’Dell, B. L., and Campbell, B. J. (1970) and Ramachandran, C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 651b.Luykx, D. M. A. M., Duine, J. A., and de
Comprehensive Biochemistry21, 179–226 272, 843–851 Vries, S. (1998) Biochemistry37, 11366–11375
602. Zhang, L., and Lay, P. A. (1996) J. Am. Chem. 630. Li, J., Elberg, G., Gefel, D., and Shechter, Y. 651c.Liu, M. T. W., Wuebbens, M. M.,
Soc.118, 12624–12637 (1995)Biochemistry34, 6218 – 6225 Rajagopalan, K. V., and Schindelin, H. (2000)
602a.Thompson, K. H. (1999) BioFactors10, 43–51 631. Mikalsen, S.-O., and Kaalhus, O. (1998) J. Biol. J. Biol. Chem.275, 1814–1822
603. Zhitkovich, A., Voitkun, V., and Costa, M. Chem.273, 10036–10045 651d.Feng, G., Tintrup, H., Kirsch, J., Nichol, M.
(1996)Biochemistry35, 7275–7282 632. Hille, R. (1996) Chem. Rev.96, 2757–2816 C., Kuhse, J., Betz, H., and Sanes, J. R. (1998)
604. Anderson, R. A. (1994) in Risk Assessment of 633. Romão, M. J., Archer, M., Moura, I., Moura, J. Science282, 1321–1324
Essential Elements (Merz, W., Abernathy, C. O., J. G., LeGall, J., Engh, R., Schneider, M., Hof, 652. Cramer, S. P., Solomonson, L. P., Adams, M.
and Olin, S. S., eds), pp. 187–196, ISLI Press, P., and Huber, R. (1995) Science270, 1170–1176 W. W., and Mortenson, L. E. (1984) J. Am.
Washington,D.C. 634. Hille, R., and Nishino, T. (1995) FASEB J.9, Chem. Soc.106, 1467–1471
605. Conconi, A., Smerdon, M. J., Howe, G. A., and 995–1003 653. Berg, J. M., and Holm, R. H. (1985) J. Am.
Ryan, C. A. (1996) Nature (London)383, 826–829 635. Harris, C. M., and Massey, V. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. Soc.107, 917–925
606. Stearns, D. M., Wise, J. P., Sr., Patierno, S. R., Chem.272, 8370–8379 654. Cramer, S. P., Wahl, R., and Rajagopalan, K. V.
and Wetterhahn, K. E. (1995) FASEB J.9, 636. Glatigny, A., Hof, P., Romao, M. J., Huber, R., (1981)J. Am. Chem. Soc.103, 7721–7727
1643–1648 and Scazzocchio,C. (1998) J. Mol. Biol.278, 655. Shah, V. K., Ugalde, R. A., Imperial, J., and
607. Stearns, D. M., BelBruno, J. J., and Wetterhahn, 431–438 Brill, W. J. (1984) Ann. Rev. Biochem.53, 231–257
K. E. (1995) FASEB J.9, 1650–1657 637. Xiang, Q., and Edmondson, D. E. (1996) 656. Orme-Johnson, W. H. (1985) Ann. Rev.
608. Macara, I. G. (1980) Trends Biochem. Sci.5, Biochemistry35, 5441–5450 Biophys. Biophys. Chem.14, 419–459
92–94 638. Harris, C. M., and Massey, V. (1997) J. Biol. 657. Howes, B. D., Bray, R. C., Richards, R. L.,
609. Nechay, B. R., Nanninga, L. B., Nechay, P. S. Chem.272, 28335–28341 Turner, N. A., Bennett, B., and Lowe, D. J.
E., Post, R. L., Grantham, J. J., Macara, I. G., 639. Glatigny, A., and Scazzocchio, C. (1995) J. Biol. (1996)Biochemistry35, 1432–1443
Kubena, L. F., Phillips, T. D., and Nielsen, F. Chem.270, 3534–3550 657a.Caldeira, J., Belle, V., Asso, M., Guigliarelli, B.,
H. (1986) Fed. Proc.45, 123–132 640. Bläse, M., Bruntner, C., Tshisuaka, B., Fetzner, Moura, I., Moura, J. J. G., and Bertrand, P.
610. Chasteen, N. D. (1983) Struct. Bonding53, S., and Lingens, F. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, (2000)Biochemistry39, 2700–2707
104–138 23068–23079 658. Rothery, R. A., Magalon, A., Giordano, G.,
611. Boyd, D. W., and Kustin, K. (1985) Adv. Inorg. 641. Canne, C., Stephan, I., Finsterbusch, J., Lingens, Guigliarelli, B., Blasco, F., and Weiner, J. H.
Biochem.6, 311–365 F., Kappl, R., Fetzner, S., and Hüttermann, J. (1998)J. Biol. Chem.273, 7462–7469
(1997)Biochemistry36, 9780–9790

--- Page 906 ---

903
References
659. Augier, V., Guigliarelli, B., Asso, M., Bertrand, 671. Khangulov, S. V., Gladyshev, V. N., Dismukes, 679. Nagahara, N., Okazaki, T., and Nishino, T.
P., Frixon, C., Giordano, G., Chippaux, M., and G. C., and Stadtman, T. C. (1998) Biochemistry (1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 16230–16235
Blasco, F. (1993) Biochemistry32, 2013–2023 37, 3518–3528 680. Nishino, T., Usami, C., and Tsushima, K. (1983)
660. Magalon, A., Asso, M., Guigliarelli, B., 672. George, G. N., Colangelo, C. M., Dong, J., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.80, 1826–1829
Rothery, R. A., Bertrand, P., Giordano, G., and Scott, R. A., Khangulov, S. V., Gladyshev, V. 681. Rech, S., Wolin, C., and Gunsalus, R. P. (1996)
Blasco, F. (1998) Biochemistry37, 7363–7370 N., and Stadtman, T. C. (1998) J. Am. Chem. J. Biol. Chem.271, 2557–2562
661. Campbell, W. H., and Kinghorn, J. R. (1990) Soc.120, 1267–1273 682. Blanchard, C. Z., and Hales, B. J. (1996)
Trends Biochem. Sci.15, 315–319 673. Shuber, A. P., Orr, E. C., Recny, M. A., Schendel, Biochemistry35, 472–478
662. Garde, J., Kinghorn, J. R., and Tomsett, A. B. P. F., May, H. D., Schauer, N. L., and Ferry, J. G. 683. Chan, M. K., Mukund, S., Kletzin, A., Adams,
(1995)J. Biol. Chem.270, 6644–6650 (1986)J. Biol. Chem.261, 12942–12947 M. W. W., and Rees, D. C. (1995) Science267,
663. Ratnam, K., Shiraishi, N., Campbell, W. H., 674. Muller, U., Willnow, P., Ruschig, U., and 1463–1469
and Hille, R. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.270, 24067– Höpner, T. (1978) Eur. J. Biochem.83, 485–498 683a.Hu, Y., Faham, S., Roy, R., Adams, M. W. W.,
24072 675. Rohde, M., Mayer, F., and Meyer, O. (1984) J. and Rees, D. C. (1999) J. Mol. Biol.286, 899–
663a.George, G. N., Mertens, J. A., and Campbell, Biol. Chem.259, 14788–14792 914
W. H. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc.121, 9730 – 9731 676. Ribbe, M., Gadkari, D., and Meyer, O. (1997) 684. Koehler, B. P., Mukund, S., Conover, R. C.,
664. Stadtman, T. C. (1991) J. Biol. Chem.266, J. Biol. Chem.272, 26627–26633 Dhawan, I. K., Roy, R., Adams, M. W. W., and
16257–16260 676a.Dobbek, H., Gremer, L., Meyer, O., and Johnson, M. K. (1996) J. Am. Chem. Soc.118,
665. Berg, B. L., Baron, C., and Stewart, V. (1991) Huber, R. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 12391–12405
J. Biol. Chem.266, 22386–22391 96, 8884–8889 685. Mukund, S., and Adams, M. W. W. (1995) J.
666. Berg, B. L., Li, J., Heider, J., and Stewart, V. 676b.Gremer, L., Kellner, S., Dobbek, H., Huber, Biol. Chem.270, 8389–8392
(1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 22380–22385 R., and Meyer, O. (2000) J. Biol. Chem.275, 686. Johnson, M. K., Rees, D. C., and Adams, M.
667. Stewart, V. (1988) Microbiol. Rev.52, 190–232 1864–1872 W. W. (1996) Chem. Rev.96, 2817–2839
668. Sawers, G., Heider, J., Zehelein, E., and Böck, 676c.Hänzelmann, P., Dobbek, H., Gremer, L., 687. Yadav, J., Das, S. K., and Sarkar, S. (1997) J.
A. (1991) J. Bacteriol.173, 4983–4993 Huber, R., and Meyer, O. (2000) J. Mol. Biol. Am. Chem. Soc.119, 4315–4316
669. Gladyshev, V. N., Boyington, J. C., Khangulov, 301, 1221–1235 688. Juszczak, A., Aono, S., and Adams, M. W. W.
S. V., Grahame, D. A., Stadtman, T. C., and 677. Rajagopalan, K. V., and Johnson, J. L. (1992) J. (1991)J. Biol. Chem.266, 13834–13841
Sun, P. D. (1996) J. Biol. Chem.271, 8095–8100 Biol. Chem.267, 10199–10202
670. Boyington, J. C., Gladyshev, V. N., Khangulov, 678. Wahl, R. C., Warner, C. K., Finnerty, V., and
S. V., Stadtman, T. C., and Sun, P. D. (1997) Rajagopalan, K. V. (1982) J. Biol. Chem.257,
Science275, 1305–1306 3958–3962
Study Questions
1. Describe one or more metabolic functions of ions 4. Suppose that you could add a solution containing
or chelate complexes of ions derived from each of micromolar concentrations of Cu2+, Mn2+, Fe 3+,
,
the following metallic elements: Ca, Mg, Fe, Cu, Co2+, Zn2+, and MoO 2–and millimolar amounts of
4
Ni, Co. Mg2+, Ca2+, and K+ to a solution that contains a
large excess of a mixture of many cellular proteins.
2. If the concentration of Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase What would be the characteristics of the sites that
(SOD) in a yeast cell is 10 µM, the total copper would become occupied by each of these metal ions?
(bound and free) is 70 µM, and the dissociation How tightly do you think they would be bound?
constant for loss of Cu+ from SOD is 6 fM, what
will be the concentration of free Cu+ within the 5. What factors affect the rate of electron transfer
cell? If the cell volume is 10–14 liter, how many from an electron donor(atom or molecule) to an
copper ions will be present in a single cell? See acceptor?
Roeet al. (1999) Science284, 805 – 808.
6. List some mechanism that cells can use to combat
3. Outline the metabolic pathways that are utilized the toxicity of metal ions?
by acetic acid-producing bacteria (acetogens) in
the stoichiometric conversion of one molecule of 7. NADH peroxidase (p. 857, Eq. 15-59) does not
glucose into three molecules of acetic acid. Indicate contain a transition metal ion. Propose a reasonable
briefly the nature of any unusual coenzymes or detailed mechanism for its action and compare it
metalloproteins that are required. with mechanisms of action of heme peroxidases.

--- Page 907 ---



--- Page 908 ---

905
Index to
Volume 1
Page numbers set in boldface refer to major discussions.
The symbol s after a page number refers to a chemical structure.
A formation from fatty acids 511 Acrylonitrile 115
synthesis of 660 ACTH 54s
reactions of, table 700 adenylate cyclase in action of 556
ABC transporters 417, 419, 839 Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 725 – 729 Actin 406
Abequose 180s biotin subunit 726 F-actin structure 338
abl 572, 576 Acetylene hydratase 894 thin filaments 369
Abortive complexes 466. See also Nonpro- Acetylenic fatty acids 381 Actinidin 618
ductive complexes Acetyl-enzyme α-Actinin 370, 405
Absorption spectra in citrate lyase 704 Actinomycetes 6
of N-acetyltyrosine ethyl ester 123 from serine proteases 617 Activation
of adenosine 205 N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) 164, 599 of enzyme(s) 471– 478
of aromatic amino acid derivatives 123 N-Acetyllactosamine 183 of enzyme synthesis 536
bands at 500 nm 750 N-Acetylmuramic acid (MurNAc) 165s, 599 noncompetitive 473 – 475
of cytidine 205 N-Acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc) 165s Activation cascade, pancreatic proteases 609
of cytochrome c 847 N-Acetylornithine 742 Active transport 379, 410, 417– 420
of proteins 122, 123 Acetyl phosphate 799 of Na+ and K+ 424
of uridine 205 O-Acetylserine sulfhydrylase 742 Activity of a solute 287
of vitamin B coenzyme 750 S-Acetyltransferase 661 Activity coefficients 288
6
Acarbose 607, 607s N-Acetyltyrosine amide 617s Acyl-ACP, dehydrogenation of 766
Acatalasemia 852 Acid(s) Acyl adenylate 507
Acetabularia 21, 22 enthalpy change of dissociation, table Acyl carrier protein (ACP) 681, 704, 723
Acetaldehyde, hydration equilibrium 677 293 Acyl-CoA 526
Acetan 179 Gibbs energy of dissociation, table 293 Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 766, 785, 789
Acetate pK values of, table 293 Acyl-dihydrolipoyl derivative 736
a
binding constants to metal ions 311 strengths of 95–96 Acyl-enzyme
Gibbs energy of oxidation 297 Acid – base catalysis 469, 486 – 491 in glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydro-
Acetate kinase 661 concerted 490 genase 775
Acetic acid of mutarotation 487 intermediates 610 – 613
pK values of 99, 293 Acid – base chemistry Acyl groups table of names 380
a
Acetic anhydride, acylation by 124 of amino acids 51– 55, 304 – 307 Acyl phosphates 507, 509, 660 – 661, 775s
Acetoacetate decarboxylase 705 of enzymatic action 486 – 491, 691– 698 Acylation 124
Acetoacetyl-CoA 700s of nucleic acids 204 – 211 of proteins 559
Acetohydroxy acid isomeroreductase 712 Acid catalysis in regulation 543
Acetohydroxy acid synthase 734 general 487– 491 Acylglycerols 382
Acetolactate 734s, 735 specific 489 Acyltransferases 637
Acetone 705s Acid phosphatases 645 Adair equation 328, 354
tautomerism 45 Acidity Adaptor proteins
Acetyl adenylate 661, 720 of benzoic acids 308 Grb2 577
Acetylation of fatty acids 380 Shc 577
coenzyme A for 720 of groups in enzymes 486 Addition – elimination sequence 526
of histones 549 of ketones 46 Addition reactions 526, 530, 677– 690
of sulfanilamide 720 of phenols 308 of double bonds, adjacent to
Acetylcholine of phenylacetic acids 308 carboxylate 683 – 690
as neurotransmitter 720 Aconitase 676, 686 – 688, 861 of double bonds, carbon-carbon
receptor 422 active site structure 689 681– 683
Acetylcholinesterase 609, 634, 636 proton retention 686 of double bonds, isolated 688
pseudosubstrate of 636 cis-Aconitate 516s, 686s of double bonds, polarized 677– 690
Acetyl-CoA (acetyl-coenzyme A) 506s, 508, isomerization of 697 of enolate to carbon dioxide 705 – 710
881 Acrasins 557 facilitation by carbonyl group 681
carboxylation of 724 Acridine yellow 223s isomerization 690
corrinoid-dependent synthesis 876, Acrosomal process 370 nucleophilic 123
877 Acrylochlorin heme 845, 845s reversibility of 690

--- Page 909 ---

906 Volume 1 Index
stereochemistry 680, 681 Agarose 177s formation 870
Adducin 405 activated 105 synthesis 869 – 870
Adenine (Ade, A) 199s, 203 double helices in 177 Alkyl radicals, table of names 380
binding constants to metal ions 311 gel networks of 175 Alleles 184
Adenosine (Ado) 203, 778s Agglutinins (lectins) 427 Alliinase 742
absorption spectra of 205 Aggrecan 181 Allolactose 168
acid– base chemistry 204, 205 Aggregation of cells 187 Allose (All) 163s
hypermodified 235 Aglycone 167 Allosteric activation 539
pK value of 293 Agonists 479 Allosteric constant 476
a
Adenosine 5'-phosphate. SeeAMP Agrin 437 Allosteric control
Adenosine diphosphate. SeeADP Agrobactin 838 of enzymes 539– 541
Adenosine monophosphate. SeeAMP Alamethicin 414 Monod-Wyman-Changeux model 349
Adenosine triphosphate. SeeATP Alanine (Ala, A) 52s Allosteric effectors 357, 475 – 477, 536
Adenosine-diphosphate-ribose.See ADP- pK values of 293 Allosteric inhibition 539
a
ribose L-Alanine (Ala, A) 52, 52s Allosteric properties
S-Adenosylhomocysteine 592s, 778s binding constants to metal ions 311 of enzymes 539– 541
S-Adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase 778 biosynthesis 517 of repressor protein 539
S-Adenosylmethionine (AdoMet, β-Alanine Allosteric site 473
SAM) 591, 592s, 813, 875 in coenzyme A 722 Allostery (allosterism) 475
decarboxylation 753, 754 D-Alanine 429 Alloxan 121
reaction with catechol L-Alanyl-L-alanine Allylic rearrangement 527, 712
O-methyltransferase 592 pK value of 293 with condensation 527
a
Adenosyltransferase, B
12s
870 D-Alanyl-D-alanyl carboxypeptidase Allysine 429
Adenoviruses 247, 346 625 Alpha-carbon plot 64
Adenylate cyclase 556–557, 556s, 657 L-Alanyl-L-valyl-L-methionine 57s Alpha effect on reaction rates 590
characterization of 556 Albinism 887 Alpha helix Seeα Helix
toxic 548 Alcohol(s) Alport disease 438
Adenylate kinase 303, 654, 655s addition to carbonyl 677 Alternan 175
fold 658, 659 dehydrogenation of 765– 767 Alternative splicing of proteins 538
functions of 655 Alcohol dehydrogenase(s) 766 Altman, Sidney 84
Adenylate system 302– 304 isoenzymes 774 Altrose (Alt) 163s
storage of energy 302 stereospecificity of 479 Aluminum
5'-Adenylic acid. SeeAMP structure 773 hydroxide complex, soluble 310
Adenylosuccinate lyase 685 zinc in 680, 772 – 775 toxicity of 658
Adenylylation 545 Aldaric acid 164 Amadori rearrangement 169
Adenylyl cyclases. SeeAdenylate cyclase Aldehyde(s) Ameba 18
Adenylyl groups covalent hydrates 775 Amebic dystentery 187
transfer from ATP 660 dehydrogenation of 766 Amebocytes 23, 25
Adhesion discs (septate desmosomes) 29 oxidation of 775 Ameloblasts 442
Adhesion proteins 187 Aldehyde dehydrogenases 776 Ameloblastin 442
Adipocyte 379s Aldehyde oxidases 794, 890 Amelogenins 442
ADP (Adenosine diphosphate) 536 Aldehyde oxido-reductase 891s Amicyanin 817, 883
in adenylate system 302 – 304 Aldimine. 434s See also Schiff bases Amide(s)
complexes with metal ions 296 external, of pyridoxal phosphate 741 displacement reactions of 608
dissociation as acid 288 internal, of pyridoxal phosphate 741 linkages in proteins 55 – 57
intracellular concentration 304 from pyridoxal phosphate 742s mechanism of formation 661, 662
P-31 NMR spectrum 642 Aldo-keto reductases 774 resonance energy 299
pK value of 293 Aldolase(s) 527, 679, 699–703 weak basic properties 56
a
in regulation 535 Schiff bases in 732 Amidination 124
ADP-ribose (ADPR) 315, 778, 780 type I 699 Amiloride 421s
ADP-ribosylation 545, 778 type II 699, 700 Amine(s)
ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs) 559 Aldolase A addition to carbonyl 677
Adrenaline (epinephrine) 534, 542, 553, 553s enzyme-substrate complex 699 dehydrogenation of 766
in adrenergic receptor 535 Aldol cleavage 698, 742 Amine oxidases 766, 782
α-Adrenergic receptors 553, 558, 563 in epimerization 778 Amino acid(s) 51–55
β-Adrenergic receptors 553, 554 Aldol condensation(s) 527, 529s, 699, 700 abbreviations of, table 52, 53
in asthma 553 Aldonic acid 164 alpha (s) 41
in heart failure 553 Aldose-ketose interconversions 692 aromatic, light absorption 749
receptor kinase 553 Aldose reductase 774 C-terminal 57
structure (proposed) 534, 555 Algae 20 – 22 configurations 42
topology 555 Algin 21 dehydrogenation of 775
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) 54s Alginates 170, 178 as dipolar ions 42, 51
Adrenodoxin reductase 764, 788 Alkali metal ions 206 essential 52, 53
Adsorption chromatography 103 Alkaline phosphatases 645 N-terminal 57
Adsorption isotherm 326 active site of 645 pK values of 55
a
Aequorin 314 occurrence 645 table 52, 53
Aerobes, obligate 8 Alkane(s) 382 residues (definition) 57
Affinity chromatography 104 – 106 Alkenes, hydration of 683 separation by ion exchange
Affinity labeling 127, 477, 623 Alkyl shift, rearrangements with 527 chromatography 104
African sleeping sickness 787 Alkyl cobalt 867 sequences of 57
Agammaglobulinemia 572 Alkyl ethers 382 side chain groups 55
Agar-agar 170 Alkyl cobalamins table 52, 53

--- Page 910 ---

Volume 1 Index 907
Amino acid decarboxylase 744 Animal cells, surroundings of 431– 443 Arrows, drawing 528, 529
Amino acid dehydrogenase 766 Animal tissue, composition of 31 Arsenate
Amino acid oxidases 782 Ankyrin 405 phosphorylation, uncoupling of 596
D-Amino acid oxidase 478, 790, 791s Annelida (segmented worms) 24 similarity to phosphate 596
of kidney 781 Annexins 316, 422, 571 Arsenic compounds 387, 596–597
Amino acid sequence 57– 59 Anomeric carbon atom 162 toxicity of 596
of aspartate aminotransferase 57, 202 Anomeric effect 166 Arsenicals in treatment of syphilis, 597
of insulin 118 Antagonists 479 Arsenite, reaction with thiols 596
Amino acid side chains Antamanide 414 Arseno-ribofuranoside 596s
torsion angles of 61, 62 Na+ complex 415s Arsenolysis 596
Amino group(s) Anthranilate 747s of glucose 1-phosphate 595
reactions of 123 Anthrax 548 Arsenophospholipid 387s
Aminoacrylate 744s Anti conformation of nucleosides 211, 212 Arthropods 24
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases 662 Antibiotics 414, 479 Ascaris 25
p-Aminobenzoate 473s anthracycline 223 chromosome number of 18
γ-Aminobutyric acid (Gaba) 744 Anticoagulation systems in blood 634 Ascarylose 180s
Aminocyclopropane carboxylate (ACC) 744s Anticodon 231 Ascomycetes 20
α-Aminoisobutyric acid 69 Anticodon loop in tRNA Ascorbate oxidase 887
δ-Aminolevulinic acid 742, 745s hypermodified base in 231 Ascorbate peroxidase 852
biosynthesis 742, 745 Anticooperativity 352 Ascorbic acid 721
formation from glutamate-1- in binding 329, 497 nutritional requirement 756
semialdehyde 742 to metal ions 307 Ascus 20
Aminomutases (vitamin B ) 872, 874 of protons 330 Ash, amount from tissue 31
12
8-Amino-7-oxo-nonanoate 718, 742 Antidotes for organic phosphates 636 Asparagine (Asn, N) 53s
Aminopeptidase(s) 117, 609, 627 Antienzymes 539 Aspartase 526
β-Aminopropionitrile 438 Antifreeze proteins 191 Aspartate 737s
Aminopterin, inhibition of dehydrofolate Antigen(s) 427 binding constants to metal ions 311
reductase 805 O-Antigen(s) 428 biosynthesis 711
Aminotransferase(s) 737, 740 – 743, 747– 753 ofSalmonella 180 effect on biotin requirement 724
half reactions 737 Antigenic determinants 427 metabolism of 539
Ammonia Antihemophilic factor 632 residues 312
binding constants to metal ions 311 Antimetabolites 473 Aspartate aminotransferase 57s, 135s, 753
pK value of 99, 293 Antioxidants 818 – 820, 822 – 824, 826 absorption spectra 749
a
Amoeba proteus 19 vitamin E 721, 818, 819, 822, 823 active site structure 744
AMP (Adenosine 5'-phosphate) 203 Antiparallelβ structures 62 atomic structure 750
in adenylate system 302 – 304 α-Antiplasmin 634 catalytic intermediates, models 752
2
dissociation as acid 288 Antiport process 410 NMR spectra 149
pK value of 293 Antithrombin 634 quinonoid intermediate 750
a
as protein handle 719 Antitrypsin 58 Ramachandran plot 61
Amphipathic character 380, 401 AP-1 (Activator Protein) 576, 577 sequence 57
Amplification Apoferritin 842 transamination 742
of DNA 260 Apoptosis 574, 619 Aspartate ammonia-lyase 685
of signals 567 Apple motif of proteins 367 Aspartate carbamoyltransferase 348s
α-Amylase(s) 603, 605 – 608 Apurinic acid 250 active sites 348
action patterns of 606 Apyrimidinic acid 255 regulation 540
calcium ion in 606 Aquaporins 411, 412 Aspartateα-decarboxylase 753, 755
chloride ion in 606 Arabidopsis thaliana Aspartateβ-decarboxylase 746
pancreatic, 606s genome 12, 29 Aspartate racemase 741
pH profile of 471 Arabinan 177 Aspartic acid (Asp, D) 52, 53s
subsites 606 Arabinogalactan 431 biosynthesis 517
β-Amylase(s) 603, 608 L-Arabinose (Ara) 163 pK
a
value of 293, 487
Amylopectin 165, 170, 172, 173s binding protein 418 Aspartic proteases 621–625
Amylose 165, 170, 172 D-Arabinose (Ara) 163s Aspartyl aminopeptidase 621
double-helical form 173 L-Arabinose isomerase 693 β-Aspartyl phosphate 539, 540s
Anaerobes Arachidonic acid 381s, 565 Assays of enzyme activity 456
facultative 8 Aragonite 440 Assembly core of virus shell 365
obligate 8 Archaea 8 Assembly pathway
Anaerobic nucleotide reductases 864 Archaeobacteria 7, 815 Bacteriophage T4 367
Anaphylaxis 385 Area detector for X-rays 134 for virus φX174 366
Anchors, membrane for proteins 402 Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) sequence 408 Association constant. SeeFormation constant
diphytanylglyceryl 402 Arginase 888 Astacin 627
glycosylphosphatidylinositol manganese in 888 Asthma 26, 385
(phosphatidylinositol-glycan) 403, Arginine (Arg, R) 53s, 745 Asymmetric unit of crystal 134
403s, 523 Arginine kinase 656 Asymmetry of molecules 41– 43
myristoyl 402, 522 Arginine phosphate 303 handedness 41– 43
palmitoyl 522 Argininosuccinate lyase 685 in oligomers 344
polyprenyl 402 Aromatic clusters in proteins 75 Ataxia telangiectasia 566, 574
Angiosperms 29 Aromatic groups, formation by elimination Atomic force microscope 131
Angiotensin II 563 689 diagram of 131
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 625 Arrhenius activation energy 483 Atomic force microscopy 131, 179, 392
Anhydrobiotic organisms 168 Arrhenius equation 483 Atomic structures of macromolecules. See
1,5-Anhydro-D-glucitol 165s Arrhenius, Svante A. 9, 83 Three-dimensional structures

--- Page 911 ---

908 Volume 1 Index
pyridoxal phosphate enzymes 750 largest 8 Beta oxidation 511, 512
Atoms, table of sizes 41 methanogens 7 of fatty acids 511, 512
ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) 536, 719– 720 coenzymes of 813–815 Knoop’s theory 513
in acetylation of sulfanilamide 720 nutrition of 8 pathway 506
in adenylate system 302 – 304 photoautotrophic 8 Beta propeller 67, 560, 764
analogs of 655 photosynthetic 7, 9 Beta ribbons 241
binding constants to metal ions 311 pili 335 Beta sheet 64
as coenzymes 719 Bacterial dehydratases Beta spiral 74
complexes with metal ions 296 Fe-S clusters in 861 Bicarbonate ion
dissociation as acid 288 Bacterial diseases 7 from carbon dioxide 677
exchange-inert complex 643 Bacteriophages in carboxylation 710
formation during oxidation of filamentous (fd, f1, M13) 129, 334, 335 into carboxyl groups 711
aldehyde, scheme 775 helical 244 rates of incorporation 710
hydrolysis of 507 temperate 248 Bicarbonate sensor 557
enthalpy of 296 BacteriophageφX174 244 Bicinchoninic acid 102
Gibbs energy of 293, 297 Bacteriophage P22 BICINE buffer 99
pK values of 293 tailspike protein 66, 66s pK value of 99
a a
proteases, dependent 627, 628 Bacteriophages T-even 244, 363 Biliverdin 852
in regulation 535 Bacteriophage T4(s) 363s Binding.See also Association
screw-sense isomer 643 assembly pathway 367 by macromolecules 327– 330
synthesis of 303, 507– 515 lysozyme 599 cooperative processes 330 – 332
ATPase 638 Bacteriorhodopsin 71 equilibria 325– 332
Ca2+ 424, 425s Baculoviruses 247 of metal ions 307
gastric H+, K+- 424 Baltimore, David 84 multiple sites of 327– 330
H+, K+- 424 Band 3 protein 404 ordered 464
Na+, K+- [ (Na+ + K+)-activated ] 423 of erythrocytes 420 of oxygen. See oxygen (O), binding of
2
P-type 423 Barrels random order 464, 467
traffic 417 α/β 77 Binding constant(s) 325 – 327. See also
vacuolar 425 α,α 71 Formation constant
ATP, biosynthesis of β 65 anticooperativity 329, 330
in fermentation reactions 661 Basal body of flagella 15 intrinsic 328
uncoupling 636 Basal metabolic rate 283 for metal complexes, table 311
ATP-citrate lyase 703 relationship to surface area 283 microscopic 328, 329
ATP synthase 425, 514, 659 Basal stem cells 439 of protons to dianions, table 328
Atrial natriuretic factor 561 Base(s) Binding curves 326
Aurocyanin 883 of nucleic acids 199 sigmoidal 331
Autocatalytic reaction 470 strengths of 95, 96 Binding energy
Autocrine effect 385, 574 Base catalysis, general 487– 491 relation to maximum velocity 617
Autophosphorylation of receptor 562 Base composition of DNA and RNA 239 Binding equilibria 325 – 332
Auxilin 427 Base pairs 207– 211 dimerizing protein 350 – 352
Avidin 257, 728 angle of twist 217 Binding protein(s) 418
Avogadro’s number 283 base inclination 217 for histidine 419s
Axis (axes) of symmetry 322, 323, 327– 338 of DNA 200 for hormones 536
Axons 11 Hoogsteen 207, 231 Binding sites, multiple 327
Azurins 883 propeller twist 217 Bioactivation of insecticides 636
strength of 209 Biochemical equilibria 304– 316
tautomerism 211 Biochemical reactions
B thermodynamics of 209 table of types 526,527
Watson-Crick 207, 231 Biocytin 724, 724s
wobble 209, 231 Biological recognition 29
Base quartets 207– 211 glycoproteins, in 186
Bacillus, definition of 6
Base triplets 207– 211 Biomineral precursor 843
Bacillus subtilis
Basement membrane 15, 72, 431, 436 Biopolymers, hydrolysis of 292
genome 12
Basidiomycetes 20 Biopterin 803, 804s
Bacteria 2. See also Specific genus and species
Basophils 26, 188 as hydroxylation coenzyme 803
acetic acid 8 β Bend 72– 74 Biosensors 122
aerobes 10
bcl 572 Biosynthesis 507, 515– 517
anaerobic 8
Bdellovibrio 3 of isoprenoid compounds 689
autotrophic 8
Benzaldehyde, resonance energy 299 scheme 506, 509
binding to cells 186
Benzene, resonance energy 299 Biosynthetic pathways
branched fatty acids of 381
Benzoic acid committed step 535
chemoheterotrophic 7, 8
acidity of 308 feedback inhibition 535
chemolithotrophic 7
pK value of 309 schemes 506, 509
classification of 6–8 a
Benzoylformate decarboxylase 734 Biotin 515, 516, 711, 721, 723– 730, 723s
coats 431
Berenil 225s biosynthesis of 718, 745
composition of 31
Beriberi 721 in enzymes, table 724
electron micrograph of 4
Beryllium, toxicity of 299 mechanism of action 725 – 729
flagella 6
BES buffer 99 nutritional requirement 756
gram-negative 6, 7, 180
pK value of 99 Biotin-binding proteins 728
transporters in 416 – 420 a
Beta cleavage. SeeCleavage, beta Biotin carboxylase 724
gram-positive 6, 7, 185, 190, 428
Beta condensation. SeeCondensation, beta Biotin carboxyl carrier protein 724
L forms 6 Beta helix Seeβ Helix Biotin holoenzyme synthetase 724

--- Page 912 ---

Volume 1 Index 909
Biotinidase 725 Bromoperoxidase(s) 856 Calvin, Melvin 84
BIS-TRIS buffer 99 Brönsted equation in basicity 490 Cambium layer 29
pK value of 99 Brönsted plot 309, 490 Cambrian explosion 9
a
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate 596s Brown, Michael S. 84 cAMP 536, 544, 544s, 556, 557
in glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate Brownian movement 461 second messenger 557
dehydrogenase 775 Brucellosis 7 Cancer 573– 575
2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate 357s, 361 Bryophyta 29 chemotherapy 224, 812
effect on hemoglobin 357 Buchner, Edward 83, 456 p53 as suppressor 581
Bisphosphoglycerate mutase 654 Buffer(s) 97–98 Cancer cells
Bisulfite 779 table 99 communicating junctions in 29
reaction with uridine 251 volatile 98 lack of contact inhibition 29
with thiamin 731 β Bulge 66, 67s promoters 573
Biuret 102s Burkitt’s lymphoma 572, 576 Capsid 244
Biuret method 102 Butyrylcholinesterase 634 Capsomers 244
BK virus 247 Capsule 6
Black membrane 393 Captopril 624
Bleomycin 225s C Carbamate group (See also carbamino group)
Bleomycin hydrolase 619 80
Blood in ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase
carbonic anhydrase 678 707– 709
Cacodylic acid, pK value of 99
cell(s) 26 a Carbamates
Cadherin(s) 187, 407
complement system 58, 414 in proteins 80
domains 408s
proteins of 58 Carbamino groups 678 See also Carbamate
Cadmium 317
Blood-brain barrier 29 group
toxicity of 680
Blood clotting 631– 634 in hemoglobin 358
cADP ribose (cyclic ADP ribose) 564s
anticoagulation systems 634 in regulation 543
Caenorhabditis elegans
cascade mechanism 632 Carbamoylation
apoptosis 619
cofactors 631 by sodium cyanide
cuticle 440
inhibition of 622 Carbamylation See also Carbamoylation
genome 12
intrinsic mechanism 633 of lysine 707
number of cells 24
Blood group determinants 182, 183 of ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase
Cage effect 462, 463
ABO system 184, 185 707
Caged phosphate 137
Cad antigen 185 by sodium cyanate 124
Calbindins 313
Kell antigens 185 Carbanion mechanism of flavin dehydroge-
Calcineurin 646
Lewis blood group 184, 185 nase 790
Calciosomes 314, 563
MN antigens 185 Carbinolamine(s) 677
Calcite 440
P group 185 configurations 680
Calcitonin 314
Rh antigen 185 formation of 526
Calcium 314– 315
Blood plasma Carbocation(s)
oscillations 315
electrolyte concentrations 206 from alkenes 683
release channel 314
proteins 58 oxocarbenium ion 598s
in signaling 563– 566
Blood platelets 26, 384 Carbocation mechanism
Calcium-binding protein(s) 312
Blood type. SeeBlood group determinants of fumarate hydratase 684
Calcium-binding sites 312
Blue-green algae. SeeCyanobacteria Carbocationic intermediate 595
Calcium carbonate
Blue multicopper oxidase 887 Carbodiimide 105s
spicules 443
Bohr effect 357 Carbohydrate(s)
Calcium channels 422
Boltzmann constant 284 analysis 188
Calcium ion(s) 31, 314, 315
numerical value of 283 caloric value 283
activation of metabolic processes 314
Bond(s) content, in tissues 31
concentration
angles 39– 40 hydrolysis of 189
in tissues 314
energies, table 299 methylation of 189
in serum 314
lengths 40 NMR spectra of 190 – 192
effects on equilibria 297
Bonding periodate oxidation of 190
interaction with carboxylate groups 47
heterologous 333, 334 Carbohydrate-binding proteins. Seelectins
Callose 170, 174
isologous 338 Carbon-14, properties of 110
Calmodulin 313, 315, 317s
nonsymmetric 344 Carbon-carbon bonds
in phosphorylase kinase 544
Bone 26, 440, 441 addition to 681– 683
Calnexin 188, 520
Bone morphogenic factor 443 cleavage of 530
Caloric values of food 282, 283
Bordetella 548 reduction of 777
table 283
Boric acid, pK value of 99 Carbon dioxide 358
a Calorie, definition of 282
Borohydride carbon units, source of 810
Calorimeter
in carbohydrate analysis 190 hydration of 677, 710
bomb 282
reduction by 124, 190 reduction of 881
differential scanning 285
Boronic acids 622 reduction, scheme 814
Calorimetry
Bradford method 102 resonance energy 299
animal 283
Brain stability of 690
differential scanning of membranes
of molluscs, organization 24 Carbon monoxide 553
394
transporters in 416, 417, 420 in hemoglobin 358
Calpactin See Annexin
Branch migration in DNA 229 oxidation of 881
Calpains 619
Breast cancers 572 resonance energy 299
Calreticulins 313
Brine shrimp 168 Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase/acetyl-
Calsequestrin 313, 314
Bromelain 618 CoA synthase 881, 882

--- Page 913 ---

910 Volume 1 Index
Carbon monoxide oxidase 893 Catabolism 536 Cell differentiation antigens (cluster of
Carbonic acid, pK value of 99 and ATP synthesis 507– 515 differentiation, CD) 187, 407
a
Carbonic anhydrase 443, 676– 678, 710 pathways of 506, 509 Cell membranes 3
active site structure 679 Catalase(s) 844, 852 – 855, 853s anions 420, 421
mechanism 678 catalytic cycles, scheme 855 Cellobiohydrolases 602
turnover number of 458, 678 compounds I, II 853 – 855 Cell recognition 29
Carbonium ion. See Carbocation function of 852 Cell respiration, inhibition 636
1,1'-Carbonyl-diimidazole 105s hereditary deficiency 852 Cell signaling, table of abbreviations 577
Carbonyl group iron properties 853 Cell structure, compartments 552
addition of enolate anion 699 – 704 mechanisms of catalysis 853 – 855 Cell types
addition to 677 molecular activity of 852 animal 25
in displacement reactions 608 – 637, 698 turnover number of 458 plant 29, 30
facilitation of addition or elimination Catalysis (acid, base) 469, 486 Cell wall 5, 10, 15, 427– 441
681 Catalysis (enzymatic) of bacteria 427– 431
formation 723 – 730 acid and base 469, 486 – 491 of plants 5, 177, 179, 443
in metabolic sequences 681 covalent 494 in micrograph 13
reactivity 608 mechanisms of 482– 497 Cellulases 602, 603
transient formation of 777, 778 microenvironment 495 structural features 602
N-1'-Carboxybiocytin microscopic reversibility 486 Cellulose 170, 171s, 172
in action of enzyme 725 multiple attack 606 content in spinach 31
N-1'-Carboxybiotin 725, 726, 726s nucleophilic 494 Cellulose I 171s, 172
dimethyl ester of 725 proximity factor 495 Cellulose II 172
intermediate 725 stereoelectronic effect 495 Cellulose-binding domains 602
γ-Carboxyglutamate 821, 821s strain and distortion in 496, 497 Cellusome 602
binding of calcium ions 80 tautomeric 490, 491 Cementum 442
formation of 820 – 822 transition state 482 – 486 Centipedes 24
Carboxylation Catalyst, polyfunctional 490 Centrifugation 100
beta 527, 727– 729 Catalytic cycles. See also Other specific in CsCl gradients 249
biotin-assisted 724 enzymes and cell cycle density gradients 101
driven by cleavage of ATP 705 for catalase 855 zone 101
Carboxylesterases 635 for coenzyme M reductase 880 Centrioles 10, 15
Carboxyl (carboxylate) groups for glycine decarboxylase 809 Centromeres, DNA of 228
in proteins 312 for lysozyme 599 Centrosome 627
reduction of 776 forα-oxoacid dehydrogenases 798 Cephalopods, mesozoa in kidneys of 23
resonance energy 299 for serine protease 613 Ceramide 389s
Carboxylic acid for vitamin B -dependent isomerases Ceramide aminethyl phosphonates 389s
12
activation of 507 872 Cerebral ganglion in Platyhelminthes 23
dehydrogenation of 766 Catalytic dyad 620 Cerebrosides 388, 389s
Carboxylic acid reductase 893 Catalytic subunits 348 Ceruloplasmin 58, 633, 839, 883, 887
Carboxyltransferase 724 Catalytic triad 134, 611– 614, 619, 635 CFTR 417
of propionic acid bacteria 725 of serine proteases 611– 614 cGMP 561
Carboxymethylation Cataracts 169 Chagas disease 787
of proteins 594 Catechol 838 Chain elongation process 700
Carboxypeptidase(s) 117, 609, 625 Catecholamine(s) 553 Chain-terminating inhibitors for DNA
zinc ion in 625 CatecholO-methyltransferase (COMT) 591 sequencing 262
Carboxypeptidase A 64s Cathepsin(s) 619, 621 Channeled substrates 552
active site 626s G 610 Chaperone (chaperonin) 339
pK values of 626 K, in osteoclasts 619 calnexin 188
a
Carboxypeptidase Y 610 Cations.See also Individual ions DnaK 518
Carboxyphosphate 726, 726s active transport 422 GroEL 518
Carcinogenic compounds channels 421, 422 GroES 518
adducts with nucleic acids 235 Cat scratch disease 7 heat shock proteins 518
Carcinomas 573 Cauliflower mosaic virus 247 Chargaff, Erwin 200
Cardiolipin 384 CD (Cluster of Differentiation) 187, 407 Charge, effect on metal binding 311
Caricain 618 Cech, Thomas R. 84 Charge-relay system 612
Caries 442 CED-3 619 Chelate complexes 310s
β-Carotene 10, 390s Cell(s) Chelate effect 310
Carpal tunnel syndrome 756 aggregation of 187 Chelate stability 311
Carrageenan(s) 170, 177, 178s columnar epithelium 26 Chemical force microscopy 131
Carrageenin 22 composition of 30– 33 Chemical shift 138
Cartilage 26, 436 doubling time 470 hydrogen bonding, effect of 139
articular 182 fractionation of 98 – 100 prediction 139
matrix protein 437 junctions 28 shielding of nuclei 138
Cascades metal binding sites in 311, 312 table of NMR spectra 141
blood clotting 632 sizes of 11 units of 138
dephosphorylation 542 squamus epithelium 26 Chemoheterotrophic bacteria 8
MAP kinase 576 – 578 Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) 406 Chemolithotrophic bacteria 7
pancreatic proteases 609 Cell constant organisms 24 Chemoprevention 575
phosphorylation 542 Cell contacts 28, 29 Chemoreceptors 562s
regulatory 566, 567 Cell culture 26 bacterial 561– 563
Casein kinase 544 Cell cycle 578– 581 Chemostat 470
Caspases 619 figure 580 Chemotaxis

--- Page 914 ---

Volume 1 Index 911
carboxylmethylation in 548, 563 hydropathy index 78 Coenzyme A persulfide 790
CheA 562, 563 Cibachron blue in affinity chromatography Coenzyme A transferases 662
CheB 563 106 Coenzyme F 788
420
CheR 563 Cilia 10, 15. See also flagella Coenzyme M 813s, 814, 815
CheW 562, 563 eukaryotic structure 15 Coenzyme M reductase
CheY 562, 563 Ciliophora 19 mechanism of 881
CheZ 563 Cinnamic acid 756s scheme 880
Chiral acetates 704, 705 Cinnamoyl-CoA thiol esters 682 Coenzyme Q 818. SeeUbiquinones
nonenzymatic preparation 704 Circular dichroism (CD) Cofactor F 879 – 881, 880s
430
Chiral methyl group 591 of bound PLP and PMP 750 Coiled coil
Chirality 42 Cisplatin 218, 224s helical wheel 70
Chitin 19, 170, 175 Citrate 480s, 506s, 515, 516s, 686s heptad repeat 70
in exoskeleton of arthropods 24 binding constants to metal ions 311 superhelix 70
Chitinases 599 – 602, 601, 603 prochiral centers 480 Colchicine 371, 371s
Chitosan 175 Citrate cleaving enzymes 703– 704 ColE1 248
Chlamydomonas 20, 22 Citrate synthase(s) 527, 676, 700–703, 702s Colicins 414, 418
Chloramphenicol 637s active site 703 Colipase 635
Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) mechanism 700 Colitose 180s
637 Citric acid Collagen 15, 72, 181, 409, 432– 441
Chlorella 17, 22 pK values of 99 alternative splicing 436
a
Chloride channels 420, 421 synthesis of 700 amino acid composition 72
band 3 protein 420 Citric acid cycle 506, 508,515 biosynthesis of 433
Chloride ion, activation of α-amylases 606 discovery of 516 characteristics, table 434
Chlorin(s) 843 priming of 711 crosslinking 433, 434
β-Chloroalanine 739 scheme 516 gene location, table 434
Chlorobenzoyl-CoA dehalogenase 682, 683 Citrulline 80 genetic defects 438
Chlorocruorins 362 Citryl-CoA 703 hydrogen bonds in 72
Chlorocruoroheme 845s Claisen condensation 699 location, table 434
Chloroperoxidase(s) 855 Claisen rearrangement 485 sequence 72
Chlorophyll(s) 13 Clathrin 426 structure 72, 432, 433
chelate effect 310 Clathrin light chains 313 vertebrate types, table 434
Chlorophyll a 10, 843 Cleavage Collagen fibril, electron micrograph 73
Chlorophyta 20 aldol 698 Collagen, type IV
Chloroplast(s) 10, 14 alpha 730 electron micrograph of 437
in micrograph 13 of amino acid side chains 745 structural model of 437
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase in beta 698– 711 Collagenases 627
706 Clone of cells 26 Collagenlike peptide 73s
Cholera 7 Cloning vehicle 263 Collenchyma 30
Cholera toxin 546 – 548, 546s Clostridium acetobutylicum 705 Color reagents 120
in ADP-ribosylation 546 Clostripain, specificity 117 Combinatorial libraries 128, 129
AMF images 131 Clp (caseinolytic protease) 628 Combustion, Gibbs energies of 297, 298
Choleragenoid 333s Cluster of differentiation, CD 187 Communication between cells 26 – 29
Cholesterol 390s, 392 CMP (Cytidine 5'-phosphate) 203 Competitive inhibitors 471, 472
elevated 16 Cnidaria (Coelenterata) 23 slow, tight-binding 472
as precursor of steroid hormones 696 Coated membrane 426s Complement system
from reduction of desmosterol 777 Coated pits 426 of blood 72, 414
Chondroitin sulfate(s) 170, 175, 176s Coated vesicles 426 of thioester-containing proteins 630
Chordata 25 Coatomer 426 Complementarity
Chorismate 485s, 690s Cobalamin 867. See also Cyanocobalamin, of amino and carbonyl 679
biosynthesis of 689, 690 Vitamin B of enzyme surfaces 478
12
Chorismate mutase 485 in ribonucleotide reductase 871 of substrate 478
Christian, W. 767 Cobalamin-binding proteins 58 Compound I, II
Christmas factor 632 Cobalophilin 869 of peroxidases, catalases 853, 855
Chromatin 11 Cobalt 866– 877 COMT. SeeCatecholO-methyltransferase
Chromatography 102– 105.See also specific complex with ATP 643 Concanavalin A 186, 342
types Cocarboxylase 721 Concentration gradient(s) 289, 410
Chromium 888– 889 Coccidia 19 Concerted mechanism 490
complex with ATP 643 Coccus, definition of 6 Condensation
Chromosome(s) 11, 17 Cocoonase 610 aldol 699, 700
bacterial 3 CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase alpha 730
homologous pair 18 881 beta 527, 698– 711
micrograph of 371 Coding strand (non-transcribing) of DNA Configuration
numbers of 18 204, 237 of amino acids 41– 43
sizes of 18 Codon(s) 4, 236 entgegen (E) 43
Chymopapain 618 initiation 236 rectus (R) 42
Chymosin 621 stop 236 RS notation 42
Chymotrypsin 66, 609 table 236 sinister (S) 42
inhibition by TPCK 477 Coenzyme(s) 511, 719– 757,765– 829 of sugars 163
specificity 117 ease of dissociation from proteins 719 zusammen (Z) 43
turnover number of 457 oxidative 719 Confocal micrograph
Chymotrypsinogen 609, 613, 615 Coenzyme A (CoA) 507, 720– 723,722s of a cerebellum 130
activation of 609, 615 functions of 722 of metaphase chromosomes 361

--- Page 915 ---

912 Volume 1 Index
Confocal scanning microscopy 129 Covalent modification Cycloglutamate inhibitors 739s
Conformations of molecules 43– 45 in control of metabolism 541– 545 Cycloguanil 805
anti 43 by dephosphorylation 541– 545 1,2-Cyclohexanedione, reaction with
anti-periplanar 43 by phosphorylation 541– 545 guanidinium groups, 126
boat (B) 166 reactions, table 543 Cyclophilin 488
eclipsed 44 Covalent radii 40 human 488s
envelope 166 Covalent structure of proteins 57 D-Cycloserine 739s
Fisher projection 42 Cow, genome 12 Cyclosporin 488, 488s
gauche 44 Cozymase 767 β Cylinders 65, 66, 686
Newman projection 44 Crambin, amide exchange rate 149 Cystathionine, 746s
of nucleotides 211 Creatine kinase 656 formation 746
of polysaccharide chains 170 transition state structure 640 Cystathionineβ lyase 742
quasi-equivalence 348 Creatine phosphate 303 Cystathionineβ-synthase 744
random coil 69 Crepenynic acid 381s Cystathionineγ-synthase 743, 746
sickle 44 Cretinism 31 Cystatins 622, 629
skew (S) 166 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 248 Cysteamine disulfide (cystamine) 549
twist (T) 166 Crick, Francis H. C. 84, 200 Cysteine (Cys, C) 52, 53s
5- and 6-membered rings 166 Cristae of mitochondria 14 microscopic pK values 306
a
C1 of sugars 166 Crossing-over 18 zinc complex 680
chair 166 Crosslinking 79 Cysteine residues 53
Conformational changes Crotonase. SeeEnoyl hydratase crosslinking of 80, 521, 522, 786, 787
cooperative 349– 353 Crowfoot Hodgkin, Dorothy M. 84 Cysteine proteases 618– 619
during dehydrogenase action 773 Cruciform structure in nucleic acids 229 Cystic fibrosis 16, 421
in enzymes 481 Crustacea 24 transmembrane conductance
in proteins 81 Cruzain 619 regulatory 421
role of buried hydrogen bonds 81 Cryoenzymology 469 Cystine residues
slow 477 elastase 616 beta elimination 85
Conformational maps 60 Cryoprotectants 191 Cystinuria 16, 417
Conformational substates in proteins 496 Crystallins 169 Cytidine (Cyd) 203
Conidia 20 Crystallography 131– 137 absorption spectra of 205
Conjugate bases 486 electron 131 reaction with hydrazine 252
Connective tissue 72, 431 X-ray 132 – 137 Cytidine 5'-phosphate. SeeCMP
Connexons 29 Crystals, liquid 392 – 394 Cytidine diphosphate choline 720
Consensus sequences in DNA 265 Crystal systems 133 5'-Cytidylic acid. SeeCMP
Constitutive enzyme 538 Cubic symmetry Cytoadhesins 409
Contact inhibition 573 of oligomers 342 Cytochalasin B 416s
of cells 29 of pyruvate dehydrogenase 796 Cytochrome(s) 845– 848
Control elements of metabolic reactions 536 Cupric ion, complexes with ammonia 307 Cytochromes b 847
Controllability coefficient 537 Curdlan 170, 174 Cytochrome b 847
562
Coomassie brilliant blue 102, 122s Cuticle Cytochrome c 846, 847, 847s
Cooperative binding 352 of invertebrates 440 absorption spectra 846
of protons 331 of plants 15, 30 structural studies 846
of substrate 476 in micrograph 13 Cytochrome c oxidase 848, 887
Cooperative changes in conformation 349– Cutinase 134s, 635 Cytochrome c peroxidase 849s, 852
353 Cyanase 717 active site of 853
Cooperative processes 330 – 332, 334 Cyanate, carbamoylation by 360 Cytochrome c 847s
3
Copper 65, 514, 882– 887 Cyanide ion Cytochrome oxidase 513
as nutritional essential 882, 883 adduct with NAD+ 779 Cytochrome P-450 846
uptake regulation 883 complex with hemoglobin 358 Cytokines 188
Copper amine oxidases 816– 817 reactivity of 590 Cytokinin 235
mechanisms 817 β-Cyanoalanine 438 Cytomegalovirus
Copper oxidases 885 – 887 Cyanobacteria 7, 10 micrograph 246
Copper proteins, electron-transferring 883, Cyanoborohydride 124 protease of 614
884 Cyanocobalamin 867s, 869. See also Vitamin Cytoplasm, definition of 3
Copper– sulfide cluster 884s B Cytosine (Cyt, C) 199s, 203
12
Coproporphyrin III 843, 845s reduction 869, 870 acid– base chemistry 204, 205
Cornified cell envelope 439 Cyanogen bromide 117 Cytoskeleton 15, 368– 372, 405
Corrin in transmethylation 592 agarose, activation of 105 intermediate filaments 369
Corrin ring 867, 868 Cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate microfilaments 369, 370
Corrinoid-dependent synthesis as attractant for Dictyostelium 20 microtubules 370
of acetyl-CoA 876, 877 Cyclic ADP ribose 778 Cytosol, definition of 14
Cosmarium 22 Cyclic AMP. SeecAMP
COSY-NOESY diagram 143 Cyclic GMP. SeecGMP
Cotransport (symport) process 411, 416, 417 Cyclic symmetry 333 D
Coulomb 283 Cyclins, mitotic 580
definition of 47 cell cycle 524
Coulomb’s law 47 D1 572
Daltons 4
Countercurrent distribution 102 G1 or start 580
Dansyl chloride 118, 118s
Coupled enzyme assay 768 Cyclization
Darwin, Charles 9
Coupling constants. See also NMR spectros- PLP-dependent enzymes 741
Daunomycin 222, 223s
copy Cyclodextrins 171
intercalation with DNA, figure 223
Covalent catalysis 494, 591 Cyclodextrin glucanotransferase 603, 607

--- Page 916 ---

Volume 1 Index 913
DDT dehydrochlorinase 551 Desmosine 436, 436s ortho-Dihydroxybenzene. See also Catechol
Dead-end complexes 466 Desmosome 10 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine (dopa) 80, 887,
DEAE-cellulose 104 Desmosterol 777s 887s
DEAE-Sephadex 106 reduction to cholesterol 777 2,3-Dihydroxyproline 80
Deamidation Desulforedoxin 859 Diiron desaturases 863
of asparagine 594 Desulfuration of insectides 636 Diiron oxygenases 863
of asparaginyl residues 84 Dextrans 170, 174 Diiron proteins 862– 864
5-Deazaflavin Dextrin(s) 606 Diiron-tyrosinate proteins 862 – 863
in hydrogenase 879 Diabetes mellitus 567 Diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP,
nonenzymatic oxidation of NADH 789 Diabetic nephropathy 438 diisopropylphosphofluoridate) 610s
Deazariboflavin 5'-phosphate 789 Diacylglycerols 563, 564 Dimethylallyl diphosphate 712s
Debranching enzyme 606 scheme 565 Dimethylallyl pyrophosphate, condensation
Debye-Hückel equation 288 in signaling 563 – 566 of 527
Decarboxylase(s) 753 – 755 Dialkylglycine decarboxylase 743, 745 Dimethylarsine 876
biotin-dependent 729 Dialkylnitrosamines 254s Dimethylglutaric acid, pK value of 99
a
dialkylglycine 745 Dialysis 100 Dimethylimidazole 868s
pyridoxal phosphate-dependent 1,4-Diaminopropane 745 Dimethylsuberimidate 125s
enzymes 744, 745 Diastereoisomers (diastereomers) 43, 162 crosslinking of proteins 125
pyruvoyl enzymes Diastereotopic atoms or groups 479 Dimethylsulfoxide reductase 836s
Schiff bases in 732 Diatomaceous earth 21 Dimethylsulfoxide reductase family 890
thiamin-dependent 730 – 733 Diatoms 21 Dinoflagellate 19
Decarboxylation 527, 705– 710 motion of 21 Dioldehydratase 871
catalysis by amines 705 Dicoumarol 821, 821s stereochemistry 872, 874
catalysis by metal ions 705 Dictyosome in micrograph 13 Dioxetane 820
ofβ-oxoacids 698, 705, 742 Dictyostelium discoideum 20 Dioxygen 850s
Decarboxylation-transamination reaction cAMP as messenger 557 Dipeptidyl aminopeptidase 117
748 genome 12 Dipeptidyl peptidase 619
Decarboxylative elimination 526 Dicyanocobalamin 870 Diphtheria toxin, ADP-ribosylation 548
Degree of hydration, effect on metal binding 3,6-Dideoxyhexoses, formation of 747 Diphytanyl group 385
311 Dielectric constant 47 Diphytanyl tetraether lipids 387
Dehydroalanine 755, 757s Diesenhofer, Johan 84 Diploid cell 17
Dehydroalanine residue 754, 756 Diethanolamine, pK value of 99 Diploid phase 18
a
Dehydroascorbate 787 Diethylmalonic acid, pK value of 99 Dipolar ion 41
a
transport 416 Diethylpyrocarbonate reaction with histidine Disaccharides 167–169
Dehydroascorbic acid 416, 787 126 hydrolysis of, Gibbs energies 169
Dehydrogenase(s) 514, 765– 802 Difference electron density map 136 Discoidin I 186
conformational changes 771, 772 Differential scanning calorimetric curves 395 Diseases, bacterial 7
3-dimensional structures 768 Differentiation Displacement reactions, nucleophilic 123,
mechanisms 768–775,770– 771 among prokaryotes 9 482, 530, 589– 670
nucleotide-dependent 777 cluster of (CD) 187, 407 on carbonyl groups 608 – 637, 698
stereospecificity 768 – 775 Diffractometer 134 multiple 660
Dehydrogenation Diffusion 109, 410 on phosphorus atom 637– 657See also
of alcohols 765 – 767 exchange 410 Kinases, phosphatases, transferases
of amines 775 facilitated 410 in-line 638
of amino acids 775 mobile carrier 414 permutational rearrangement 638
reactions of flavoproteins, table 784 saturation effect 410 proteases 608 – 637
types of, table 766 through membranes 410, 414 rates of 589– 590
Dematin 405 Diffusion constant 461 on sulfur atoms 659, 660
Denaturation of proteins 82 Diffusion-controlled limit on reaction rates Dissipative structures 289
by guanidinium chloride 82 462 Dissociation constant(s) 304
by sodium dodecyl sulfate 82 Digestion 505, 507 apparent 293
by urea 82 Digoxigenin 257 Disulfide bridges (crosslinkages) 65, 80
Dental plaque 442 Dihedral (D) symmetry 338 cleavage of 115 – 116
2
Dentin 442 D-gluco-Dihydroacarbose 607s cleavage with performic acid 115
5'-Deoxyadenosyl cobalamin 867, 867s, Dihydrofolate reductase 804 – 808, 810, 811 locating 119
872 active site structure 807 in proteins 80
Deoxyhemerythrin, oxygenation of 862 inhibitors 805 reduction of 115, 785
Deoxyhemoglobin 850, 851 mechanism 805 – 808 Dithioerythritol 115
Deoxy-D-mannooctulosonic acid (KDO) 180s structure 805 – 808 Dithionite ion 779
Deoxyribonuclease 652– 653 Dihydrolipoic acid amide 784s Dithiothreitol 98, 115, 822
Deoxyribonucleic acid. SeeDNA Dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase 785, 796 Dityrosine linkages 81
2-Deoxyribose 200s Dihydrolipoyl transacetylase 796s DMSO reductase 890
1-Deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate 735, 736 Dihydropteroic acid 473 DNA
Dephosphorylation, cascade 542 Dihydropyridine receptor 314 A form 213, 214s
Depsides 23 Dihydroriboflavin 794 within ancient conserved regions 9
Depsipeptide 414 Dihydro U loop of tRNA 231 B form 213, 214s
Derepression of enzyme synthesis 536 Dihydrouridine 234 hydration of 213
Dermatan sulfate 170, 175, 176s Dihydroxyacetone 164s right handed helical structure 213
Dermatosparaxis 438 Dihydroxyacetone phosphate 694s side-by-side structure 213
Dermis 439 Dihydroxyacid 697 base composition of 239
Desaturases 863 Dihydroxyacid dehydratase base inclination 216
Desmid 22 Fe-S clusters in 861 base roll 216

--- Page 917 ---

914 Volume 1 Index
bending of 218 typing 259 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 438
cDNA 257 underwound 220, 221 Eicosanoid 565
circular, in trypanosomes 219 Watson-Crick structure 200 Eigen, Manfred 84
cloning of 201 Z form 214s, 215, 239 Elastase 66, 609, 610, 611s
coding capacity 16 enhancers in 216 cryoenzymology 616
coding strand of 204, 237 DNA-binding motifs β-cylinder in 78
conformational flexibility 216 in proteins 241 Elastic fibers 436
consensus sequences 265 DNA-binding proteins Elastin 15, 72, 436
content in tissues 31 helix-turn-helix motif 239 Electrical double layer 400
denaturation of 255 DNA, circular 218, 219 Electric field jump methods 468
density gradient centrifugation 101 linking number 220 Electrochemical gradient 410
double helical structure 201 writhe 220 Electrochemical transference 311
electron micrograph of 213 DNA gyrase 220 Electrode(s)
electron transfer in 218 DNA, mitochondrial 14 calomel 300
electrophoresis 221, 249 physical map 262 reference 300
extraction of 249 DNA photolyase 794, 802 Electrode potentials 300 – 302
fingerprinting 259 DNA polymerase(s) 657 measurement of 302
footprinting 266 Thermus aquaticus (Taq) 260 observed 301
gyrase 220 zinc in 680 standard, table 300
H-DNA, proposed structure 226 DNA - protein interactions 266 Electrogenic 423
helical twist 216 DNA-RNA hybrids 257 Electromotive force of electrochemical cell
helix parameters 216 DNA sequencing 260 – 266 300
Holliday junction 228 – 230 chain-terminating inhibitors 262 Electron carriers 512 – 514, 767– 802, 843 –
hydration of 216 method of Maxam and Gilbert 264 850, 883
hydrolysis of 249, 251 Sanger dideoxy method. 262 Electron crystallography 131
hypersensitive sites 266 DNA supercoiling estimating amounts 222 Electron micrograph
interaction with spermidine and DNase.SeeDeoxyribonuclease of bacteria 4
spermine 218 Docking protein for SRP 520 of cell junctions 27
intercalation 221,223 Domains in protein structure 74 of plant cell 13
intrachain NOEs 268 Donnan equilibrium 420 of starch granules 172
knot, electron micrograph 219 Dopamine 744 of viruses 246
light absorption 209 Dopamineβ-monooxygenase 887 Electron microscopy 129 – 131
linking number 220 Double displacement reactions 595 Electron microscope tomography 130
major groove 201, 213 ping-pong mechanism 595 Electron-nuclear double resonance (ENDOR)
melting curve 256 in ribonuclease 647 399
minor groove 201, 213 Double helices 201, 213 – 218 Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, ESR)
mispaired bases in 218 conformational flexibility 216 spectra 398,399
mitochondrial 14 hybrid DNA-RNA 230 first derivative plot 398
map 262 Double reciprocal plot 460 of putidaredoxin 860
nanochemical scale construction 230 Drawing arrows 528, 529 of tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl 398
nearest neighbor analysis 265 Drosophilia melanogaster 24 Electron transfer
negative strand 244 genome 12 biological, mechanism of 848– 850
NMR spectroscopy 266– 270 Drosopterins 803, 804s coupling 849, 850
1H spectrum 269 DSS or Tier’s salt 138 gating 849, 850
non-coding (transcribing) strand 237 Dyad axis 134, 213 ionic equilibria, effects of 850
open reading frame 237 Dye, reducible 300 pathways 848
operator 237 Dynamic equilibrium 289 Electron transferring flavoprotein (EFT) 514,
overstretched 217 Dyneins 370 794
palindromes in 238 Dysentery, Shigella dysenteriae 7 Electron transport chain 512 – 515
plectonemically interwound 220 Dystrophin 405 of mitochondria 513
polymorphism 259 Electron-transport proteins 514, 767– 802,
propeller twist 216 819, 843 – 850
R-DNA 226 E Electronic noses 122
reassociation curves, figure 256 Electropherogram, single erythrocyte 107
reassociation kinetics 255 Electrophilic center
relaxed 221 definition of 589
E (entgegen) configuration 43
repetitive 11 in enzymes 754 – 757
E3 binding protein 796
replicative form 244 Electrophilic reagents
Eadie-Hofstee plot 460
sequence determination 260 – 266 reactions of nucleic acids 253 – 255
E-cadhedrin 574
sequences, understanding 265 Electrophoresis 58, 106– 108
Echinodermata 25
sequencing gel, figure 263 agarose gel 106
Ectoderm 23
single-stranded binding (SSB) proteins capillary 106, 107
Ectoenzymes 409
239 diagonal 120
Ectopic proteins 573
solenoidal 220 pulsed field 249, 250
Edelman, Gerald M. 84
structures 214, 223, 225, 228, 229, SDS-polyacrylamide gel 106, 113
Edman degradation 118
240– 243 zone 106, 249
EDTA. SeeEthylenediaminetetraacetic acid
supercoiled 219– 222 Electrophoretic molecular sieving 106
Effector(s) of allosteric enzymes 473 – 475
superhelix density 221 Electrostatic effects
EF-hand motif 313, 317
tetraplex (quadruplex) structures 227 on pK values 330
EGF (epithelial growth factor), definition of a
topological isomers 221 titration curves of proteins 330
577
toroidal (solenoidal) 220 transmission through aromatic rings
EGF-like domains 367
triplex 227 330

--- Page 918 ---

Volume 1 Index 915
Electrostatic theory 311 Enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase 777 Fe-S clusters in 862
Element(s) Enoyl hydratase 681 multisubstrate, kinetics of 464, 465
essential 33 Enoyl reductase 766 oligomeric 475, 497
in human body 31 Entamoeba, PEP carboxytransphosphorylase pacemaker 535 – 537
toxic 33 of 706 processive action 602
Elimination reactions 526, 530, 677– 690 Entamoeba histolytica 19 prochiral centers 478 – 481
beta, of cystine residues 85 Enterobactin (enterochelin) 838s proofreading 482
conjugative 689 Enterokinase. SeeEnteropeptidase pyridoxal phosphate, coenzyme table
decarboxylative 689 Enteron 24 743
facilitation by carbonyl group 681 Enteropeptidase 609 rate equation for 460
ofγ substituent 746 Enthalpy 282 rate of encounter with substrate
of PLP-dependent enzymes 742 of combustion 282, 283 461– 464
reversibility 690 Enthalpy change(s) 282, 283 reaction rate 455 – 458. SeeKinetics
Ellman’s reagent 125, 125s estimation of 297 regulation. SeeEnzyme regulation
Elongation factor EF-Tu 558 of dissociation, table 293 retaining 593
Elongin complex 564 Entner-Doudoroff pathway 697 saturation of 457
Embden-Myerhof-Parnas pathway 508, 510 Entropy (S) 284, 285 selenium-containing 822 – 827
Embryos, plant 30 of gases 284 specific activity of 457
Emphysema 629 from heat capacities 285 specificity of 478– 482
treatment of 631 of racemization 284 starch-hydrolyzing 605 – 608
Enamel 442 relationship to microscopic disorder stereospecificity 478 – 481
Enamelins 442 284 substrate binding 463, 464
Enamelysin 627 table 285 tetrameric 342
Enamines, 528s units, definition of 284 thiamin-dependent, structures 733
formation of 526 Environment (thermodynamics), definition thiamin diphosphate-dependent, table
Enantiomers 164 of 282 735
definition of 41 Enzymatic reactions Enzyme-activated inhibitors 682, 864
Enantiotopic atoms or groups 479 catalysis 482 – 497 Enzyme assay, coupled 768
Endergonic reactions 286 classification of 530 Enzyme-inhibitor complex 472
Endo ring conformation 212 enolic intermediates 691– 699 Enzyme regulation 535 – 537, 539 – 553, 571–
Endocytosis 13, 425 – 427 first order 457 581
Endoderm 23 integrated rate equations 457– 460 allosteric control 539 – 541
Endoglucanases 602 pH, effect on 469 – 471 by allosteric effectors 475 – 477
Endoglycanases 593, 602 progress curve 456 by covalent modification 541– 545
Endonexin See Annexin reversible 458, 464 – 468 by group transfer modification 545 –
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 10, 13, 14, 521 second order 458 549
cisternae of 14 stereoelectronic effect 495 by hormones 553 – 563
definition of 14 velocity of 455 – 458 by ions 549
in micrograph 13 Enzyme(s) 1, 2, 455– 503 by thiol-disulfide equilibria 549
rough 14 activation of 471– 478 Enzyme-substrate (ES) complexes
smooth 14 active site 491– 494 formation and reaction of 458 – 461
Endosomes 13, 426 biotin-containing 724, 725 Enzyme synthesis, genetic control of. See also
Endosperm 30 table 724 Protein synthesis
Endothelial cell-derived relaxing factor. See catalysis by 482 – 497. See also Catalysis Eosinophils 26, 188
Nitric oxide, NO (enzymatic) Epidermal growth factor (EGF) 544, 571
Endotoxins 431 classification 497 Epidermis 439
cis-Enediol 693s conformational changes in 481 Epidermolysis bullosa 440
Enediol; Enediolate 694s, 695s constitutive 538 Epimerases 692
intermediate 693 dead-end complexes 466 Epimerization of sugar, mechanisms 778
Energy (E) 282 debranching 606 Epimers, definition of 163
solar 289 effectors of 474 Epinephrine (adrenaline) 542, 553, 553s
sources of 507 equilibrium 467 Episomes.Seeplasmid
storage and utilization of 302, 303 feedback inhibition, figure 540 Epithelial cells 29
Enhancer 576 history of 456 Epitheliocytes 25
Enkephalin 54s hydrogen bonding in 491– 494 Epoxides, alkyation by 254
Enkephalin convertase. SeeCarboxypepti- induced fit 481 Epoxide hydrolases 591
dase N inducible 538 EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance)
Enolase 685 inhibition of 471– 478 spectroscopy 398, 399
active site 685s competitive 471, 472 of glutamate mutase 873
metal ion requirement 685 irreversible 477, 478 in study of phosphotransferases 639
relaxation of water protons 685 noncompetitive 473 – 475 EPSP (enolpyruvoylshikimate-3-phosphate)
Enolase superfamily 686 inverting 593 687s
Enolate anion 46, 46s, 681, 698 – 710 isologous dimers 349 synthase 687
formation of 526 kinetic parameters 459 Epstein-Barr virus 247
as nucleophile 527 kinetics of action 455– 471 Equilibrium in carboxylation reactions 725
from oxosteroid 696 mechanism Equilibrium constant(s) 304
phosphorylation of 706 iso 466 for association 325– 332
resonance-stabilized 494 ping-pong 465 for binding of metal ions 307
Enolic forms 530 reciprocating (flip-flop) 497 for carboxylation of propionyl CoA
Enolic intermediates 691– 699 modifiers of 474 725
Enolpyruvoylshikimate-3-phosphate. See molecular activity of 457 changes with temperature 289
EPSP molybdenum-containing 890 – 893 from concentrations 288

--- Page 919 ---

916 Volume 1 Index
effect of pH 293 – 297 F Filamin 370
for hydrolysis 292 Filaria worms 24
prediction by Hammett equation 309 Fimbriae 6. See also Pili
as ratio of rate constants 458 Fingerprinting. See also Peptide mapping
relationship to Gibbs energy change 2 FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) 511, 511s, of DNA 259
87 765, 780, 781s of proteins 118, 360
stepwise, for complex formation 307 FADH 2 529, 529s First Law of Thermodynamics 282
c-erb 571 Familial adenomatous polyposis 574 First order reactions 457
v-erb 571, 572 Faraday, numerical value of 283 Fischer, Edmond H. 84
Erhlich, Paul 473 Farnesyl group 402, 559 Fischer, Emil H. 42, 83
ERK 577– 579 Fat(s). See also Triacylglycerol (triglyceride) Fischer projection formula 42
Erythrocruorins 68, 362 composition of 380 of monosaccharides 163
Erythrocytes 26, 404– 406 hydrolysis of 507 FK506 488
cytoskeleton 405 Fatty acid(s) 380– 382 Flagella
defects 826 activation of 512 bacterial 3, 6, 562
integrin 405, 406 acyl CoA, derivatives of 507 eukaryotic structure 15
membrane skeleton 406 biosynthesis of 722 Flatworms 23
NADP+ from 767 branched chain 381 Flavin(s)
size of 11 cyclopropane-containing 399 chromatography of 103
Erythrocyte membranes essential 721 electrophilic centers 790
band 3 protein 420 in lipids 380 fluorescence 103
proteins of 403 names of, table 380 half-reduced 791
Erythrose 163s oxidation 511 isoalloxazine ring 790
Erythrulose 164s pK a values of 380 metal complexes 794
Escherichia coli 3 stability of 589 properties of 793
composition of 31 Fatty acyl-CoA derivatives 507 Flavin adenine dinucleotide. SeeFAD
DNA of 4 Fatty alcohols 380– 382, 382 Flavin adenine diphosphate. SeeFAD
envelope structure 428 Favin 64s Flavin coenzymes 766, 780– 795
genome 12 Feedback inhibition 536, 539 modified 788, 789
Essential trace elements 31, 33, 837, 877– 881, Feedback repression 536 reduced 794
887– 894 Ferments 456 Flavin radicals 792
Ester(s) Fermentation(s) 8, 508 – 511, 535 color of 794
displacement reactions of 608 of glucose, Gibbs energy change 298 formation constant 794
mechanism of formation 661, 662 glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydro- Flavocytochrome b 782, 794, 847
2
resonance energy 299 genase in 775, 776 Flavodoxins 793, 799, 800
Esterase(s) 526, 634– 637 reactions 298, 510 Flavoprotein(s) 513, 788
Ethanol 508 Ferns 18 dehydrogenation reactions 782 – 787
Ethanolamine, pK value of 99 gametophyte and sporophyte forms 18 table 784
a
Ethanolamine ammonia-lyase 871 Ferredoxin(s) 793, 857, 858s reduction potentials of 782
Ether lipids 382 from chloroplasts 859 Flavoprotein dehydrogenases 789
Ether phosphatides 383s reduction potentials 857 free radicals 793
Ethidium 223s Ferredoxin:NADP+ oxidoreductase 788, 794 mechanisms 789 – 791
Ethidium bromide 221, 222 Ferrichrome 838s, 839 Flavoprotein oxygenases
Ethylenediamine, binding constants to metal Ferric uptake regulation protein 839 free radicals 793
ions 311 Ferriheme(s) 844 Flow of materials within cells 289
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) 98, Ferritin 343s, 841s, 841, 842 Flow cytometry 107
311s Ferrochelatase 843 Flukes 24
N-Ethylmorpholine, pK value of 99 Ferroelectric crystals 486 Fluorescamine 120s
a
ets 576 Ferroheme(s) 844 Fluorescence
Eubacterium 3, 6 Ferrous ion in aconitase 688 in analysis 120
Euglena 19 Ferroxidase center 843s of flavins 103
Euglenophyta 20 in ferritin 842 recovery after photobleaching 400
Eukaryote(s), unicellular 18 – 22 Ferryl iron in peroxidase and catalase 854 of vitamin B coenzyme 750
6
Eukaryotic cells 11– 15 Fetal hemoglobin 362 Fluorescence probe
definition of 2 α-Fetoprotein 573 polarity-dependent 396
iron uptake 839 FhuC, D 839 Fluoride ion
structure 10 Fiber cells 30 inhibition of acid phosphatases 645
Evolution 9 Fibrillin 440 5-Fluorouracil 812
of eukaryotes 15 – 18 Fibrin 631, 632 Fluorographs 103, 252
Exchange diffusion 410 stabilizing factor 632 5-Fluorouridine 574
Exchange rates, amide protons 148 Fibrinogen 58, 409, 578, 632 Flux
Exchange reactions of enzymes 595 Fibroblasts 25, 433 across membranes 410
Exergonic reactions 285 micrograph of 370 in metabolism (analysis) 536, 537
Exo ring conformation 212 Fibrocytes 25 FMN (Riboflavin 5'-phosphate) 513, 765, 780,
Exocytosis 14, 427 Fibronectin 407, 409 781s
Exoglycanases 593 domain structure 409 Focal adhesions 405, 406
Exponential growth rate constant 470 Fibrous dysplasia 576 Fodrin 405
Extensins Fibulin 437 Folate coenzymes, 803, 804. See also Folic acid
glycosylation of 181 Ficin 618 Folate receptors 805
in plant cell wall 72 Field flow fractionation 103 3-Fold axis 333
Extracellular matrix (ECM) 406, 427– 441 Fifth disease 244 Folding patterns
Filaggrin 370, 439 of polypeptides 76, 77

--- Page 920 ---

Volume 1 Index 917
effects of sequence 78 Fructose (Fru) 162s, 175 Gel filtration 100, 112
Folic acid (pteroylglutamic acid) 473, 557, Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (Fru-2,6-P) oligosaccharides, separation of 100
2
721, 802 in regulation of glycogen metabolism relative molecular mass by 112
deficiency of 802 537 Geminal diamine 751, 751s
metabolic functions 802 beta form 541s Geminiviruses 244
nutritional requirements 756 Fructose bisphosphate aldolases 699 Gene(s)
in transmethylation 592 Fructose 6-phosphate 535, 693s amplification of 538
Folyl polyglutamates 803 Fructose 6-phosphate kinase 656 average number of nucleotide pairs in
Footprinting Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 645 4
DNA 266 Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 646 human, number of 16
hydroxyl radical 267 Fruit fly. See Drosophilia melanogaster imprinting of 234
Foraminifera 19 Fucose (Fuc) 165s sequence for aspartate aminotrans-
Forces L-Fucose isomerase 693 ferase 202
acting between molecules 46– 51 Fucosyltransferase 184 structural, definition 1
electrostatic 47 Fucoxanthin 22 Gene therapy 16, 203
van der Waals 46 Fumarase.SeeFumarate hydratase sickle cell disease 361
Formaldehyde 802 Fumarase-aspartase family 685 Genetic code 1, 236– 239
hydration equilibrium 677 Fumarate 481s, 516s, 683s tables 236, 237
reaction with nucleic acid bases 253 Fumarate hydratase (fumarase) 526, 683, 688 variations 237
Formate. See also Formic acid acid– base catalysis 471 Genetic diseases 2, 16
carbon units, source of 810 concerted reaction 685 Genetic recombination 6, 230
Formate dehydrogenase 824, 890, 892, 893 Fumarase A 688 Genomes
molybdopterin 892 Fumarase B 688 bacterial 3 – 5, 201
Formate dehydrogenase H 893 Fumarase C 683 changing 17
Formation constants 304. See also Equilibrium mechanism 683 – 685 definition of 4
constants pH dependence 684 human 201
macroscopic 328 rates of substrate exchange 684 sequences 12,
of metal complexes 312 turnover number of 683 table of 12
for Schiff bases 679 Fumarate reductase 785 of viruses 201
stepwise 327, 328 Fumarylpyruvate 690s Geometrical isomers 43
Formic acid 802 Function of state R 476 Geometry of orbitals
pK value of 99, 293 Fungal infections 20 effect on metal binding 311
a
Formiminoglutamate 810 Fungi 20 Geranylgeranyl group 402
Formiminoglycine 810 cell walls 443 Giardia lamblia 12, 19
Formyl-THF synthetase 810 Furanose rings 161, 175. See also Sugars Gibbs energy (Free energy) 285, 286
Formylglycine in sulfatases 659 Furfural 251, 167s of activation (∆G‡) 483
Formylmethanofuran 814s of association 325 – 332
N-Formylmethionine 231 of dissociation 293
6-Formylpterin 803 G of acetic acid 50
10-Formyltetrahydrofolic acid (l0-formyl of formation 286, 292– 298
THF) 810 for biochemical substances, table
Fos 70, 241, 572 290
G-quartets 208, 227
definition of 577 of RNA helix, table 210
G phase of cell cycle 579
fos 572, 576, 579 0 of hydrolysis 283
Gabaculline 738s
Fossils of bacteria and blue-green algae 17 table 294
Galactan 177
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy in hydrophobic interactions 50
Galactanase 602
of membranes 396 linear relationships 308
Galactolipid 387s
Fractionation of oxidation
Galactosamine 176
of cells and tissues 98 – 100 for biochemical substances, table
Galactose (Gal) 162, 163s
Fragile X syndrome 228 290
metabolism of 778
Frame-shifting 538 by NAD+, table 290
Galactose chemoreceptor protein 186
Franck-Condon principle 848 partial molar 287
active site 187s
Franklin, Rosalind N. 200 summing 286
Galactose oxidase 885
Free energy. SeeGibbs energy Gibbs energy change(s)
active site 886
Free radicals. See also Superoxide anion for dilution 287
mechanism of 887
radical, nitric oxide (NO) and equilibrium constant 287
tyrosine-cysteine cofactor 885, 886
in action of peroxidase and catalase for fermentation 298
Galactosemia 16, 169
855, 856 β-Galactosidase 602, 603 for oxidation-reduction reactions 300
in coenzyme M reductase 880 for subunit association 333
Galectins 186
flavin 791– 794 Gingipains 619
Gametes 17
in metalloenzymes 850 – 886 Gla proteins 821
Gametophyte form of fern 18
in pyruvate formate-lyase 800 – 801 Glial cells 26
Gangliosides 388
in pyruvate oxidase 736, 799 Glial filaments 369
of cholera toxin 546
in reactions of vitamin B 869 – 876 Globin, evolution of gene 17
12 Gap junctions 29
in ribonucleotide reductases 864, 865 Globular proteins, properties 59
Garrod, Archibald 16
Freeze-fractured membranes, figure 405 Globulin(s) 101, 58
Gas constant, numerical value of 283
Freeze fracturing 130 Glucagon 542
Gastricsin 621
FreIp metalloreductase 839, 883 adenylate cyclase in action of 554
Gated pores 411
Frictional coefficient 109 receptor 554
of sphere 109 GDP dissociation inhibitors (GDIs) 559 β-Glucanases 602, 603
Gel electrophoresis 112
Fructofuranose (Fruf) 165s Glucans 172– 175
Fructofuranosyl-enzyme 597s relative molecular mass by 112 β-1,3-linked 174

--- Page 921 ---

918 Volume 1 Index
Glucarate dehydratase 686 reaction mechanism 791 biological recognition 161
D-Glucitol.SeeD-Sorbitol scheme 792 blood group determinants 184
Glucoamylase 603, 607 GlutathioneS-transferases 550, 682 high mannose type 183
α,α barrel structure, 77s Glycans 169– 180.See also Polysaccharides linkage of saccharides to 181
active site structure 608 N-linked 183 O-linked 181, 182
Glucocerebrosidase 603 Glycation 169 release of oligosaccharides 188
Glucokinase 538, 568 Glyceraldehyde 163s Glycosaminoglycan 181
Gluconeogenesis 515 Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 506s, 508, 694s repeating disaccharide units of 176
pathway 509 oxidation of 508 – 510 Glycosidases
regulation of 541 Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase beta 602
5-Gluconolactone 604 63s, 766 endo 605
Gluconolactone 604s in fermentation reactions 775, 776 Glycosides
Glucosamine (GlcN) 164, 176 formation of NADH-X 780 displacement reactions of 593
Glucose (Glc) in oxidation of aldehydes 775, 776 N-Glycosides (glycosylamine) 169
caloric value 283 thiol group of 677 Glycosidic acetal linkages 168
Glucose (D-glucose, Glc) 161s, 162s D-Glycerate dehydrogenase, stereochemistry Glycosidic linkages 780
concentration in blood 161 768 Glycosylamine 169
diastereomers 162 Glycerol 380s Glycosylation
equilibrium mixture in water 162 accumulation in fish and insects 191 definition of 169
fermentation of 298 in lipids 380 Glycosyl enzyme intermediates 595
ring form 162s Glycerol 1-phosphate, pK value of 293 Glycosyl esters 595
a
Glucose (L-glucose,L-Glc), 161s Glycerol dehydratase 871 Glycosyl exchange reactions 593
Glucose 1-arsenate as intermediate in Glycerol oxidase 886 Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors
arsenolysis 595 sn-Glycerol 3-phosphate 383s 403
Glucose 1,6-bisphosphate 653, 653s Glycerolteichoic acids 431s Glycosyltransferase(s) 184, 526, 604, 608
Glucose dehydrogenase(s) 814 L-Glycero-D-mannoheptose 180s catalytic groups, table 603
Glucose oxidase 782 Glycerophospholipids 383 Glycyl endopeptidase 618
Glucose-6-phosphatase 645 Glycerylcysteine 428, 428s Glycylglycine
Glucose 6-phosphate 506s, 507, 535, 693, 693s Glycine (Gly, G) 52, 52s, 745 binding constants to metal ions 311
Gibbs energy of hydrolysis 293 binding constants to metal ions 311 copper complexes 312s
pK value of 293 cleavage system, scheme 809 pK value of 99
a a
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 770, decarboxylation of 745 Glycyl radical 864
776 pK value of 99 Glyoxalase 527, 551, 698
a
Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase reductases 753, 755 Glyoxalase I, II 698
efficiency of 692 Glycineamide, binding constant to metal ions Glyoxylate 705s
turnover number of 692 311 Glyoxylate carboligase 736
Glucose tolerance factor Glycine decarboxylase 743, 745, 809 Glyoxylic acid
chromium in 888 Glycine decarboxylase-synthetase system in polysaccharides 179
Glucose transporters 415, 416 808 Glyoxysomes 14
GLUT1, topology diagram 416 GlycineN-methyltransferase 591, 593s Glyphosate 687s
GLUT4, response to insulin 416 Glycine reductase 824 GMP (Guanosine 5'-phosphate) 203
Glucosidase Glycocalyx 6 Gold 318
alpha 603, 606 Glycogen 165, 170, 173, 173s, 603 Goldstein, Joseph L. 84
alpha 1,6 606 breakdown of 537 Golgi apparatus 10, 521
beta 602, 603 content in rat liver 31 definition of 14
Glucosylasparaginase methylation analysis 196 Golgi body in micrograph 13
(aspartylglucosaminidase) 620 13C NMR 174 Golgi, Camillo 83
Glucuronic acid; glucuronate (GlcA) 164s, particles in cytoplasm 10, 174 Gonadatropin-releasing hormone
165s, 176 STM image of 174 NMR spectrum 145
epimerization 177 storage of 537 Gonorrhea 7
GLUT1–GLUT7. See Glucose transporters synthesis 509 Goodpasture syndrome 438
L-Glutamate 737s Glycogen phosphorylase 541– 545, 543s,604, G protein(s) 534, 557– 561
biosynthesis 711 605, 746 bovine brain G 560s
i
Glutamate dehydrogenase 770, 775 catalytic site 605s function, scheme 557
inhibition by 2-oxoglutarate 780 conformational states 604 monomeric 558
Glutamate mutase 871 control of 541– 545 three-dimensional structures 559 – 561
stereochemistry 874 effect of insulin 571 Gramicidin A 414
Glutamate-1-semialdehyde 742 regulation of 539, 604 Gramicidin S 54s
Glutamate synthase 788 Glycogen synthase Gram-negative bacteria 6, 7
Glutamic acid (Glu, E) 52, 53s.See also effect of insulin 571 outer membrane 428 – 431
Glutamate Glycogenin 174 Gram-positive bacteria 6, 7, 185, 190, 428
pK value of 487 Glycogenolysis 545 Gram stain 6
a
Glutamine (Gln, Q) 53s Glycoglycerolipids 387 Granulocytes 26
Glutamine PRPP amidotransferase 620 Glycolate 707 Granzymes 610
Glutamine synthetase 342, 662 Glycolate oxidase 782 Grb2 577, 578, 580s
Glutaredoxin 522, 549, 786, 787, 864 Glycolipids 387, 392 Green plant, composition of 31
Glutathione 521, 549, 550– 552,550s biological recognition 161 GroEL 339, 518
biosynthesis 551 Glycolysis 506, 508 – 511, 699 GroES 339, 518
protective functions 551, 786, 826 regulation of 541 Ground substance between cells 26
Glutathione peroxidase 550, 826, 856 Glycophorin A 404 Group transfer potential(s) 292, 293
selenium in 823 Glycophorin C 405 effect of metal ions 296, 297
Glutathione reductase 785, 785s Glycoproteins 15, 180– 188, 404, 405 of pyrophosphates 636

--- Page 922 ---

Volume 1 Index 919
Group translocation 411 HeLa strain of human cancer cells structural changes during oxygenation
Growth, control of 578 30 S ribosomal subunit 26 354– 357
Growth factors 571– 576, 722 Helical structure subunits 353
Growth rates of cells 470 polyethylene 44 thermodynamic function for
Growth regulating hormones 567– 571 polyfluoroethylene 44 oxygenation, table 355
GTP (guanosine triphosphate) Helical wheel 69s, 70 Hemoglobin mutants 354, 359 – 362
as coenzyme 719 Helix (helices). See also Superhelix F 362
GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) 559 3 69, 70 H 354
10
Guanidination 124 amphipathic 79, 401 M 359
Guanidinium chloride 82s hydrogen bonds in 68 S 359, 360
Guanidinium groups 53, 55s one-start 334 Hemopexin 58, 627
Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase 591 Pi 69 Hemophilia A, B 633
Guanine (Gua, G) 199s, 203 pitch of 68 Hemosiderin 842
hydration of 215 primary 334, 337 Henderson-Hasselbalch equation 97
quartet 208 properties of 69 Heparan sulfate 175 – 177, 176s
Guanine nucleotide binding proteins. SeeG radial projection 334 Heparin 176s, 181
proteins in serum albumin 71 anticoagulant properties of 177
Guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulators stacking of 70 pentasaccharide segment 177s
(GDSs) 559 structures of 334 Heparin cofactor II 177
Guanosine (Guo) 203, 234s torsion angles of 68 – 71 Hepaticae 29
absorption spectra of 205 α Helix (helices) 68s, 69, 78 Hepatitis A virus 247
Guanosine 5'-(β,γ -imido) triphosphate as helical wheel 69s, 70 Hepatitis B virus 244
(GppNp) 558s β Helix (helices) Hepatitis delta virus 247
Guanosine5’phosphate (GMP,Guanosine 5'- parallel 65 HEPES buffer 99
guanylic acid) 203 Helix bundles pK value of 99
a
Guanylate cyclase 561, 657 four helix 71 Heptad in coiled coil 71
Guanylin 548, 561 Helix-turn-helix motif 76 Heptanoyl threonine phosphate (HTP,
Guanylyl cyclase. SeeGuanylate cyclase Hemagglutinin 186 coenzyme B) 881
Guard cells 30 Heme 68, 353, 514, 844, 850, 851 Herbicides 678
Gulose (Gul) 163s covalent linkage to proteins 719 Herbicides
Gustducin 558 imidazole group in 851 glyphosate 687
Gutta-percha 389 Hemea 844, 845s Herpesviruses 247
Gymnosperms 29 Hemec 845, 845s Heterocysts 10
Hemed 845, 845s Heteroduplex 256
Hemeo 845s Heterologous bonding interaction 333, 334
H Heme proteins 843– 845 Heterologous interactions 342
reactions with hydrogen peroxide Heterologous square 352s
850– 857 Heteropolysaccharide(s)
reactions with oxygen 850– 857 of animal body 175 – 177
Haemophilus influenzae
Heme-oxygen complexes 851 definition of 169
genome sequence 12
Hemerythrin 362, 852, 862 of plants 177– 179
Hageman factor 632
active site, 863s Heterotropic interactions 476
Hairpin ribozyme 649
Hemiacetals 161, 162, 677. See also Glycosidic Hexagonal phase
Haldane, J. B. S. 9
linkages of alkanes 394
Haldane relationship 464, 465
formation of 526 of lipid bilayer 394, 395
Half-life 457
Hemicelluloses 177, 602 Hexokinase 467, 518, 654, 656
Haloacid dehalogenase(s) 590
Hemiketals 677 in regulation 535
mechanism of 590
formation of 526 Hexoses 162
Haloalkane dehalogenase(s) 591
Hemimercaptals 677 High performance liquid chromatography
active site structure 591
formation of 526 (HPLC) 103
Halocyanin 883
Hemin 844 High potential iron proteins (HIPIP) 857
Haloperoxidases 855, 889
Hemochromatosis 840 Hill plot 331, 332
Hammerhead ribozyme 649, 651s
Hemochrome(s) 844 Hippuric acid 513s
mechanism of action 651
Hemocyanins 885 Hirudin 634
Hammett equation 308
Hemoflagellates 19 Histamine 745
for dehydrogenation reactions 771
Hemoglobin(s) 17, 353– 359, 844 Histidine (His, H) 53s
for multisubstituted compounds 309
abnormal 354, 359 – 362 binding constants to metal ions 311
table of constants 308
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, effect 357, catabolism of 810
Handedness of molecules 41– 43
358 diethylpyrocarbonate, reaction with
Haploid
carbamino groups in 358 127
definition of 5
comparative biochemistry 362 pK value of 487
phase 18 a
competing ligands 358 titration curve 97
Haptoglobin 58
fetal 362 Histidine ammonia-lyase 755
Harden, Arthur 83
fingerprints of 359 Histidine-binding protein 419s
Haworth structural formulas 164
folding pattern 354 Histidine decarboxylase
Hay fever 26
oxygen binding cooperativity 851 active site 755
Heart disease 16
in oxygen transport 354 mechanism 754
Heat 282
oxygenation curves 355 proenzyme 754
of combustion 282
pK values of 357 Histidinohydroxymerodesmosine 434, 434s
flow of 284 a
salt bridges 357 Histone(s) 204
Heat shock proteins (chaperonins) 518
saturation curve 355 complex with DNA 221
Heisenberg uncertainty principle 138
H2A, ubiquitination of 525

--- Page 923 ---

920 Volume 1 Index
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) 248 in hyaluronan 176 I
HIV-1 protease 624s in ion pairs 75
catalytic mechanism 625 lengths of 48, 493, 494
Hofmeister series 311 low-barrier 494
Holley, Robert W. 84 in polypeptides 56, 61 ICAM-1
Holliday junction 229s in proteins 75 diagram 408
branch migration in 229 strengths of 49, 494 Ice
in DNA 228– 230 strong, in papain 619 hydrogen bonds in 49
immobile 230 Hydrogen-bonded network melting of 284
Homeostatic mechanisms for metal ions 307 in carbonic anhydrase 678 reaction rates in 492
Homoaconitase 688 in proteins 75 structure of 49
Homocitrate 700s Hydrogen bonding 491– 494.See also Ice-nucleation proteins 191
L-Homocysteine 746, 746s, 778s Hydrogen bond Ichthyoses 439
Homogenization 98 chemical shift, effect on 139 Icosadeltahedra 346
Homology, definition of 59 Hydrogen transfer reactions, table 766 Icosahedral viruses 345
Homopolysaccharide(s) 175 Hydrogenase(s) 878, 879, 879s Icosahedron 344
definition of 169 iron-only 878 Idose (Ido) 163s
Homotropic interactions 476 Ni containing 879 Iduronate, iduronic acid 176
Hoogsteen base pair 207 Hydrogenosomes 15 conformation 166
reversed 208 Hydrolases 589 Image reconstruction 130
Hookworms 24 definition of 498 Imidazole
Hopkins, Frederick G. 83 Hydrolysis 593, 608 binding constants to metal ions 311
Hormone(s).See also Specific hormones of biopolymers 116 – 118 pK a value of 99, 487
receptors for 479, 536, 553– 563 of carbohydrates 189 Imidazole group(s) 46s, 53
regulation of enzymes 553 – 563 of fats 507 hydrogen bonding 48
Hormone-sensitive lipase Gibbs energies of, table 294 numbering of ring atoms 46
effect of insulin 571 of proteins 116 – 118 as a polarizable base 590
Horseradish peroxidase 852, 856 Hydropathy index 78, 79 in proteins 312
Horseshoe crabs 24 Hydrophobic effect 50 protonation of 46
Housing silk 67 Hydrophobic interaction chromatography tautomerism of 46
HPLC.SeeHigh performance liquid 103 Imidazolium cation 46, 46s
chromatography Hydrophobic interactions 50, 51.See also Imine(s), 679. See also Schiff bases
HSQC 144 Hydrophobic bonding in enzymes 699, 740 – 746, 750
Huber, Robert 84 Hydrophobicity 51 Immunoglobulin(s) 58, 74
Human body, elements in 31 Hydroquinone(s) 815 – 822 repeat 367
Human genome 12, 201 Hydroxamate 838 superfamily 187
Human glucose transporters 416 Hydroxide ion, binding constants to metal Immunosuppresant 488, 805
figure 416 ions 311 Indole, resonance energy 299
Human immunodeficiency virus. SeeHIV Hydroxocobalamin 869 Indole-3-acetate 734
Hyaluronan 170, 175 – 177, 176s S-3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG- Induced fit 481
hydrogen-bonding 176 CoA) 700s model 351
properties of 175 4-Hydroxy-l-proline 432s theory 349
repeating disaccharide units of 176 erythro-β-Hydroxyaspartate Inducer(s) 539
Hyaluronate lyase 686 reaction with aminotransferase 750 of gene expression 539
Hyaluronic acid 15, 182. See also Hyaluronan Hydroxyl radicals 856 Inducible enzyme 538
Hyaluronidase. SeeHyaluronate lyase Hydroxylamine 251 Induction of enzyme synthesis 538, 539
Hybrid duplexes 256 reactivity of 590 Inflammation 384
Hycanthone 223s Hydroxylapatite 103, 441s Inhibition
Hydra 23, 24 Hydroxylysine 432s classical noncompetitive 474
Hydration 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine 234, 810 of enzyme synthesis 536
of alkenes, mechanism 683 Hydroxymethylfurfural 167s of enzymes 471– 478
effects on biochemical equilibria 50 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA 699, 701s noncompetitive 473 – 475
of ions 50, 311 lyase 699 uncompetitive 475
of nucleic acid bases 213 reductase 776 Inhibition constant 472
of polar molecules 50 synthesis of 699 Inhibitors
Hydration layer 51 5-Hydroxymethyluracil 234 competitive 471
Hydride ion 3-D-Hydroxymyristic acid 429 enzyme-activated 478, 864
shift of 527 4-Hydroxynonenal 682 in study of enzyme mechanisms 475
transfer of 765 Hydroxyproline 52s, 72 transition state 484
Hydride-transfer mechanism 789 2(α)-Hydroxypyridine 491s Initiation codon 236
Hydrocarbon(s) 380– 382 as catalyst 490, 491 Inorganic deposits by cells 15
α-Hydrogen tautomerism 45 Inosine 203
loss from PLP Schiff bases 741 Hydroxypyridine crosslink in collagen 434 Inosinic acid 203
Hydrogen (H
2
),See also Hydrogenase D-10-Hydroxystearate from hydration of oleic myo-Inositol 387s
formation by bacteria 300 acid 688 Inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate (InsP 4 ) 564
Hydrogenase 861, 878, 879 Hyperfine structure of epr signal 398 Inositol 1,3,4,5,6-pentakisphosphate (InsP 5 )
Hydrogen atoms, direct transfer of 768 Hyperpolarizability 70 564
Hydrogen bond(s) 47– 49, 69. See also Hyphae 20 Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP 3 ) 563
Hydrogen bonding Hypochromic effect 209, 255 receptors 564
chains in proteins 56, 64 Hypoxanthine Inositol hexakisphosphate (InsP 6 ) 564
in collagen 72 tautomerization of 203 Inositol phosphates, scheme 565
competition for 82 Inositol polyphosphates

--- Page 924 ---

Volume 1 Index 921
in signaling 563 – 566 proximal histidine in heme 851 Isopentenyl diphosphate (prenyl pyrophos-
Inositol trisphosphate 542 in hemoglobin 850 phate) 527, 689, 690s, 712s
Insecta 24 storage of 841– 843 Isopentenyladenosine 234s
Insecticides 636 uptake by cells 837– 841 Isopeptidases 525
Instantaneous velocity 456 non-transferrin pathway 840, 841 Isopeptide linkage
Insulin 346s, 544, 567– 571 transferrin pathway 840, 841 in proteins 80
effects on acetyl-CoA carboxylase 568 Iron regulatory factor 688 to ubiquitin 524
effects on ATP citrate-lyase 568 Iron regulatory protein 1 862 Isoprenoid alcohol phosphokinase 409
effects on GLUT4 568 Iron-sulfur cluster(s) 514, 857, 857s Isoprenoid compounds. See also Polyprenyl
effects on ribosomal subunit S6 568 3Fe-4S 859 compounds
glucose uptake 570 4Fe-4S 857 biosynthesis 689, 700
half-life 571 reduction of 859 Isoprenoid lipids 389
hexameric, 347s in flavoproteins 861 Isoprenoid quinones, structures of 819
metabolic effects of 568 membrane proton pumps 860 Isoprenylation. SeePrenylation
phosphorylation 571 Mossbauer X-ray absorption spectra Isopropylmalate 700s
response element 578 860 Isopropylmalate isomerase 689
second messenger 569 – 571 oxidation states 857 Isoproterenol 553, 553s
Insulin receptor 568, 569 properties of 859, 860 Isospartyl residues in proteins 594
autophosphorylation 569 radical generator 862 Isotachophoresis 108
down-regulation 571 reduction and oxidation 862 Isotope(s)
mutant forms 569 single-electron transfer 861 properties of 110
protein kinase of 544 Iron – sulfur enzymes radioactive 110
structure (schematic) 569 functions of 860 – 862 stable 110
substrates 559 Iron – sulfur proteins 686–688,857– 862 Isotope effect(s)
substrate-1 (IRS-1) 570 electron paramagnetic resonance for alcohol dehydrogenases 771
tyrosine kinase domain 569, 570s spectrum 860 in displacement reactions
Integral proteins of membrane 391, 401, 402 Iron superoxide dismutase 866s kinetic 111, 486, 592, 593
Integrated rate equations 457– 461 Iso-mechanisms 466 Isotope exchange at equilibrium 467, 468
Integrin(s) 187, 405, 406 L-Isoaspartyl / D-aspartyl methyltransferase Isotopic labels (tracers) 110, 679
Interaction constant 352 594 Isotopomer(s) 111
Intercalation in DNA 222, 223 Isoaspartyl group 84 Isotopomer analysis 111
Interleukin-1β-converting enzyme 619 Isobutyraldehyde, tautomerism 45
Internal energy 282 Isobutyryl-CoA mutase 872
Internal equilibrium constants 640 Isocitrate 516s, 686s, 704s J
International system of units 2 oxidation to 2-oxoglutarate 705
International unit of enzyme activity 457 Isocitrate dehydrogenase
Intervening sequences. SeeIntron phosphorylation of 545
Joule 282
Intestinal mucosa stereochemistry 768
definition of 2, 283
alkaline phosphatase in 645 Isocitrate lyase 704
Jun 70, 241, 572
Intrinsic barrier 493, 691 Isocoumarins 623
definition of 577
Intrinsic factor in vitamin B uptake 869 Isodesmosine 436, 436s
12 jun 572, 576, 579
pernicious anemia 869 Isoelectric focusing 108, 111
Introns 202 Isoelectric point 101, 106
Inulin 170, 175 of proteins 83
K
Inversion of configuration Isoenzymes (isozymes) 536, 538
as criterion of mechanism 590, 591 Isoionic point 106
by glycosyltransferases 593 Isolation of compounds 98 – 108
Involucrin 439 Isoleucine (Ile, I) 52s, 539 K+channel 413s
Iodacetamide 115 biosynthesis 540 Karplus equation 139
Iodide-starch complex 174s branched fatty acids from 381 Katal 457
Iodoacetate 115 configuration 43 KDEL receptor 554
Iodothyronine deiodinase 824 Isologous interactions 337– 353 KDO (ketodeoxyoctonate) 180s
Ion(s) in oligomers 349 – 353 Kelps 22
hydration of 50 square 352s Kendrew, John C. 84
transport of 420– 425 Isomerases 498, 530, 692– 697 Keratan(s)
electrogenic 421 aldose-ketose interconversions 692 Keratan sulfate 175 – 177, 176s
Ion channels 412 – 414, 420– 425 cis-trans, glutathione-dependent 690 disulfide bridges 115
Ion exchange chromatography 103, 104 hydride shift mechanism 695 N-linked 185
Ion exchange resins 104 3-oxosteroid 696, 697 terminal units 181
Ion pairs 55 ring opening by 693 Keratin 70, 369
hydrogen bonded 75 triose phosphate 693 – 697 Keratinocytes 439
in proteins 75 xylose 695 Keshan disease 822
Ion pumps 422 – 425 Isomerization reactions 526, 527, 530, 690, Kethoxal 253
Ion 712 Ketimine 121, 744s.See also Schiff base
Ionic atmosphere of membranes 400 of isopentenyl diphosphate 712 from pyridoxal phosphate 742
Ionic radius stereochemistry 874 as electron acceptor 746, 747
effect on metal binding 311 vitamin B -dependent 873 α-Ketoacid.See2-Oxoacid
12
for ions, table 310 table 871 Ketoamine 434s
Ionic strength 288, 297 Isomers 41– 43 Ketodeoxyoctonate.SeeKDO
Ionophores 414 Isomorphous replacement method 133 Ketone(s), acidity of 46
Iron 837– 866 Isonicotinyl hydrazide 738 Khorana, H. Gobind 84
binding of O 850 Kidney cells, alkaline phosphatase in 645
2

--- Page 925 ---

922 Volume 1 Index
Kidney tubules 28 Langmuir-Blodgett layers 392, 394 O-antigen of 180
Kilocalorie 282 Large calorie, numerical value of 283 structures of 430
Kinases 638, 654– 657 Lateral phase separation 395 Lipoprotein(s) 58
cyclin-dependent 580 Lathyrism 438 bacterial 428
metal ions in 654 Lavoisier 281 Liposomes 392, 392 – 394
Kinesin 370 Lead 31 NMR spectra 396
Kinetic(s) Leader peptidase 620 Liquid crystals 392 – 394
high enzyme concentrations 461 Leadzyme 649 Liquid crystalline phases 392
of enzyme action 455– 497 Leaving group Lithium salts, in treatment of manic-
of rapid reactions 468, 469 definition of 589 depressive illness 564
Kinetic constants 455 effect on reaction rates 590 Lithostatine 443
Kinetic equations for complex mechanisms Lecithin.SeePhosphatidylcholine Liverworts 29
466, 467 Lectin(s) 64s, 186, 186 – 188 Lobry de Bruyn-Alberda van Ekenstein
Kinetic isotope effect (KIE) 76, 111, 486, 592, domains in proteins 186 transformation 693
593, 600, 789 Lederberg, Joshua 83 Lock and key theory 478
Kinetic parameters 459 Leghemoglobin 362 Log phase of growth 470
Kinetic theory of gases 462, 463 Legionnaire’s disease 7 Lon protease 628
Kinetisome 15 Leprosy 7 Loricin 439
DNA of 15 Leucine (Leu, L) 52s Lou Gehrig’s disease 884
Klug, Aaron 84 branched fatty acids from 381 Low barrier hydrogen bond 614
Knobs-into-holes bonding 71, 334 biosynthesis of 527, 712 Lowry method 102
in coiled coil 71 L-Leucine 2,3-aminomutase 875 Luciferase 795
Knots Leucine aminopeptidase 627 Lungfish, genome 12
in peptide chains 74 Leucine-zipper 69, 71, 241, 576 Luteinizing hormone releasing factor (LRF)
in DNA 219 Leucopterin 803, 804s 54s
Kojibiose 431 Leucovorin 810 Lutropin receptor 554
Kornberg, Arthur 84 Leukemias 573 Lyases 530
Koshland Leukocytes 26 definition of 498
induced fit theory 349 adhesion 188 Lymphocytes 25, 26
model 352 Leupeptin 615, 622, 622s Lymphomas 573
Krebs, Hans A. 83 Lewis acid, Zn2+ 680 Lynen, Feodor 84, 725
Kringles 367, 368s Lewis blood group 184 Lyotropic series. SeeHofmeister series
K systems 475 Lewis x antigen 188 Lysine (Lys, K) 700, 745
Kuru 248 Lichen(s) 23 biosynthesis 53s , 540
Kynurenine 747s Life, origin 9 pK value of 487
a
conversion to alanine 746 Ligase(s) 498 D-Lysine 5,6-aminomutase 874
definition of 498 D-α-Lysine mutase 871, 874
Light absorption 122, 123. See also Absorp- L-β-Lysine mutase 871, 874
L tion spectra Lysine tyrosylquinone (LTQ) 817, 817s
of DNA 209 Lysophosphatidylcholine 384
Lily, genome 12 Lysosome 10, 13, 98
Lineweaver-Burk plot 460 Lysozyme(s) 599– 602, 599s, 603
Lac repressor 240
Link protein 181 active site structure 600
Laccase 887
Linkage between genes 18 catalytic side chain groups 599
Lactacystin 620, 620s
Linoleic acid 381 kinetic isotope effect 600, 601
Lactate 506s
Lipase(s) 634– 637 neighboring group assistance 601, 602
binding constants to metal ions 311
hormone-sensitive 635 substrate distortion 601
Lactate dehydrogenase 342, 467, 768, 771
lipoprotein 635 transition state 601
active site of 769
Lipid(s) 379– 436 HSQC NMR spectrum 146
inhibition by pyruvate 780
bilayer 391s, 394 titration curve 98
isoenzymes of 538
melting temperature 395 Lysyl oxidase 434, 886
Lactate monooxygenase 799 building blocks of 380– 389 α-Lytic protease 610
Lactic acid 508, 510
caloric value 283 Lyxose (Lyx) 163s
pK value of 293
a content in tissues 31
Lactobacillic acid 381s
in membranes 392
Lactoferrin 840, 840s
physical properties of 394 M
Lactoperoxidase 853, 856
neutral 382
Lactose (Lac) 167
α-Lactose 168s Lipid A 429, 430s
Lipmann, Fritz A. 83, 720
sweetness of 168 M-phase of cell cycle 579
β-Lactose 168 Lipoamide dehydrogenase Macrodipole of helix 70
reaction mechanism, scheme 792
Lactose (Lac) permease 417 Macroglobulin(s) (IgM) 58, 629
Lactosyl ceramide sulfate 389s Lipoarabinomannans 431 α 630
Lipocortins See Annexin(s) 2
O-Lactyl-GlcNAc.SeeMuramic acid Macromolecular structures
Lipoic acid 795– 802
Lactylthiamin 733s self-assembly pathways 362– 368
absorption maximum 795
Lag phase of growth curve 470 Macromolecules. See also Polymers
arsenite, reaction with 596
Lamellar (smectic) phase 392 association of 325
chemical reactions 795
Laminin 71, 409, 437 binding by 327
functions of 796 – 798, 798
Lamins 369 packing of 332– 348
proteins, attachment to 795s
Landsteiner, blood groups 184 synthesis and turnover of 517– 527
reduction of 785
Langmuir trough 394 Macrophages 26
ring strain in 795
Langmuir-Adam film balance 394 Macroscopic dissociation constants 305 – 307
Lipopolysaccharide 429

--- Page 926 ---

Volume 1 Index 923
Magnesium complex Melanosomes 439 Metabolic pathways 505,505– 507
in kinase action 655 Mellitin 414 scheme 506
Magnesium ion(s) 31 Melting curve Metabolic regulation 535– 581
in adenylate system 302 – 304 for DNA 256 control elements of 536
concentrations in tissues 299 for a diacylglycerol 395 sensitivity coefficient 537
effect on equilibria 296 Membrane(s) 5, 390 – 410 Metabolism.See also Specific compounds
enzymes dependent upon 299 active transport 410 activation 507, 508
intracellular concentration 299 anchors.SeeAnchors, membrane beta oxidation 511, 512
Magnetic iron oxide 842 artificial 392 – 394, 393 control by covalent modification
Magnetic resonance study basement 10 reactions
of phosphorus atom displacement cation channels 421 table 543
639– 642 chemical compositions, table 393 control by substrate cycles 567
Magnetite in organisms 842 coated, 426s definition of 1, 2
Maize, genome 12 communication 427 effects of insulin 568
Major groove of DNA 201, 213 concentration gradient 206 fermentation 508 – 511
Malaria 19 Davsen-Danielli model 393 glycolysis 508 – 511
L-Malate, 516s, 683s, 705sSee also Malic acid differential scanning calorimetry 394 introduction 505– 527
cleavage to acetyl-CoA 703 double, of gram-negative bacteria 5 oxidative phosphorylation 512 – 515
Malate dehydrogenase 497, 768 electrical properties 400 regulation of. SeeMetabolic regulation
Malathion 636 fluid mosaic model 390 study with isotopic tracers 110
Maleylpyruvate 690s fluidity 397 Metabolite, activation 507, 508
Malic enzyme 705 freeze fractured 405 Metal-binding proteins, chelate effect 310
Malolactic enzyme 777 inner side composition 401 Metal-binding sites 312
Malonate decarboxylase 723 ionic atmosphere 400 Metal complexes
Maltoporin (LamB) 411 ionic gradients across 400 formation constants, table 311
Maltose 81, 167s, 606 lateral diffusion of lipids 399 stability of, transition metal 311
β-Maltose from β-amylase action 608 lateral phase separation 395 Metal ion(s) 296
Mandelate dehydrogenase 784 lateral proton conduction 401 binding of 307
Mandelate racemase 691 lipid bilayer structure 390, 393 charge 311
active site 690 lipid composition 392 geometry of orbitals 311
Manganese 887, 888 lipids, physical properties of 394 hydration of 311
Manganese ion(s) NMR spectra 396 ionic radii 311
effect on equilibria 297 outer side composition 401 table 310
in enolase 685 peripheral proteins 407 toxicity 33
Mannan(s) 170, 175 permeability to neutral molecules 399 Metalloenzymes 680
Mannitol 165, 191 pretransition temperature 394 Metalloflavoproteins 794
Mannoprotein of yeast cell walls 185 resting potential 400 Metalloproteases 625– 627
Mannose (Man) 161s, 163s structure of 390– 401 Metalloproteins 312
Mannose-6-phosphate 185 transport through 410– 427 Metallothioneins 317, 317s, 680
Mannose-6-phosphate isomerase 693 transporters 411– 427 Metals, transition 837– 895
MAP kinase cascade 576 – 578 Membrane metabolism Metaphosphate ion 639
figure 579 enzymes of 409 Metastasis 573
in insulin signaling 570 Membrane proteins 401– 409 Metazoa 23 – 29
MAPK 578 anchors 402 Methane formation 814
definition of 577 glycoproteins 404 Methanofuran 814s
MAPKK, definition of 577 integral 401 Methanogens 7, 813 – 815, 879 – 881
Marcus theory 771, 848 positive-inside rule 401 Methanol dehydrogenase 816s
of proton transfer 493 Menadione 818 Methanopterin 803, 804s
Marfan’s syndrome 440 Menaquinones (vitamin K) 818, 821 Methemerythrin 862
2
Markovnikov rule 777 Mengo virus 247 Methemoglobin 358
Mass action ratio 535 Menkes’ disease 883 Methemoglobin reductase system 359
Mass spectrometry Mercaptans 624 Methionine (Met, M) 53s, 539, 875
electrospray 114 Mercaptides 550 biosynthesis of 540, 746
MALDI 112 – 114 Mercaptoethanol 98 sulfoxides 85
in sequencing 119 β-Mercaptoethylamine in coenzyme A 722s Methionine repressor 243
Mass spectrum 7-Mercaptoheptanoylthreonine phosphate operator complex 243s
of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 114 814s Methionine sulfoxide 631s
of myoglobin, apo 115 Mercapturic acid 550s Methionine synthase 813, 874s, 875
Mast cells 427 Mercuric reductase 787 Method(s) 95– 150
Mastigophora 19 Mercury 317 isolating compounds 98 – 108
Matrix of mitochondria 14 methylation of 876 of peptide synthesis 127– 129
Matrix metalloproteases 627 Mercury ions of carbohydrate analysis 188– 192
McClintock, Barbara 84 binding to proteins 125 Methotrexate 574, 805
Mechanocytes 25 reduction of 5-Methylarginine 881
Medusa form 23 Merrifield procedure, peptide synthesis 127, 3-Methylaspartate lyase 685
Megakaryocytes 26 128 Methylation
Meiosis 18 Merrifield, R. Bruce 84 of arsenic 876
MEK 578, 579 MES buffer 99 of carbohydrates 189, 190
Melanin 439, 887 pK value of 99 of carboxyl groups 592
a
Melanocyte(s) 439 Mesosome 3 of mercury 876
drawing 439 Mesozoa 23 of nucleic acids 591
Melanophores 439 Metabolic diseases. See Genetic diseases permethylation 189

--- Page 927 ---

924 Volume 1 Index
of protein side chains 79 Miescher, Friedrich 199 Morels 20
in regulation 543 Millipedes 24 Morgan, Thomas H. 83
of uracil in tRNA 591 Minor groove of DNA 201, 213 Mössbauer X-ray absorption spectra
Methylcellulose 172 Mitchell, Peter 84 of iron-sulfur clusters 860
Methylcobalamin 867, 867s, 875 Mites 24 Mosses 29
Methyl-coenzyme M reductase 879 – 881 Mitochondria 14, 15 Motion, in proteins 81
Methyl corrinoids 876 inner membrane 512 Mouse, genome 12
β-Methylcrotonyl-CoA, carboxylation of 724 matrix of 512 mRNA 5, 230, 257, 536
2-Methylcysteine 881 definition of 14 splicing of 11
5-Methylcytosine 234 origin from bacteria 15 Mucins 181, 182
oxo-Methylene analog of transition state 626, of plant cell cis,cis-Muconate lactonizing enzyme 692
627s in micrograph 13 Mucopolysaccharidoses 659
α-Methyleneglutarate mutase 871 Mitochondrial DNA. SeeDNA, mitochon- Multicatalytic protease 339, 620. See also
Methylene-THF reductase 813 drial Proteasome
Methylesterase 563 Mitochondrial processing peptidase 625 Multidrug resistance protein 417
N-Methylglutamate synthase 789 Mitochondrion 10 Multilamellar vesicles (liposomes) 392
2-Methylglutamine 881 Mitogen activated protein kinase (MAP Multiple attack concept 606
Methylglyoxal 695, 695s kinase) cascade 576 – 578 Multisubstrate enzymes, kinetics of 464
metabolism of 697 figure 579 Muramic acid (Mur) 165s
Methylglyoxal synthase 697 Mitogenic activity 576 Murein 170, 428, 429s.See also Peptidoglycan
Methyl group(s) 802 Mitomycin 225s Musci 29
synthesis of 813 Mitosis 18, 371 Muscle(s)
transfer reactions of 875 Mobile defects in proteins 496 cardiac 26
N-Methylhistidine 881 Modification of enzyme smooth 26
4-Methylidine-imidazole-5-one (MIO) 757 by group transfer 545 – 549 striated 26
S-Methylmalonyl-CoA by phosphorylation 541– 544 thin filaments 336
formation from propionyl-CoA 725 Modifiers of enzymes 473 electrolyte concentrations 206
equilibrium constant 725 Molal solution, definition of 287 Muscular dystrophy 822
Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase 871 Molecular activity (of enzyme) 457 nutritional 822
mechanism 873 Molecular biology, definition of 2 Mutagens 222, 253, 254
stereochemistry 874 Molecular dynamics simulations of mem- Mutarotase 486, 526
three-dimensional structure 874 branes 396 Mutarotation 486
Methylotrophs 815 Molecular mass Mutases 637
Methyltetrahydrofolic acid 875 in daltons 4 vitamin B dependent 653, 654, 872
12
Methyltransferases 526, 563, 591– 593 relative 4 Mutation(s) 2
Mevalonic acid-5-diphosphate (pyrophos- Molecular size, as basis of separations 100 addition 256
phate) 689, 690s Molecular weight 4 See also Relative autosomal recessive 16
Micelles 390 molecular mass conservative 59
Michael addition 681 Molecules, properties of deletion 256
Michaelis complex 751, 751s, 752 chiral 42 harmful dominant 16
Michaelis constant 464 conformations of 43– 45 heteroduplex formation 256
definition of 459 cyclic symmetry 332, 333 lethal 16
Michaelis-Menten equation 459 packing of 41 rate of 16
Michaelis pH functions 96, 296 structural principles 39– 46 myb 576
Michel, Hartmut 84 Molluscs 24 myc 572, 576, 577, 579
Microbodies. SeePeroxisomes Molybdenum 890– 893 Mycelium 20
Microfilaments 369, 369, 370 coenzyme forms 890 – 892 Mycobacteria 431
behind desmosomes 29 nutritional need 893 Mycobacterium tuberculosis 431
Micropinocytosis 426 oxo-transfer reactions 892 Mycolic acids 431
Microscopic binding constants 328, 329 Molybdenum-iron cofactor (FeMo-co) 892 Mycoplasma(s) 2, 3
Microscopic dissociation constants 305 Molybdoenzymes Mycoplasma genitalium 4
of pyridoxine 305 active site structures 892 genome 12
Microscopic reversibility, principle of 486 dimethylsulfoxide reductase family Mycorrhizae 20
Microscopy 890 Myelin 390, 399
atomic force 131 nitrogenase family 890 Myeloperoxidase 856
chemical force 131 sulfite oxidase family 890 Myoglobin 17, 68s, 70, 353– 359, 354s, 844
confocal scanning optical microscopy xanthine oxidase family 890 bonding of dioxygen 851
129 Molybdopterin 803, 804s, 825 folding pattern 354
electron 130 in formate dehydrogenases 892 mass spectrum 113
near-field scanning optical 130 Molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide 891s mass spectrum of apo form 115
negative contrast 130 Monensin 414 NMR spectrum 148
scanning tunneling 131 K+ complex 415s oxygenation curves 355
STM image, glycogen 174 synthesis 872 packing of side chains 75
Microsome, definition of 14 Monocytes 26, 188 Myohemerythrin 71s
Microtomes 130 Monod, Jacques 84 Myosin 369
Microtubules 15, 369, 370 Monod-Wyman-Changeux (MWC) model coiled coil structure of 71
associated proteins 372 350, 476 diffusion constant of 461
growth of 373 allosteric regulation 349 Myotonia congenita 420
labile 334, 370 Monosaccharide(s) 161– 167 Myriopoda 24
organizing centers 372 characteristic reactions 167 N-Myristoyl group 559
stable 370 13C-NMR spectrum of 162 Myxococcus xanthis, genome 12
Microvilli 10, 12 reduction of 167 Myxomycetes 20

--- Page 928 ---

Volume 1 Index 925
N Nicotinamide ring 770, 779 lysozyme 146
Nicotine 769 isotope-edited spectra 144, 145
oxidation to nicotinic acid 769 J coupling 139
Nicotinic acid. 769sSee also Nicotinamide liposomes 396
NAADP+ 315, 779 Nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide membranes 396
Na+, K+-ATPase 423 – 425 (NAADP+) 778 multidimensional
model 424 Nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide mixing time 143
Nacrein 678 phosphate (NAA 315 NOESY 142
NAD+ (NAD) 63s, 507s, 535, 765– 771, 767s, Nicotinic acid hydroxylase 825 nitrogen-15 140
778 Nidogen 437 NOE 140
absorption spectrum of 768 Ninhydrin 120,121s NOESY spectra 146
addition to 779 Nitrate reductase(s) nuclear Overhauser effect 140
containing2H 768 assimilatory 890 phosphorus-31 140, 295
determination of 779 dissimilatory 890 of adenylate system 303
NAD2H 771 Nitric oxide, NO 553, 561 of muscle 304
oxidation by 298 binding to hemoglobin 358, 359 of phosphotransferases 640 – 643
NAD+/ NADH ratio, redox potential 767 Nitrite reductase(s) 836s, 861 positional isotope exchange 641
NADH (NADH + H+; NADH 2 )765– 771 copper in 884, 885 protein dynamics 145
absorption spectrum of 768 cytochrome cd type 885 relaxation times 141
1
modification in acid 780 Nitroform 126 residence time, τ 142
m
NADH-X 780 Nitrogen mustards 574 ring current shifts 139
NADH-methemoglobin reductase 826 Nitrogenase 890 saturation-transfer 641
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase 788 Nitromethane, inhibition of ammonia-lyases scalar coupling 139
oxidation by ferricyanide 780 756 solid-state 149
NADP+ (NADP) 507, 765– 771,767s, 779 p-Nitrophenolate anion, as a leaving group spin decoupling 139
in catalase 853 636 spin-lattice relaxation time, T 142
1
isolation of 767 p-Nitrophenyl acetate 610, 610s spin-spin interaction 139
NADPH (NADPH + H+; NADPH 2 ) 507, 765– Nitrous acid, reaction with nucleic acids 253 spin-spin relaxation time T 2 142
771 Nitrous oxide reductase(s) stable isotopes, use of 110, 111
NADPH/ NADP+ ratio 776 copper in 884, 885 study of phosphotransferases 639
Naphthalene, resonance energy 299 NMR spectra tetramethylsilane (TMS) 138
Nathans, Daniel 84 of ADP, 31P 642 titrations 147
Natural killer cells 185 of aspartate aminotransferase 149 transferred NOE 145
Near attack conformation 485 of carbohydrates 190 – 192 two-dimensional 141
Near-field scanning microscope 130 of honey, 13C 162 correlation spectroscopy (COSY)
Neighboring group assistance in displace- of tRNA, 19F 270 144
ment reactions 601, 602 of glycyl-L-histidylglycine 147 TOCSY 144
Nekoflavin 783 of gonadatropin-releasing hormone of various nuclei 141
Nematocyst 427 145 of vicinal protons 139
Nematodes 24, 25 of DNA, 1H 269 Nobel prizes, list 83
Neocarzinostatin 218, 224s of lysozyme 146 Nodes of Ranvier 29
Neopterin 803 of myoglobin 147 Nojirimycin tetrazole 605, 605s
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 412 of muscle, 31P 304 Non-coding (transcribing) strand in DNA
Neprilysin 625 of phospholipid phases, 31P 397 237
Nernst equation 400 of phosphatidylcholine, 1H 396 Noncompetitive inhibition 476, 477
Netropsin 225s of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, 1H 138 Nonheme iron proteins. SeeIron-sulfur and
binding to DNA 225 pyruvate kinase equilibria 641 diiron proteins
Neu (protein) 576 of serine proteases, 1H 613 Nonlinear equations 460
neu (oncogene) 572 of tRNA 268 Nonmetallic ions, ionic radii, table 310
Neuraminic acid anion (Neu) 165s NMR spectroscopy 137– 149, 494 Nonproductive complexes 475
Neuraminidase 186 assignment of resonances 145 Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) 553, 553s
Neurofibromatosis 574 band widths 138 in receptor 555s
Neurofilaments 369 basic principles 137 Nuclear envelope 11
Neuroglia 25 carbon-13 140 Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Neuron(s) 25. See also Axon chemical shift 138 SeeNMR spectroscopy
of squid 24 table 141 Nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) 140. See
Neurospora crassa 20 correlation time, τ 142 alsoNMR spectroscopy
c
figure 21 coupling constants 138, 139, 146 Nuclear pore 11
Neurotransmitter(s) 29, 553 deshielded 139 Nuclear relaxation
receptors for 479 deuterium 140 by chromium ions 639
Neutron diffraction 137 distance constraints 145 by manganese ion 639
Neutrophils 26, 188 downfield 139 Nucleases 250
Nick translation 257 DSS or Tier’s salt 138 micrococcal, active site 653
Nickel 877– 882 exchangable protons 148 Nucleic acid(s) 199 – 213, 218
dietary essential 877 fluorine-19 140 abbreviated structures 204
in plants 877 Fourier transform 141 absorption of light 205
Nickeloplasmin 877 free induction decay 141 acid– base chemistry 204, 205
Nicotinamide 507, 721, 766, 767, 769s, 780. Heisenberg uncertainty principle 138 amount in cells 31
See also NAD+, NADH; NADP+, NADPH HMQC (15N-multiple quantum bases, aromatic character of 204
daily requirements 756, 769 coherence) 144 stacking of 209
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. See HSQC (15N-multiple quantum catenated 218
NAD+, NADH coherence) cruciform structure in 229

--- Page 929 ---

926 Volume 1 Index
dynamics 218 and specificity of metabolism 720 Ornithine decarboxylase 342, 342s
electrophilic reagents 253 – 255 Nucleotide kinases 655 Ornithine mutases 871, 874
homology of 256 Nucleotide sequence Oscillatoria 22
hydrolysis of 249 of aspartate aminotransferse 202 Osmate ester 393s
interactions with proteins 239– 244 of DNA and RNA chains 200 Osmotic shock 417
isolation of 249 of genes and genomes 12, 201 Osteoarthritis 438
knots in 218, 219 of mitochondrial DNA 201 Osteoblasts 26, 441
melting curves of 255 of viruses 201 alkaline phosphatase in 645
methods of study 249– 270 Nucleotidyl transferases 657 Osteocalcin 821
pK values of 204 Nucleotidylation 545 Osteoclasts 441
a
separation of 249 Nucleus 10, 11 acid phosphatase in 645
tautomerism 204, 205 of plant cell, micrograph 13 Osteocytes 441
topology 218– 230 alkaline phosphatase in 645
turnover of 527 Osteogenesis imperfecta 438
Nucleic acid bases O Osteonectin 313
alkylation 253 Osteopetrosis 572, 678
aromatic character 207 Osteopontin 409, 441, 572
chemical reactions of 207 Osteoporosis 443, 619
O-Antigen 180, 428 – 430
epoxides 254 Ouabain 422
Obelia 24
halogenation 253 Ovomucoids 183, 629
Occlusion zones 29
reactions 251– 255 Ovotransferrin 840
Octahedral geometry 311
reactions with formaldehyde 253 Oxalate 699s
Octopus, intelligence of 24
reactions with kethoxal 253 Oxaloacetate 699s
Oils, composition of 380
reactions with nitrous acid 253 Oxaloacetate 506s, 515, 516s, 737s
Okadaic acid 545
Nucleoid 4 acetylhydrolase 698
Old yellow enzyme 783
Nucleolus 10, 11 decarboxylases 527, 706
Oleate hydratase 526, 688
Nucleophilic catalysis 494. See also Covalent 4-Oxalocrotonate decarboxylase 705
Oleic acid 381
catalysis 4-Oxalocrotonate tautomerase 697
Olfactory responses 558
Nucleophilic character and bonding to metal Oxalosuccinate 516s, 705
Oligomer(s)
ions 307 Oxazoline 601s
asymmetry 344 – 347
Nucleophilic displacement reactions 526, Oxidation
cubic symmetry 342 – 344
589– 662 of biochemical substances, table 290
with dyad axes 337– 348
carbocationic intermediates 598 linked 705
heterologous tetramer 352
cellulases 602 by NAD+, table 290
chitinase 599 – 602 isologous tetramer 352 β Oxidation pathway 506, 511
quasi-equivalence 344 – 347
glycogen phosphorylase 604, 605 Oxidation-reduction, by dehydration 697
β-glycosidases 602 Oligomeric enzymes 475 Oxidation states
Oligonucleotides, 200 – 205
glycosyltransferases 593 – 598 of iron-sulfur clustsers 857
synthesis of 258
inversion 590, 591 Oxidation-reduction potentials. See also
probe 119
kinetic isotope effects 592, 593 Reduction Potential
Oligosaccharide(s) 167– 170.See also Specific
lysozymes 599 – 602 of pyridine nucleotide system 766
names
starch-hydrolyzing enzymes 605 – 608 table 301
asparagine-linked (N-linked) 180 – 185
transmethylation 591, 592 Oxidation-reduction reactions
biological recognition of 161
Nucleophilic group, definition of 589 coenzymes of 765– 827
Nucleophilic reactivity (nucleophilicity) 589 N-linked 182 – 185, 183, 192s Oxidative decarboxylation of α-oxoacids
release from glycoproteins 188
alpha effect 590 511, 736, 796– 802
separation of 100
effect of polarizability on 590 by hydrogen peroxide 799
Omega.SeeOxidation
of sulfur compounds 590 mechanisms 799 – 801
OmpA protein 411, 428
Nucleoside(s) with thiamin diphosphate 800
OmpC (osmoporin) 411
conformations of 211, 212 Oxidative metabolism 535
OmpF 411, 412s
names and abbreviations, table 203 Oxidative phosphorylation 512
Oncogenes 242, 544, 571– 576
torsion angles of 211 Oxidizing power of redox couples 300
in human tumors 571
Nucleoside diphosphate kinase 655 Oxidoreductases 497
Nucleoside Q (Queosine) 234s table 572 α(2)-Oxoacid(s) (α-keto acids). See also
Oncogenic viruses 248
Nucleoside trialcohols, fluorographs 252 specific acids
One-start helix 334
Nucleoside triphosphates 302 cleavage of 802
Oparin, I. V. 9
Nucleoside Y 234s decarboxylation 730
Open systems 289
Nucleosomes 239 oxidative decarboxylation 796– 802
DNA in 221 Operator sequence of DNA β-Oxoacid(s)
1H NMR spectrum 269
model 222 decarboxylation 705
Nucleotide(s) 199 – 213, 200s Operons 240 α(2)-Oxoacid dehydrogenases 348
Opsin(s) 553
names and abbreviations, table 203 sequence of reactions, diagram 798
Optical rotation 42
chemistry of 203– 213 3-Oxoacyl-CoA transferase 527
conformations of 211– 213 Optimum rate for enzymes 469 α-Oxo alcohol, reaction with thiamin 732
d Orbitals, participation in covalent bond
modified 234 Oxocarbenium ion 598s, 604
pairs 3 formation 311 α(2)-Oxoglutarate (α-ketoglutarate) 516s,
Orcinol 251
structures of 203 – 213 737s
Ordered binding 464
Nucleotide binding domain 76 dehydrogenases 796
Ordered sequential mechanism 475
glyceraldehyde phosphate synthase 799
Organelle(s) 11
dehydrogenase 63s 2-Oxoisovalerate 700s
separation 101
Nucleotide handles Oxonium ion. SeeOxocarbenium ion
Organic mechanisms, use of arrows 528
of coenzymes 719 2-Oxopantoate 810

--- Page 930 ---

Volume 1 Index 927
Oxophenarsine 597s Penicillin 20 glutathione 856
5-Oxoproline, 551s, 662s Penicillin acylase 620 halo 855, 889
Oxosteroid isomerase 526, 696 Penicillopepsin 621 heme linkage 853
molecular activity 696 Pentose phosphate pathway 700 horseradish 852, 856
∆5-3-Oxosteroid isomerase reductive 517 iron properties 853
turnover number of 458 Pentoses 162 lacto 853, 856
Oxyanion 613 PEP. SeePhosphoenolpyruvate mammalian 853
Oxyanion hole 614, 615s PEP carboxykinase. SeePhosphoenolpyru- mechanisms of catalysis 853 – 855
formation of in trypsinogen 615 vate carboxykinase myelo 856
of serine proteases 614 PEP carboxylase. SeePhosphoenolpyruvate structure 853
Oxygen (O) carboxylase thyroid 856
2
binding of, to heme proteins 353 – 358, PEP carboxytransphosphorylase 706 Peroxisomes (microbodies) 10, 14
850– 852 PEP mutase 711 Perutz, Max F. 84
to hemocyanin 885, 886 Pepsin 456, 621 PEST regions 527
paramagnetism of 850 specificities 117 pH 95 – 98
reactivity of 850 Pepsinogen 625 of cytoplasm 549
Oxygenases 863 Pepstatin 623 effects on enzymatic action 469
diiron 863 Peptidase(s) 526, 609 effects on equilibria 293 – 297, 305
Oxyhemoglobin 851 leader 620 effects on metal binding 310
Oxyperoxidase 854 procollagen 433 Michaelis pH functions 296
Oxytocin 54s signal 620 within a cell 295
Oysters, glycogen content 31 ripeptidyl 140 pH dependence
Peptide(s) 51– 59 of chymotrypsin 616
β conformation of 60 PH (plekstrin homology) domain 102, 367,
P knotted chains 74 566, 571
torsion angles 60 Phaeophyta 22
Peptide deformylase 627 Phage head 363
Peptide hormone(s). See also Chapter 30 Phage lambda
P Loop 425, 648, 658
amidation of 522 repressors 241
Packing
Peptide linkage 51, 55s Phage tail 363
of macromolecules 332 – 348
cis 56s Phagocytosis 13
of molecules 41
dimensions 55 Phagosomes 426
Paget’s disease 443
resonance stabilization of 55 Phantom atoms 42
Palindromes
trans 56 Phase transition 284
in DNA 238
Peptide mapping 118 Phase transitions
H- (mirror-repeats) 238
Peptide structure of lipid bilayer 394
Pallidin 405
torsion angles of, table 61 Phenol(s)
Palmitic acid 381
Peptide synthesis 127– 129 acidity of 308
Palmitoyl group 559
solid-phase 127, 128 pK value of 293, 309
Pancreatic trypsin inhibitor 629 a
Peptide unit resonance energy 299
Pantetheine 722
hydrogen bonds 56 Phenolsulfonic acid
Pantetheine 4'-phosphate 722
partial double bond character 55 pK value of 99
in acyl carrier proteins 723 a
planarity of 55 Phenylacetic acid(s)
Pantoic acid 722, 723
properties of 55, 56 acidity of 308
in coenzyme A 722
structure 55, 56 pK value of 309
Pantothenic acid 721, 722, 722s a
Peptidoglycan(s) 179, 428, 429s Phenylaceturic acid 513s
nutritional requirement of 756
Peptidyl transfer 234 Phenylalanine (Phe, F) 52, 52s
Papain 618
Peptidyl transferases 637 absorption spectrum of derivative 123
active site 618
Peptidyl-prolyl-(cis-trans) isomerases 488 Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase 755
Paper chromatography 103 Peptidylglycineα-hydroxylating Phenylephrine 563s
Papovaviruses 244
monoxygenase 887 Phenylisothiocyanate 118
Parabactin 838, 838s
Parallelβ structure 62 Performic acid 115 Phenylketonuria 16
Perfusion chromatography 100, 101 Phenylpyruvate 689
Paramagnetic ions, effects on NMR signal
Perinuclear space 11 Phenylpyruvate tautomerase 692
640
Periodate oxidation Phenylthiohydantoin 118
Paramecium 17, 20
of carbohydrates 190 Pheromones 382
Paramylon 170, 174
Periodental disease 442 Phloem 30
Parathion 636s
Periplasm 427, 428 Phorbol esters 564
Parathyroid hormone 314
Permeability coefficient 410 Phosducin 558
Paratose 180s
forD-glucose 415 Phosphagen 303
Partition coefficient 410
Permease 411 Phosphatase(s) 515, 526, 637, 645– 647
Parvalbumin 312 – 316
for lactose 417 Phosphate anhydride 303
Parvoviruses 244
periplasmic 417– 419 Phosphate, inorganic (P)
Patterson map 135 i
Pernicious anemia in adenylate system 302, 304
Pauling, Linus C. 83, 84
vitamin B treatment 868, 869 Phosphatides 383, 384
Paxillin 406 12
Peroxidase(s) 844, 845, 852 – 855 structures of 383
p 53 cancer suppressor 574, 581
ascorbate 852 Phosphatidic acid 383s
Pectate lyase 65, 686
bromo 856 Phosphatidyglycerol 383s, 384
Pectate lyase C 686, 686s
catalytic cycles, scheme 855 Phosphatidylcholine 383, 383s, 391s
Pectin(s) 15, 170, 177
chloro 855 in bilayer 391
Pellagra 721, 769
compounds I, II 853 – 855 packing 391
L-Penicillamine 739
cytochrome c 852 Phosphatidylethanolamine 383, 383s

--- Page 931 ---

928 Volume 1 Index
bilayer, AFM image of 392 4' - Phosphopantothenylcysteine succinyl-CoA-acetoacetate CoA
Phosphatidylinositol decarboxylases 753, 755 transferase 662
383s Phosphophoryns 442 Pinocytosis 13
Phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) 563, 565, 566s Phosphoporin (PhoE) 411, 412s Piperazine, pK value of 99
a
in signalling 563– 566 Phosphoric acid Piperidine, pK value of 99
a
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 565 in lipids 380 PIPES, pK value of 99
a
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 563 pK value of 99 Pitch
a
Phosphatidylserine 383s,564 Phosphorolysis, 593 of a helix 68
decarboxylation of 753 Phosphorothioate of B-DNA 213
Phosphatidylserine decarboxylase 409, 755 phosphotransferases, study of 642 Pituitary hormones 54
3'-Phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate Phosphorus-32 pK values 95– 98.See also Specific compounds
a
(PAPS) 659 properties of 110 of acids, table 293
Phosphoadenylation Phosphorylase a 541 of amino acid side chains 55
of protein side chains 79 Phosphorylase kinase 541, 544 of buffers, table 99
Phosphodiesterase 556, 638 Phosphorylation 541 of buried groups 55
for cGMP 558 in bacteria 545 of dicarboxylic acids, table 328
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) 510, 510s, 685s cascade reactions 542 effect on separation 104
key metabolic intermediate 705, 706 oxidataive 303 in hemoglobin 357
as stabilized enol 697 photosynthetic 303, see also of hydrogen-bonded protons 494
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 549 Photosynthetic phosphorylation in hemoglobin 357
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase of protein side chains 79 succinic acid 330
(PEPCK) 706 substrate level 775, 800 of terminal – COOH 55
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 527, 711 Phosphorylation, photosynthetic. See of terminal – NH3+ 55
Phosphoenzyme 653, 703 Photosynthetic phosphorylation thiamin 330
Phosphofructokinase Phosphorylation reactions 303 Plague 7
in regulation 535 Phosphorylation state ratio Planarians 23
Phosphofructokinase-2 541 definition of 303 Plankton 22
Phosphoglucomutase 653 O-Phosphoserine 610s Plant cell, electron micrograph 13
6-Phosphogluconate ion 164s Phosphoserine 545 Plant cells and tissues 29, 30
6-Phosphogluconate dehydratase 697 Phosphothreonine 545 fiber 11
6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase 770 Phosphotransferase system Plasma amine oxidase 886
3-Phosphoglyceraldehyde dehydrogenase bacterial 419, 420 Plasma antithrombin III 177
770 Phosphotransferases 637 Plasma membrane 12, 379
2-Phosphoglycerate 510s, 685s in-line displacement 638 Plasmalemma.SeePlasma membrane
dehydration 685 P31 NMR of 642, 643 Plasmalogens 383s, 384
dehydration to PEP 705 pentacovalent intermediate 638 Plasmids 5, 248249
3-Phosphoglycerate 506s, 707s stereochemistry 642, 643 ColE1 248
in chloroplasts 706 Phosphotriesterase 646 drug resistance 248
Phosphoglycerate kinase 654, 656 mechanism 646 Plasmin 634
Phosphoglycerate mutase 653 Phosphotyrosine 545 Plasminogen 634
Phospho (phosphoryl) group 292s Phosvitin 80 Plasmodesmata 10
chirality of 644 Photoautotrophic bacteria 8 in micrograph 13
as a handle 507 Photofootprinting 266 Plasmodium 19, 20
transfer from ATP 660 Photorespiration 707 Plastids 14, 15
transfer of 292 Photosynthesis 506, 517, 705 Plastochromanols 818
transfer of, by kinases 654 Photosynthetic bacteria 7 Plastocyanin 65s, 883
O-Phosphohomoserine 746 Photosynthetic phosphorylation 303, 517 Plastoquinone(s) 818, 818s
Phosphoketolase 736 Photosynthetic reaction centers 71 Platelet(s) 26
Phosphokinases 526 Phthaldialdehyde 120s cyclic AMP in 557
Phospholipases 635 Phycoerythrin 22 Platelet activating factor 384, 384s,385
A 566 Phycomycetes 20 Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) 544,
1
A 566, 635 Phylloquinones (vitamin K1) 818, 821 571
2
C 563, 566 Phylogenetic approach Platyhelminthes 23
D 566 to RNA structure 232 Pleated sheet 62
Phospholipid(s) 379, 380,382– 387, 392. See Phylogenetic tree 7, 8 structure 62
alsoSpecific substances Physarum polycephalum 20 P loop 425, 648
bilayer diagram 391 Phytanyl group 385 consensus 559
head groups, functions of 396 Phytate.SeeInositol hexakisphospate (InsP) of Ras 559
6
inverted hexagonal phase 397 Phytochelins 318 PLP. SeePyridoxal phosphate (PLP)
31P NMR 397 Phytocyanin 883 PLP-dependent reactions. SeePyridoxal
non-bilayer structures 397 Phytoglycolipids 388, 389s phosphate-dependent reactions
Phosphomannomutase 654 Phytosphingosine 388, 388s PNA, 227s
Phosphomutases 526 Picornaviruses 247 Poison(s).See also Insecticides, Antibiotics,
Phosphonamidate 626s Pili 3, 6, 335, 336, 364. See also F pili Inhibitors
as metalloprotease inhibitor 626 Pimeloyl-Coenzyme A cyanide 590
Phosphonate esters 626s conversion to biotin 719, 723 hydroxylamine 590
Phosphonates Pinacol 712s Polar membrane 5
synthesis of 711 Pinacolone 712s Polar molecules 50
Phosphono group 711 Pinacol-pinacolone rearrangement 712 definition of 48
Phosphonoethylamine 385s Ping-pong mechanism 465, 475 hydration of 50
Phosphonolipids 385 rate equation for 466 Polarizability 590
4'-Phosphopantetheine 723

--- Page 932 ---

Volume 1 Index 929
Polarization concentration in cells 206 Protamines 204, 239
of water 47 effect on equilibria 297 Protease (proteinase) 609. See also
Poliovirus(es) 247 replacement by proteins 206 Proteosome
Poly(ADP-ribose) synthase 545 replacement by rubidium 206 aspartic 621– 625
Polyadenylation site in tissues 299 ATP-dependent 627, 628
in RNA 202 Potentiometer 300 in blood clotting 631– 634
Polyamines 222 Poxvirus 247 cysteine 618, 619
Polycarboxylate synthases, table 700 PQQ See Pyrroloquinoline quinone in defense systems 628
Polycarboxylic acid synthases 700– 703 Preproteins 519 – 522. See also Proenzyme(s) E. coli 628
Polyethylene peroxisomal 521 functions of 628
helical structure of 45 Precursor activation 540 metallo- 625 – 627
Polyethyleneglycol (PEG) 102 Prenatal diagnosis 26 multicatalytic 339, 525, 620
Polyfluorethylene (Teflon) Prenyl diphosphate (pyrophosphate) 390s pH dependence of 616
helical structure of 45 Prenylation 402 serine.SeeSerine proteases
Polyglutamates 803 of proteins 559 specificities, table 117
Polyglycine II 72, 73s Prenyltransferases 712 subsites of, nomenclature 617
Polyhistidine“tag” 106 Prephenate 485, 690s substrate specificities 616 – 618
Poly-β-hydroxybutyric acid 3 conjugative elimination 689 V-8, specificity 117
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 260 Prepro-opiomelanocortin 522 stereoelectronic effect 616
figure 261 Preproinsulin 519 Protease inhibitors 622, 629 – 631
Polymetaphosphate 3 Pressure jump method 468 alpha 1 629, 631
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes 26 Primary kinetic isotope effect Proteasome 523
Polynucleotide(s) 199s,226– 228.See also for glucose-6-phosphate isomerase Protection mapping. SeeFootprinting
Nucleic acids, RNA, DNA 592, 593, 693 Protein(s)
hybridization 255 Primary hydration sphere 311 amino acid composition 59, 115 – 123
hydrazine reactions 254 Primary structure anchors for 402
interactions with ions 218 of nucleic acids 200 – 202 aromatic clusters 75
melting of 255 of protein 56 caloric value 283
probes 255 Priming reaction in metabolism 507 charged groups 101
rotational movements of bases, figure Prion 248 chemical modification 79– 81
217 Priority sequence 42 classification of residues 79
triple-helical 226 Procapsid 366 compositions of specialized 59
Polynucleotide kinase 258 Processive mechanism content
Polynucleotide polymerases 638 ofα-amylase 606 from nitrogen analysis 31
Polyomavirus 247 Prochiral centers 478, 768 in tissues 31
Polypeptide(s) 56– 59.See also Proteins trigonal 480 covalent structure 57
antibiotics 66 Prochlorophytes 10 crosslinking 79– 81
chemical synthesis 85 Procollagen 432, 432s crossover connections 74s
conformation of 59– 61, 78 Procollagen peptidases 433 degradation of 628
definition of 51 Product inhibition 464, 475 disulfide crosslinkages 80
torsion angles 59 – 62 Proenzyme(s), 519, 609. See also Zymogen domains 74
Polypeptides.See also Peptides of histidine decarboxylase 754 engineering of 85
Polyphosphates 302, 303 Proflavine 223s families 76
Polyprenyl compounds Progesterone 696 globular 59
polymerization of 712 Programmed cell death. SeeApoptosis hydration of 50
Polyproline 72, 73 Progress curve for enzyme-catalyzed hydrogen bonding of side chains 75
Polyproteins 522, 628 reaction 455 hydrogen bonds in 75
Polysaccharide(s) 169– 180 Proinsulin 519 hydrolysis 116 – 118
alternating, list of 170 Projection formula idealized shapes 60
of bacterial surfaces 179, 180 Fisher 42 induction of synthesis 538, 539
chains, conformation of 170 Newman 44 intracellular degradation 523
list of, table 170 Prokaryotic cells, definition of 2 isoelectric point 83
main linkages, table 170 Proline (Pro, P) 52s maturation 519
structureal features of, table 170 in helices 69 methylation of 79
Polysialic acid 187 reductases 753, 755 molecular mass 59
Polyubiquitin 524 Proline rings, torsion angles 62 multienzyme complexes 348
Porifera.SeeSponges Prontosil 473s nucleotide-binding domain 76
Porins 65, 402, 411, 428 Proofreading oxidation of 85
FepA 839 by enzymes 482 oxygen carrying 850 – 853
FhaA 839 1,2-Propanediol 874s packing density of 75
Porphin(s) 843 β Propeller 67, 560, 764 pH, effects of 83
Porphobilinogen 843s Propionic acid, pK value of 293 phosphoadenylation of 79
a
Porphyrin(s) 843 Propionic acid bacteria 725 phosphorylation of 79
biosynthesis 742 PEP carboxytransphosphorylase 706 primary structure 56
chelate effect 310 Propionyl-CoA, carboxylation of 724 processing of 519
tautomerism of 845 Propranolol 553s repression of genes 538, 539
Posttranslational modification 402 Prostacyclin 557 salting in 101
of proteins 521– 523 Prostaglandin(s) 565 separation with ammonium sulfate
Potassium 206 Prostaglandin PGE 381s 101
2
Potassium ion(s) 31 Prostanoids 381 selenium-containing, table 825
activation of enzymes by 206 Prostate gland, zinc content 680 side chain groups, reactions of
binding to tetraplex DNA 206 Prosthetic groups 312, 719 123– 127

--- Page 933 ---

930 Volume 1 Index
solubility 101 Protoheme(s) 844, 845s enzymes, atomic structures 750
solvent, effects of 83 Proton(s) in glycogen phosphorylase 604
sulfate esters of 79 conduction, lateral 401 mechanism of action 740, 741, 751– 753
thermostability 85 dissociation, diffusion-controlled 493 NMR spectrum of 138
transport of 519 – 521 intramolecular transfer 693 optical properties 749, 750
turnover 538, 539 inventory technique 493, 618 Schiff bases, reactions of 699, 705, 742
water molecules in 76 Proton transfer transimination 741
Protein(s), association coupled 493 Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes,
binding equilibria 350 – 352 Marcus theory 493 list 743
dimerizing 350 – 352 rates 492 Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent reactions
interfaces 74 ultra-fast 491 741– 747
quaternary structure 332 Proto-oncogenes 571– 576, 574 beta replacement 742 – 744
regulatory subunits 348 Protoplast(s) 6 cyclization 741
subunits of 74, 332 Protozoa 18– 20 decarboxylation 745
tertiary structure 59 Provirus 248 elimination 742
unsymmetrical dimerization 344 Proximity factor in catalysis 495 ketimine intermediate 745, 746
Protein(s), conformational states Pseudo first order reactions 457 nonenzymatic models 737
compact denatured state 82 Pseudoazurin 884 racemization 741
conformational changes in 81 Pseudoknot in RNA 231 side chain cleavage 745
conformational substates 496 Pseudomonad(s) 8, 688 stereochemistry of 749
denaturation of 82 Pseudorotation 212, 638 transamination 741
dynamic properties 81– 85 Pseudosubstrate of acetylcholinesterase 636 Pyridoxamine 738
local unfolding 81 Pseudouridine 234s orange product with ninhydrin 121
mobile defects in 496 Pseudo vitamin B 867 Pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP) 741, 744s,
12
packing defects 81 Psicose 164s 747
Protein(s), folding patterns 76, 77 Psoriasin 313 Pyridoxamine:pyruvate aminotransferase,
α/α barrel 77 Psoriasis 316, 440 stereochemistry of 748
α/β barrel 77 PTEN 566 Pyridoxine (vitamin B) 305s, 738
6
architecture of folded 59– 76 Pteridine 803 microscopic dissociation constants 305
folding intermediates 82 ring system 802 – 804 pK values of 305
a
folding of 81– 83, 518, 519 Pteridophyta 29 tautomerism 45
molten globule 82 Pterin(s) 802 ε-Pyridoxyllysine 750s
motifs 367 coenzymes 802– 813 Pyrimethamine 805s
β sandwich 64 structures 802 – 804 Pyrimidine 199s
secondary structure 63 Puffballs 20 Pyrimidine bases
seven-bladedβ propeller 561 Pufferfish, genome 12 absorption spectra of 205
seven-helix 553 – 556 Pullulan 170, 175 hydrogen-bonding possibilities 207
symmetry in 77 Purine 199, 199s names of 203
winged helix 243 catabolism of 810 pK values of 204, 205
a
Protein C 634 Purine bases Pyrithiamin 731, 736
Protein coats of viruses 334 absorption spectra of 205 Pyroglutamate aminopeptidase 619
Protein concentrations, estimation of 102 hydrogen-bonding possibilities 207 Pyroglutamyl group as N-terminus
Protein data bank 149 names of 203 in proteins 54, 522
Protein disulfide isomerases 83, 659, 787 pK values of 204, 205 Pyrophosphatases 515, 646
a
Protein kinase 541, 656, 659 Purine hydroxylase 890 Pyrophosphate (PP) 508, 515
i
cGMP-activated 544 Purple acid phosphatases 658, 862, 863 in adenylate system 302 – 304
Protein kinase C 544, 564 Purple Cu center 883, 884 Pyrophospho group
A
Protein kinase, cAMP-dependent active site Putidaredoxin 859 transfer from ATP 660
657 EPR spectrum of 860 Pyrophosphoric acid, pK value of 99, 293
a
Protein phosphatases 544, 646 Putrescine 363 Pyrrole, resonance energy 299
Protein S 634 Pycnodysostosis 619 Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) 764, 815
Protein sequenators 118 Pyochelin 838s Pyrrophyta 20
Protein sequences from genes 119 Pyranose rings 161, 162, 175. See also Sugars Pyruvaldehyde. SeeMethylglyoxal
Protein synthesis 3, 538, 539 Pyrenoid 20 Pyruvate 506s, 510
Protein tyrosine kinases 544 Pyridine anaerobic cleavage 800
Protein-disulfide isomerase 83 binding constants to metal ions 311 decarboxylation, reversible 799
Protein-DNA interactions 266 pK value of 293 Pyruvate carboxylase 711, 724
a
Proteinase. SeeProtease resonance energy 299 control mechanisms 729
Proteoglycan(s) 181, 182. See also Glycosami- Pyridine nucleotide(s) 765 Pyruvate decarboxylase 718, 734
noglycans chemistry 779, 780 Pyruvate dehydrogenase 511, 796 – 798, 797s
aggregates of cartilage 182 coenzymes 767– 780 effect of insulin 571
molecular architecture 182 6-Pyridone(s) 780s Pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase 799
terminal unit of polysaccharides 181 Pyridoxal 738 Pyruvate formate-lyase 875
Proteolipid protein of myelin 401 Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) 121, 679, 737– reaction 800, 801
Proteome 116 753,740s.See also PLP-dependent Pyruvate kinase 656, 706
Proteosome 620, 627 reactions equilibria by NMR 641
20S 339, 341s absorption spectrum 749 Pyruvate oxidase 799
26S 340 as active site label 124 active site 734
electron micrograph 340 amino acid reactions 740 Pyruvic acid, pK value of 293
a
Prothrombin 632, 821 in aspartate aminotransferase 57 Pyruvoyl groups in enzymes, 753 – 755
Prothrombinase 631 as coenzyme, table 743 table 753
Protista 18 – 22 dependent enzymes, cyclization 741

--- Page 934 ---

Volume 1 Index 931
Q Reading frames in nucleic acids 236, 237 Resurrection plant 168
Rearrangement reactions 527, 530, 712 Retention signal 521
recA protein 219 Retinoblastoma protein (Rb) 574
Receptor(s) 1, 553 – 563 Retinol-binding protein 58
Quanine quartet 208s acetylcholine 422 Retrieval signal KDEL 521
Quantum mechanical tunneling 494, 771, 848 alpha adrenergic. Seeα-Adrenergic Retroviruses 248
Quasi-equivalence receptors Reverse transcriptase 248, 257, 657
in oligomers 344 autophosphorylation of 562 Reversed phase columns 103
in virus coats 346 bacterial, for aspartate 561 Reversible chemical reactions 284
Queosine (nucleoside Q) 234s beta adrenergic. Seeβ-Adrenergic kinetics of 458
Quinone(s) 815 – 822 receptors Rhabdoviruses 247
as electron carriers 819 on cell surfaces 479 Rhamnogalacturonan 177
Quinonoid-carbanionic intermediate 741, 744s down regulation of 571 Rhamnose (Rha) 165s, 180
from pyridoxal phosphate 743, 744s for hormones 553– 563 Rheumatoid arthritis 627
Quinoproteins 815 – 818 human adrenergic 555 Rhinovirus 247
copper 815 for surface proteins 407 icosahedral 344s
seven-helix structures 555 Rhizopoda 18
Receptor theory 479 Rho protein 558
R
Reciprocal plots Rhodophyta 22
for kinetics of enzymes 460, 465, 472 Ribbon drawing 64, 65, 71, 240, 243, 336, 338,
Recognition domains in proteins 367 343, 347, 348, 372, 409, 412, 413, 419, 488,
Rab protein 559 Rectus configuration 42 560, 580, 599, 606, 614, 633, 708, 786, 807,
Rabies 247 Red blood cell. SeeErythrocytes 840, 841
Racemase(s) 284 Redox potential Ribisco activase 707
amino acid 692 within cells 767 Ribitol, conformation 44
aspartate 741 of flavoproteins 767 Ribitolteichoic acids 431s
Racemization 741 Reduced flavins, reactions with oxygen 794 Riboflavin 721, 766, 783s
of amino acids 284 Reducing equivalents from citric acid cycle absorption spectrum 781
of lens proteins 85 515 fluorescence 783
PLP-dependent enzymes 741 Reducing powers of redox couples 300 light sensitivity 783
Rac protein 559 Reduction potential(s) nutritional requirement 756, 783
Radicals, free. See Free radicals definition of 300 properties 783
Radioautogram (radioautograph, autoradio- table, 301 Riboflavin 5'-phosphate (flavin mononucleo-
graph) 111 Reference electrode 300 tide, FMN) 513, 765, 780, 781s
Radioautography 110 Refinement of X-ray structure 136 Ribonuclease 264, 647, 648
Radioimmunoassays 110 Refolding of proteins 82 fungal 648
Radioisotope 258 Regulation pancreatic, diffusion constant of 461
Radiolaria 18 of activity of enzymes 539– 553 refolding of 82
Radius of aspartate carbamoyltransferase 540 Ribonuclease A
collision 462 control elements in 535 – 537 mechanism of catalysis 647
covalent 40, 41 of enzymatic activity 535– 581 NMR spectra of 647
van der Waals 40 pacemaker enzymes 535 – 537 pK a values of 647
Raf 578, 579 Regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) 559 reaction mechanism 648
Raffinose 169 Regulatory cascade(s) 566, 567 sequence of 647
Ramachandran plot 60, 61 monocyclic (scheme) 567 X-ray structural studies 647
Random order of binding 464 Regulatory subunits 348, 540, 541 in-line mechanisms 647
Random coil conformation 69 Relative molecular mass (M r ) Ribonuclease P 649 – 652
Rapamycin 488 determination of 108– 115 Ribonuclease S 647
Rapid equilibrium assumption 467 estimation by gel filtration 109 Ribonucleoprotein domain 244
Rapid photometric methods 468 estimation by PAGE 109 Ribonucleotide reductase 863 – 865
Ras 577– 579 Relaxation methods 468 active site 865
human c-H ras 560s Relaxation time cobalamin dependent 871
P loop 559 approach to equilibrium 458, 468 enzyme-activated inhibitors 864
Ras oncogenes (ras) 572, 576 first order reactions 457 Ribose 1, 5-bisphosphate
Ras protein superfamily 558 Renin 621 in brain 545
Rat liver, composition of 31 Reoviruses 248. See also front cover Ribose 5-phosphate isomerase 693
Rates Repair systems 16 D-Ribose (Rib) 162, 163s, 200s
of approach to equilibrium 458 Replication cycle. SeeCell cycle Ribosome(s) 3, 5, 11, 233 – 235
of displacement reactions 589, 590 Repression of enzyme synthesis 536, 538, 539 structure of 233, 234
of enzymatic reactions 455 – 497. See Repressor(s) 76, 239 Ribosylthymidine (Thd) 203
alsoKinetics of gene expression 539 Ribosylthymidine 5'-phosphate (Thd-5’P) 203
of substrate binding 463 Resolvase 229 Ribothymidine 234
Rate constants 455 Tn3 219 of tRNA 231
apparent first order 458 Resonance 45, 46, 46 Ribothymidylic acid residue 813
bimolecular 458, 462 energy values, table 299 Ribozyme(s) 649 – 652, 239
prediction by Hammett equation 309 in esters and amides 608 artificial 652
Rate equation for enzymes 455 Respiration 300 hairpin 649, 651s
Reaction coordinate 482 Respiratory chain 783 hammerhead 649, 651
Reaction rates, diffusion controlled limit 462 Respiratory distress syndrome 386 leadzyme, 651s
Reaction types in metabolism, 530 Resting potential of cell membrane 400 Ribulose 164s
table of 526,527 Restriction endonuclease(s) 249, 653 Ribulose bisphosphate 707s
Restriction maps 260 Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (Rubisco)

--- Page 935 ---

932 Volume 1 Index
549,706– 710,708s genome 12, 20 of a protein 63
carbamoylation of 707 Salmonella 7 Secretion gene (Se) 185
mechanism, scheme 709 PEP carboxylase in 711 Secretion granules 10, 14
spinach, active site 708 serotypes 180 Sedimentation constant 100, 109
Rice, genome 12 Salt bridges 47 of nucleic acids 112
Ricin 186 of hemoglobin 357 of proteins 112
Ricinoleic acid 381, 381s Salting in/out of proteins 101 Sedimentation equilibrium 108
Rickets 421, 721 Salvarsan 597s Sedimentation velocity 108
X-linked hypophosphatemic 625 SAM.See S-adenosylmethionine (Adomet) Sedoheptulose 164s
Rickettsias 7 Samuelsson, Bergt I. 84 Seeds 30
Rieske iron-sulfur protein 860 β Sandwich 64 S-Selanylcysteine 893
Ring conformations 332 – 337 Sanger, Frederick 83, 84, 118 Selectins 187, 188
boat 598 Sarcodina 18 Selenium
half-chair 598 Sarcomas 573 in enzymes 822 – 827
Ring current 139 Satellite tobacco necrosis virus 247 metabolism of 827
RNA 5, 230– 236 Saturation in binding 326 in proteins, table 825
antisense 237 Saturation curve(s) 326 – 331, 458 – 461, 475 – proteins, incorporation into 827
aptamers 235 477 Selenocysteine 237, 823, 824
base composition of 239 hyperbolic 326 in hydrogenases 878
binding proteins 243 sigmoidal 326 Selenocysteine lyase 746
content in tissues 31 Saturation fraction Selenoprotein P 824
density gradient centrifugation 101 definition of 326 Selenoprotein W 824
electrophoresis 249 for cooperative processes 331 Self-assembly of macromolecules 332
extraction of 249 Scanning mutagenesis 402 Seliwanoff’s reagent 167
forms of, table 232 Scanning tunneling microscope 131 Semiquinone radicals of flavins 792, 794
Gibbs energy of formation 210 Scatchard plot 327 Sensitivity coefficient 537
hydrolysis of 249, 251 Scenedesmus 22 Sensor kinase/response regulator systems
loops and turns 210s, 230 Schiff base(s) 121, 752 545
pseudoknot 230 in aminotransferases 750 Separations of compounds 98 – 108
figure 231 of pyridoxal phosphate 742 by chromatography 100 – 106
self-splicing 649 of pyridoxal phosphate, 740s by partition 102 – 103
sequence determination 260 – 266 reduction of Sephadex, gel networks of 175
RNA polymerase 657 by borohydride 124, 679 Sepiapterin 803, 804s
zinc in 680 Schistosoma 24 Septate desmosomes 29
RNase T1 648 Schistosomes Septum 5
RNAworld 235 protease inhibitors 622 Sequence(s)
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 7 Schistosomiasis 24, 222 of amino acids 57
Rods (visual receptor cells) 390 Schizophyllan 170, 174 of nucleic acids
Root hairs, dimensions of 30 Schwann cells 390 Sequencing primers 260
Roseoflavin 788, 789s Sclerenchyma 30 L-Serine (Ser, S) 52, 53s, 808
Rossmann fold. SeeNucleotide-binding Scorpions 24 as nucleophile 609, 610
domain Scrapie 248 pK value of 487
a
Rotamases 488 Screw-sense isomer of ATP complexes 643 Serine carboxypeptidases 610
Rotary diffusion constant 463 Scurvy 721 Serine dehydratases 688, 742
Rotation of molecules 462, 463 SDS electrophoresis 111 Serine hydroxymethyltransferase 745
Rotational barrier 44 SDS-PAGE 106 quinonoid intermediate 750
Rotifers 24, 25 of erythrocyte ghosts, figure 404 Serine proteases 609– 618
Roundworms (Nematoda) 24 SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. See acyl-enzyme intermediates 610
Rp (phosphorylation state ratio) 303 SDS-PAGE carboxypeptidase 609, 625
rRNA (ribosomal RNA) 5, 230, 233s Sea cucumbers 25 catalytic cycle 613
RS notation Sea squirts. Seetunicates catalytic triad 614
for configuration 42 Sea urchin 25 chymotrypsin 66, 457, 477, 609
for trigonal centers 480 genome 12 oxyanion hole 614, 615
Rubella 247 Second Law of Thermodynamics 284285 papain 618
Rubidium 31 Second messengers 553 pepsin 456, 621
Rubisco See Ribulose bisphosphate calcium ions 555 specificities 117
carboxylase cyclic ADP-ribose 555 thrombin 632
Rubredoxin(s) 858[s ], 859 cyclic AMP 555 trypsin 66, 116, 457, 609
Fe-S cluster 857s cyclic GMP 555 SerineO-sulfate 739
Ruhemann’s purple 121s diadenosine 5' tetraphosphate 555 Serotonin(5-hydroxytryptamine) 744
Rusticyanin 883 guanosine 5' diphosphate, 3-diphos- Serpins 629
Rusts 20 phate (ppGpp) 555 Serum albumin 58
Ryanodine receptor 314, 422, 564 inositol-1,4,5 trisphosphate 555 helices in 70
for insulin 569 – 571 Serum response factor 578
Mn2+ 555 Sex factors 249
S table of 555 SH2 and SH3 domains 367, 580
Second order reactions 458 Sharp, Phillip A. 84
Secondary kinetic isotope effect 592, 600 Shc 579
on fumarate hydratase 684 as adaptor protein 570, 577
S-phase of cell cycle 579
Secondary plots for kinetics of multisubstrate definition of 577
Saccharomyces cerevisiae enzymes 465 β Sheet, properties of 64
figure 20
Secondary structure 63 Shells 440, 441

--- Page 936 ---

Volume 1 Index 933
Shigella 7 Sperm receptors 187 of pyridoxal phosphate-requiring
Shikimate 3-phosphate 687s Spermidine 204, 363 enzymes 747
SH2 / phosphopeptide complex 368s interaction with DNA 218 Stereocilia 370
Sialic acid 165s, 183, 546 Spermine Stereoelectronic control 598
Sialidase 186 interaction with DNA 218 Stereoelectronic effect
Sickle cell disease 16, 359, 360 Spherocytosis 405 in enzymatic catalysis 495
Side chains packing 75 Spheroplast 6 in proteases 616
Siderophilins 840 Sphinganine 388s Stereospecificity
Siderophore(s) 838, 838s Sphingoglycolipids 388 of dehydrogenases 768 – 775
chelate effect 310 Sphingolipids 388, 389 prochiral centers 478
receptors 839 structures of 389 Steroid hormones 536
Sieve plates 30 Sphingomyelins 389s Sterol(s) 389
Signal peptidase 522, 620 Sphingophospholipids 383, 388 Stigma 20
Signal recognition particle (SRP) 520 Sphingosine (sphingenine) 388s STM image of glycogen 174
Signal sequences 519 biosynthesis of 745 Stoichiometric dissociation constant 305
Signaling 1 Sphingosine 1-phosphate 578 Stokes-Einstein equation 461
Silica gel, use in separation 103 Sphingosylphosphocholine 422 Stokes radius 109
Silica skeleton Spicules 23 Stomach ulcer 187
of radiolarian 178 Spiders 24, 67 Stomata 30
Silicon Spin decoupling. SeeNMR spectroscopy Stop codons 236
in biological cross-linking 178 Spin labels 398, 399 Stopped flow technique 468
biological functions 178 Spin-spin interaction. SeeNMR spectroscopy Stratum corneum 439
Silicon dioxide in “shells” of diatoms 21 Spinach (Spinacia oleracea) Strecker degradation 121
Silk 67 composition of 31 Strength of binding. See also Formation
β structure in 63 ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase in constants, Dissociation constants, Gibbs
fibroin, composition of 59 706 in metal complexes 307
Simian virus 40 (SV40) 244 Spin-orbit coupling 398 Streptavidin 728
Single carbon compounds β Spiral 74 Stromelysins 627
in metabolism 808 – 813 Spirillum, definition of 6 Strontium 19
table, according to oxidation state 808 Spirochetes 7 Structural domains, table 367
Singlet oxygen 856 Spirogyra 21 β Structure 78
Sinister configuration 42 Sponges 23 hydrogen bonds in 61
Siroheme 794, 845, 845s, 861 species-specific reaggregation 187 of proteins 61– 68
sis 576 Spongin 23 in small peptides 66
v-sis 571, 572 Spore(s), bacterial 8 twist in 63, 64
Sizes of atoms, table 41 Sporophyte form of fern 18 Stuart factor 632
Skin 439, 440 Sporozoa 19 Styrene, resonance energy 299
S-layers of bacteria 431 Squid 24 Substituent constants
Slime molds. See Dictyostelium discoideum v-src,src 572 in Hammett equation 308
Smith degradation of carbohydrates 190 Src, definition of 577 table 308
Smoluchowski equation 461, 462 SRP receptor 520 Substitution reactions. SeeDisplacement
SNAPS 521 Stachyose 169 reactions
SNARES 521 Standard electrode potential 300 Substrate
Snell, Esmond 737 Standard states 286 definition of 332
Sodium 206 Starch 172, 173s Substrate binding
Sodium arsanilate 597s Starch granules 10 rate of 463
Sodium borohydride electron micrographs 172 unequal 349, 350
action on aldoses and ketoses 167 layered structure 173 Substrate cycles 567
radioactive 679 Starch-hydrolyzing enzymes 605 – 608 Substrate saturation
Sodium borotritide 190 Starch-iodine complex 174s of an enzyme 457
Sodium channels 421 helical structure 173 Substrate specificity
Sodium dithionite 767 Starfish 25 of chymotrpsin 616
Sodium dodecyl sulfate 82s State, thermodynamic 281 of serine proteases 616
Sodium ion 31 Statherin 442 of trypsin 617
concentration in cells 206 Statine (Sta) 623s Substrate surrogate 463
Sodium-potassium pump 423 Stationary phase of growth curve 470 Subtilisin 610
Solubility Statistical effects active site 612
of proteins 101 in binding 328, 329 Subunits in protein structures 74
separation by 101 Steady state 1, 289 Succinate 478s
Sonication (sonic oscillation) 98 approximation 459 binding constants to metal ions 311
Sorbitol 164, 196, 774 Stearic acid 380s, 381 Succinate dehydrogenase (succinic dehydro-
Sorbose 164s Stearoyl ACP desaturase 863, 863s genase) 478, 766, 785
Sos 579 Stellacyanin 883 Succinic acid. See also Succinate
definition of 577 Stem, section of, figure 31 pK values of 99, 330
a
as exchange protein 578 Stereochemical numbering system 480 Succinimide
Southern blots 260 Stereochemical studies racemization 85
Soybean lectin 186 using chiral acetates 704 Succinimidyl group 84
Space groups 133, 332 Stereochemistry Succinyl-CoA– acetoacetate CoA transferase
Specific activity of an enzyme 457 of chorismate formation 689 ping-pong mechanism 662
Specific hydroxyl ion catalysis 487 of enzymatic reactions 111 Succinyl-CoA synthetase 661
Specificity of enzymatic action 478 – 482 of phosphotransferases 642, 643 Succinyl-CoA 516s
Spectrin 313, 405

--- Page 937 ---

934 Volume 1 Index
O-Succinylhomoserine 746s Synemin 370 Tetrahydrofolic acid (THF) 745, 802– 813,
conversion to cystathionine 746 Synthetic probe 803s,
Sucrose 167, 168s for nucleic acids 257 derivatives, scheme 806
Sucrose-fructose exchange 595 System, thermodynamic, definition of 281 Tetrahymena 19
Sucrose phosphorylase 595 Tetrahymena ribozyme 650s
Sugar(s) 161–167.See also Monosaccharides, Tetrameric enzyme 342
Oligosaccharides T 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl 398s
configurations of 163 EPR spectrum 398
covalent hydrate 162 Tetramethylsilane (TMS) 138
in lipids 380 Tetranitromethane 126
Taft equation 309
Sugar isomerases 526 Tetrodotoxin 736
table of constants 308
Sugar phosphates Theileriosis 544
Tagatose, 164s
interconversions 508 Thermochemistry 282, 283
Tailspike protein
Sugar transporters standard states 286–289
of bacteriophage 66s
fructose 416 Thermodynamics 281– 289
Talin 406
glucose 416 base-pairing 209
Talose (Tal) 163s
SGLT1-Na+ dependent 417 biochemical standard, new 297
Tamoxifen 575
Sulfanilamide 473s, 720s first law of 282, 283
Tapetum 680
acetylation of 720 irreversible 289
zinc in 680
Sulfatase(s) 526 of life processes 289
Tapeworms 24
Sulfate esters nonequilibrium 289
Taq polymerase 260
in proteins 79 second law of 284, 285
Tartaric acid 43s
Sulfatides 388 system 281
configuration of 43
Sulfite oxidase 847 Thermodynamic barrier 492
Tautomerases 692
family 890 Thermodynamic temperature scale 284, 285
Tautomeric catalysis 490, 491
Sulfite reductase(s) 794, 861, 861s Thermolysin 625
Tautomeric ratios 45, 305
Sulfoquinovose 165s specificity 117
Tautomerism 45, 46
Sulfogalactosylglycerolipid 387s Thermostability
in amides 45
Sulfometuron methyl 735s of enzymes 85
in base pairing 211
Sulfonamides 473, 473s Thiamin (vitamin B) See also Thiamin
of cysteine 306 1
Sulfonolipids 388 diphosphate
equilibrium constant 45
Sulfonylureas 421 acid– base chemistry (scheme) 331
in imidazole group 46
receptor 421 adducts, 733s
in 1-methyluracil 307
Sulfotransferases 526, 659 analogs 733
of nucleic acid bases 211
Sulfur displacements 659 biosynthesis of 736
of nucleic acids 204, 205, 211
Sulfur-35 chemical properties of 730, 731
oxo-enol 45
properties of 110 cleavage by bisulfite 731
of papain 306
Summer, James B. 83 cooperative binding of protons 331
of porphyrins 845
Supercoiling degradation by base 731
of pyridoxine 305
energy of 221 nutritional requirement 756
of pyrimidines 205
Supercritical fluid chromatography 103 pK values of 330
Tautomerization a
Superhelix 70 polyphosphates 736
microscopic dissociation constants 305
density of DNA 221 tricyclic form 730, 737
Taxol 371s
Superhelix density yellow anion of 331
Teeth 440, 441, 442
effect of intercalation 223 thiol form 730
diagram of 442
Superoxide anion radical 794, 826, 850, 851 Thiamin coenzymes 730. See also Thiamin
Teichoic acids
Superoxide dismutase(s) 866, 884 diphosphate
in cell walls 431
copper, zinc 884 in nerve action 736
β-cylinder in 78 Teichuronic acids in transport of sodium 736
in cell walls 431
mass spectrum 113, 114 Thiamin diphosphate (Pyrophosphate) 511,
Telomeres 208
zinc in 680 718,730– 737, 767
Superoxide radical DNA in 227 α cleavage 730, 730s
Temperature 283, 284
reaction with FADH 529 catalytic mechanisms 731– 733
2 units of 283
Surface plasmon resonance 122 enzymes, table 735
Temperature jump method 468
Surfactant system of the lungs 386 enzymatic reactions requiring 734– 736
Tenascin 409
Surfactin 54s half-reactions, scheme 735
Tensin 407
Sutherland, Earl W., Jr. 84 minor tautomer 733
Tenuin 407
Suzukacillin 414 pyrimidine, role of 733
Terminal bars 29
Svedberg equation 109 X-ray diffraction 733
N-Terminal nucleophile hydrolases
Svedberg units 100 Thiazolium dipolar ion (ylid) 732, 733, 733s
autoactivation of 621
Svedburg, Theodor 83 Thin layer chromatography 103
Termites, protozoa in 19
Symbiotic relationship 17 of maltooligosaccharides 189
Tertiary structure of a protein 59
Symmetry 133, 134, 338 – 348 O-methylated glucoses 190
TES buffer 99
cubic 342 – 344 Thin-filaments.SeeActin
pK value of 99
dihedral 338 a Thiochrome 730, 730s
Testosterone 696
space groups 133 1,3,4,6-Tetrachloro-3α,6α-diphenylglycouril Thioesters 559, 775
Syn conformation of nucleosides 211, 212 displacement reactions of 608
126s
Syn transfer of protons 696 formation from glyceraldehyde
Tetrahedral intermediate
Synapse(s) 29 3-phosphate 677
in displacement reactions 609
electrotonic 29 function of 700
stereochemistry of formation 616
Synchrotron radiation 137 mechanism of formation 661, 662
Tetrahedron 342
as X-ray source 134 Thioether 559

--- Page 938 ---

Volume 1 Index 935
Thioglycine 881 lactoferrin 840 Tobacco mosaic virus 247, 334s, 336s
Thiohemiacetal in glyceraldehyde phosphate lysozyme 599 Tocopherols 392, 815 – 822, 818
dehydro 775 methanol dehydrogenase 816 as antioxidants 822
Thiol(s) 115 methionine synthase 874 α-Tocopherol (vitamin E) 819s
addition to carbonyl group 677 methylmalonyl-CoA mutase 874 Tocopherolquinone 818, 819, 819s
adduct, dehydrogenation of 766 myohemerythrin 71 Tocotrienols 818
binding of mercury ions 125 P pilus 337 Togavirus 247
Thiol– disulfide equilibria 549 pectate lyase C 686 Toluenesulfonyl-amido-2-phenylethyl
Thiol– disulfide exchange 659 plastocyanin 65 chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)
Thiol:disulfide oxidoreductases 786 pyruvate dehydrogenase 797 623s
Thiolases 699, 827 pyruvate oxidase 734 Tomaymycin 224s
biosynthetic 699 rhinovirus 344 TonA 839
Thiolate anions 779 ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase 708 TonB 839
Thioltransferases 549, 659, 786 rRNA 233 Tonegawa, Susumu 84
Thioredoxin 522, 549, 659, 786s, 787, 864 rubisco 708 Tonoplast 11
disulfide loop 786 rubredoxin 858 Topaquinone (TPQ) 816, 817s
functions of 786 stearoyl-acyl carrier protein Topoisomerases 219, 575, 638, 657, 659
Thioredoxin reductase 785, 786, 787, 824 desaturase 863 Topological theory of graphs 466
mechanism of 791 subtilisin 612 Topologies
Thiosulfate: cyanide sulfurtransferase sulfite reductase 861 of nucleotide binding proteins 76
symmetry in 78 tissue factor 633 Topology of proteins 76
Thiouridine 234 trimethylamine dehydrogenase 784 diagram 76
Three-dimensional structures of triose phosphate isomerase 77, 694 Torsion angles 44
aconitase 689 tRNA 233 definition of 59
adenylate kinase 655 trypsin 611 of nucleosides 212
aldehyde oxido-reductase 891 trypsinogen 615 of peptides 63, 139
D-amino acid oxidase 791 tubulin 372 of polynucleotides 211
α-amylase, pancreatic 607 virus fd protein sheath 335 of side chain groups 61
aspartate aminotransferase 57, 135 virus φX174 365 of sugar rings 212
catalytic intermediates 752 L-allo-threonine 53s Toxins
aspartate carbamyltransferase 348 Threonine (Thr, T) 53s, 539 channel-forming 414
aspartate chemoreceptor 562 biosynthesis 540 Toxopyrimidine 739
bacteriophage P22 66 cleavage to acetaldehyde 745 TPQ See Topaquinone
cadherin 408 configuration 43 Tracheids 30
calmodulin 317 Threonine dehydratase 688, 742 Tracheophyta 29
carbonic acid anhydrase I 679 Threonine synthase 746 Trachoma 7
carboxypeptidase A 64 Threose 163s Traffic ATPases 417
catalase 853 Thrombin 610, 632 Transacylation 608
cholera toxin 333, 546 Thrombocytes 26 Transaldolase 700
chymotrypsin 611 Thrombomodulin 634 Transaminases. SeeAminotransferases
citrate synthase 702, 703 Thrombospondin 409 Transamination 737
cutinase 134 Thymidine (dThd) 203 by PLP-dependent enzymes 741
cyclosporin 488 Thymidylate synthase 810, 811 Transcobalamin 869
cytochrome c 847 mechanism of, scheme 811 Transcortin 58
cytochrome c peroxidase 849 Thymine (Thy) 199s, 203 Transcription
dihydrofolate reductase 807 formation 810 definition of 5
DNA 214, 223, 228, 229, 241 Thymineless death 812 of genetic information 5
DNA complex Thyroid peroxidase 856 regulation of 536
with methionine repressor 243 Thyrotropin (thyrotropic hormone)-releasing Transcription factor
with netropsin 225 factor 54s, 523 osteoblast-specific 441
with Trp repressor protein 240 receptor 554 Transcription factor(s) 76, 539
with zinc finger protein 242 Tight junctions 10, 28 AP-1 576
elastase 611 Tissue(s) binding to enhancer site 576
enolase 686 adipose 26 GCN4 70, 241
F-actin 338 animal 25 NF-κB, 243s
favin 64 collenchyma 29 Max 241, 70s
ferredoxin 858 composition of 31 proto-oncogenes as 576
ferritin 343, 841 connective 26 Sp1 202
glucoamylase 77, 608 epidermal of plants 30 Transcripts. SeemRNA
glutathione reductase 785 epithelial 26 Transducin 558
glyceraldehyde phosphate fractionation of 98 – 100 Transferases 498, 589 – 662
dehydrogenase 63 meristematic 29 aminotransferases 737, 740 – 743,
glycineN-methyltransferase 593 muscle 26 747– 753
glycogen phosphorylase 605 parenchyma 29 definition of 498
Grb2 580 sclerenchyma 29 Transferrins 58, 840, 841
HIV-1 protease 624 supporting 26 Transglutaminase 80, 633
hydrogenase 879 Tissue factor 631, 633s Transimination
insulin 347 pathway 632 in PLP-dependent enzymes 741, 751
insulin receptor 570 Tissue plasminogen activator 634 Transition metals 837– 894
iron superoxide dismutase 867 Titin 74 Transition state 482 – 486
K+ channel 413 Titration curves 96, 97 diagram 482
kringle 2 motif 368 of proteins 330 inhibitors 484

--- Page 939 ---

936 Volume 1 Index
theory 483 coiled coil structure of 71 carboxyl-terminal hydrolases 525
Transketolase 733, 736 Troponin C 313, 314 conjugating enzymes 524
Translation of genetic information, 5. See also Trp repressor protein 239, 240s genes 525
Protein synthesis Truffles 20 protein ligase 524
definition of 5 Tryosine kinases 657 UDP-galactose
nick 257 Trypanosome 19 conversion to UDP glucose 778
regulation of 536 DNA circles in 219 UDP-galactose 4-epimerase 778
Translocation mitochondria of 14 Ulothrix 21
of proteins 519 – 521 Trypanothione 552 Ultracentrifugation 108, 109
Transmembrane proteins 391 Trypanothione reductase 785 Ultracentrifuge 100
Transmethylation 591, 592 Tryparsamide 597s analytical 108
kinetic isotope effects on 592 Trypsin 66, 116, 609. See also Chymotrypsin optical system, figure 109
Transmission coefficient κ 483 hydrogen-bonding network, structure Ultrafiltration 100
Transport, See also specific substrates 612 Ultrasensitive responses 567
of ions 420 – 425 specificity 117 Ultrasonic sound 468
through membranes 400 – 415 turnover number of 457 UMP (Uridine 5'-phosphate) 200, 200s, 203
via pores and channels 401– 403 Trypsinogen 609, 615s Unimolecular processes 457
Transporters oxyanion hole, structure 615 Uniporters 414
12-helix 415 – 417 Tryptases 610 Units, International System 2
membrane 411– 427 Tryptic peptides 117 Unsatisfied ends of hydrogen bonded chains
sugar 415, 416 Tryptophan (Trp, W) 52s 64
Transposable genetic elements(transposons) absorption spectrum of derivative 123 Uracil (Ura, U) 199s, 203
249 Cβ-hydroxylated 853 tautomerism of 45
Tn3 219 nicotinamide activity 769 Urate oxidase 886
Transsialidase 187 Tryptophan indole-lyase 742 Urea 82s, 478s
Treadmilling quinonoid intermediate 750 Urea carboxylase 730
of microtubules 372 Tryptophan synthase 742 Urease 478, 877, 878
Trehalose 167, 168s Tryptophan tryptophanylquinone (TTQ) active site of, 877s
in fungi 168 817, 817s mechanism of 877
in insects 168 T system of tubules 12 Ureido anion 726s
Triacylglycerol 381, 382s TTQ See Tryptophan tryptophanylquinone Uric acid 203s
Trialkyl lock 495s Tuberculosis 7 formation of 890
Trichina 24 Tubular myelin 386 Uridine (Urd) 203, 234s
Tricholomic acid 739 Tubulin 370, 372s absorption spectra of 205
Trichonympha 19 Tumor suppressor gene 407, 574 tautomer, minor 205s
TRICINE buffer 99 Tungsten 893 Uridine 5'- phosphate. SeeUMP
pK value of 99 Tunicates Uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-Glc) 515s,
a
Triclosan 777s, 777 vanadium in 25 720
Triethanolamine buffer 99 Tunichlorin(s) 880s, 881 Uridylate kinase 655
pK value of 99 Tunneling 5'-Uridylic acid. SeeUMP
a
Trigonal bipyramid 638 quantum mechanical 494, 771, 848 Urocanase reaction 778
as transition state in pseudorotation vibration-assisted 494 Urocanic acid 755, 756s
638 Turnover numbers of an enzyme 457 Urokinase 634
Trigonal carbon atoms 680, 681 Turns Uronic acid 164
Trigonal prochiral centers 480, 481 beta 78 Uroporphyrin(s) 843
Triiodothyronine 572 in protein structures 72, 74 Uroporphyrin I, 845s
Trimethoprim 805s Twisted sheets 63 Urothione 804s, 891
inhibition of 805 Two-fold (dyad) axes 134 Urticaria 385
Trimethylamine dehydrogenase 782, 784s in oligomers 337– 348 Usher protein 364
Trimethylarsonium lactic acid, 387s Typhoid fever
Trimethyllysine S. typhi 7
in ubiquitin 525 Tyrosinase 886 V
Tripeptidyl peptidase 140, 610 Tyrosine (Tyr, Y) 52s
Triose phosphate isomerase 693, 694s absorption spectrum of derivative 123
barrel structure 77s iodination 126
Vacuole(s) 10, 11, 12
high catalytic activity 693 Tyrosine decarboxylase 737
definition of 3
target for antitrypanosomal drugs 693 Tyrosine phenol-lyase 742
Valine (Val, V) 52s
Triphosphopyridine nucleotide (TPN+, Tyrosine protein kinases (MEK) 578
biosynthesis of 527, 712
NADP+) 767. See also NADP+, NADPH Tyrosine-O-sulfate 548
branched fatty acids from 381
TRIS buffer Tyrosyl radical 864
Valinomycin 414, 415s
pK value of 99 Tyvelose 180s
a effect on potassium transport 414
Tritium
van der Waals contact surfaces
properties of 110
of purines and pyrimidines 207
Triton X 403s U
van der Waals forces 46
tRNA 230, 231, 231s, 233s
van der Waals radii 40, 41
19F NMR spectrum of 270
Vanadate
1H NMR spectrum of 268
Ubichromanol 818, 819s as inhibitor of ATPases 889
wobble position 231
Ubiquinones (coenzyme Q) 392, 514, 818, insulinlike action 889
Tropical macrocytic anemia 802
819s Vanadium 856, 889
Tropoelastin 436
Ubiquitin 81, 524s Vanadocytes 889
Tropomodulin 406
activating enzyme 524, 525 Vanadoproteins 889
Tropomyosin 370, 406

--- Page 940 ---

Volume 1 Index 937
van’t Hoff equation 289 Vitamin B 12 coenzyme 864. See also Cobalamin X
Vapor phase chromatography 103 dependent reactions, table 871
Vascular plants 29 enzymatic functions 870 – 877
Vasopressin 54s, 542, 563 isomerization reactions 872
receptor 554 nonenzymatic cleavage 870 X-ray diffraction 132– 137
Vesicle(s), coated 426 ribonucleotide reductase 871 difference electron density map 136
VHL (van Hippel-Lindau cancer syndrome) Vitamin B family 721, 738 electron density map 135
6
564 nutritional requirements 756 isomorphous replacement method 133
Vibrio 7 Vitamin C. SeeAscorbic acid (ascorbate) MAD phasing 135
definition of 6 Vitamin D 721 refinement 136
Vimentin 369 deposition of calcium in bones 314 space groups 133
Vinblastine 371 Vitamin E 721. See also Tocopherols X-rays
Vincristine 371 nutritional requirement 822 anomolous scattering 135
Vinculin 406 Vitamin K 721, 818, 819s,820– 822 Xanthan gum 179
Vinylpyridine 116s in blood clotting 821 Xanthine 203s
Viral oncogenes 573 dihydro 820 Xanthine dehydrogenases 794, 825, 890
Virion 244 epoxide 820 molybdenum in 890
Viroids 247 phylloquinone 821 Xanthine oxidase 890, 892
Virus(es) 244– 249.See also Bacteriophage Vitronectin 409 Xanthopterin 803, 804s
adeno 247 Voltage-gated K+ channel 412 Xenobiotics 550
baculo 247 Volvox 21 X-ray diffraction 611
binding to cells 186 von Szent-Györgyi, Albert 83 Xylanases 602, 603
BK 247 von Willebrand factor 409, 633 Xylans 165, 170, 175
cauliflower mosaic 247 V system 475 Xylem 30
characteristics, table 245 Xyloglucan 177
coat 345 α-D-Xylopyranose 695s
DNA, table 245 W Xylose (Xyl) 163s, 165s, 175
dsRNA 244, 244 – 247 Xylose isomerase 527, 693, 695
electron micrographs of 246 D-Xylose (Xyl) 162
Epstein-Barr 247 Xylosidases 602
hepatitis A 247 Wald, George 84 Xylulose 164s
Warburg, Otto H. 83, 767
hepatitis delta 247
Warfarin 821, 822s
herpes 247
Water Y
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
addition to carbonyl 677
248
clusters of molecules 49
life cycles of 248
content in cells 30
Mengo 247 content in tissues 31 Yeasts 20
oncogenic 248 diffusion constant of 461 Yellow fever 247
papova 244 hydrogen bonding of 48 Ylid 733s
picorna 247
properties of 49– 51
plant 346
structure of 49, 50
polio 247 Z
Watson -Crick structure
polyhedral structures 344
of DNA 200
polyoma 247
Watson, James D. 84, 200
pox 247
protein coat 334 Watson-Crick base pair 207, 208, 231 Z (zusammen) configuration 43
rhabdo 247 Waxes 382, 382s Zinc 317, 680
rhino 247 WD repeat 67 in alcohol dehydrogenases 772 – 775
RNA containing 247, 248 Wheat, genome 12 content of human 680
table 245 Whooping cough 548 Zinc finger protein 241, 242s, 243s, 680
satellite tobacco mosaic 343s Wilkins, Maurice F. 200 Zinc ion(s)
satellite tobacco necrosis 247, 343s, 344 Wilson’s disease 883 chelation by imidazole groups 625
simian (SV40) 244 Winding number. SeeDNA, circular, linking in enzymes 773
ssDNA 244 number replacements 680
tobacco mosaic 247 Wobble pairing 209 Zinc proteases 625 – 627
toga 247 Wood-Ljundahl pathway 881 FtsH 628
Virus fd protein sheath 335s Work 282 Zwitterion 41
Virus φX174 chemical 282 Zygote 17
assembly of virion structure 365 to concentrate 1 mol of a substance Zymogen 519, 609. See also Proenzyme;
Vitamin(s) 719. See also Individual vitamins 283 Proenzyme(s)
deficiency diseases 721 electrical 282, 302 Zymogen granules 609
discovery of 721 electrochemical 300 Zyxin 406
mechanical 282
Vitamin B complex 721
to raise 1 kg 1 m 283
nutritional requirements 756
to remove two charges 47
Vitamin B 331. See also Thiamin
1 World Wide Web
Vitamin B 721, 866– 877.See also Cobalamin,
12 protein sequences/ structures 148
Cyanocobalamin
Wortmannin 566s
adenosyltransferase 870
Wounds, healing of 29
blood levels 869
cobalt in 866 – 877
coenzyme forms 867
nutritional requirements 756